ALBANIA
The 1991 State Department report on human rights conditions in Albania is comprehensive and, on balance, presents an accurate picture of the human rights situation in the country. This is commendable, especially since the United States did not restore diplomatic relations with Albania until March 15, 1991.
Albania made impressive progress towards the recognition of basic human rights in 1991. Among other achievements, multiparty elections were held, all prisoners held under political crimes provisions of the penal code were released, there was a marked decline in extrajudicial killings and a law guaranteeing basic protection for human rights was adopted. The Law on Major Constitutional Provisions. Recent political changes suggest that progress will continue and that problems existing in 1991 may continue to ameliorate.
However, the State Department's report may be faulted for failing in some instances to distinguish announced policy changes from actual practice. While it understandably seeks to credit Albania with the progress already made, it all too often merely cites The Law on Major Constitutional Provisions, passed on April 30, and fails to evaluate the extent to which the government has implemented these changes. Of special concern, the report fails to draw the necessary conclusions from the historical absence of due process in the Albanian legal system. Although Albania is to be strongly praised for releasing in 1991 those convicted of political crimes, it remains true that persons currently incarcerated for common crimes were convicted in proceedings that lacked even the rudiments of due process. This is particularly disturbing in cases involving the death penalty.
The report fails to address the crisis of leadership which faces the new Albanian government. While correctly noting that the political infrastructure has undergone numerous changes, the report omits mention of the fact that many government agencies are still controlled or staffed by individuals responsible for die human rights violations of past years. Officials of many agencies assert that they have recognized the problem
Albania
and have attempted to "clean house" through early retirement. In October, government officials, in responding to questions about the problem of past abuse, emphasized to the Minnesota Lawyers International Human Rights Committee that they had brought about a rapid decrease in the average age of personnel -- 35 years of age was viewed as acceptable and below 30 even better. The report does not mention that several prominent officials of the former government were arrested in August and October. (Additional arrests also occurred in January 1992, including Nexmije Hoxha, the widow of former leader Enver Hoxha.) However, these arrests were predicated on alleged financial wrongdoing, not human rights violations.
On October 1, the People's Assembly adopted a law declaring innocent all persons who had been interned or imprisoned for convictions involving agitation, propaganda and anti-government activities under Articles 53, 55 and 57 of the Albanian Penal Code, or for trying to escape the country. Under this law persons persecuted by the previous government may now receive certificates acknowledging their innocence and entitling them to compensation. While these steps illustrate a willingness on the part of the government to begin to address these important issues, the problem of impunity remains one of the fundamental challenges of the new Albanian government.
Albanians had no established rights of due process prior to 1991. Since only minors, incapacitated persons and foreigners were permitted to have legal counsel from 1967 to November 1990, persons accused of crimes did not receive the benefit of counsel. The lack of an independent judiciary meant prisoners were not tried before an impartial tribunal. Confessions were frequently coerced. Sentences were lengthy and often involved incarceration in harsh work camps. On April 10, the Albanian government proposed a new draft constitution, but the newly elected parliament failed to adopt it. Instead, on April 30 a transitional law. The Law on Major Constitutional Provisions, was adopted. It is intended to remain in effect until the parliament agrees on a new constitution.
Albania
The Law on Major Constitutional Provisions invalidates the most repressive sections of Albania's current constitution, adopted in 1976. The Law stipulates depoliticization of the government and eliminates reference to the role of the communist party. In general, however, its provisions are vague and hortatory in nature. The report acknowledges this, but nonetheless cites The Law on Major Constitutional Provisions and, in some cases, the unadopted constitution, as evidence of standards of practice in Albania.
Some progress was made towards depoliticization in accordance with The Law on Major Constitutional Provisions, but these efforts are not comprehensive and are far from complete. While the report correctly notes that a new Supreme Court has been elected, it fails to mention that members of the Court hold office only until the next general election, at which time the People's Assembly will again elect the Court. Further, members of the Court have been permitted to hold elected and judicial offices simultaneously (a member of the Court is also a member of the People's Assembly). The Supreme Court as currently constituted is thus far from free of political influence. The independence of lawyers is also circumscribed. During 1991, legal fees were collected and distributed through the government-run College of Advocates, although this system was modified under the revised Law on Advocacy adopted in December.
In addition, there continued to be no legal mechanism in Albania to challenge a violation of human rights, and current legal standards for the protection of rights in criminal cases remain inadequate. The report recognizes these ongoing due process concerns by noting that as of March 1991 a defense attorney was prohibited from meeting with the client unless the investigating judge was present. In fact, the legal requirement was somewhat less restrictive, but not less intrusive on the attorney-client relationship. Defense counsel was permitted to meet with the defendant only in the presence of the investigator or prosecutor. In accordance with a telegram directive issued by the Minister of Justice in the fall of 1991, access to defendants was further restricted after an investigation file has been closed and the case referred to a prosecutor. Once referred, a defense counsel may not meet with the defendant
Albania
without judicial approval, which is rarely given. In referring to the May 1990 amendments to the penal code, which provided inter alia for the unqualified right to be defended by an attorney, the report overlooks the many ways in which this right continues to be abridged. However, under the revised Law on Advocacy adopted in December 1991, a lawyer is expressly granted "the right to meet alone with an arrested defendant." The extent to which this provision will be effectively implemented remains to be seen.
The report also does not address other serious concerns regarding the right to counsel now guaranteed by Albanian law. While police investigators are required to inform defendants of their right to an attorney and to notify the College of Advocates of criminal cases, there is serious question as to whether these rights are observed. The Minnesota Lawyers International Human Rights Committee was told that while many arrests were made, few cases were referred to the College of Advocates, and when referrals were made, they often occurred two or three weeks after an arrest. Moreover, since defense lawyers were not permitted in almost all cases until late 1990, many defendants remain unaware of their right to an attorney. Albanian law does not provide that defendants unable to afford a lawyer will be given legal representation, although the College of Advocates has reportedly instituted informal mechanisms for the acceptance of cases pro bono.
The report fails to discuss several troubling laws which remain in effect, although Albanian authorities contend these provisions are no longer used. Under the penal code, internment or exile is still permitted as a criminal punishment. Further, Law 7388 authorizes the use of "preventative means" against persons who "endanger public order." The law provides that those who "commit a criminal offense which is not a crime, but is incompatible with proper behavior and social morality" or "whose behavior in society show that they could commit a crime" may be subjected to internment in a district or state farm or an agricultural cooperative.
The historical and existing absence of due process raises grave concerns with respect to the prisoners convicted of non-political offenses
10
Albania
who are stili incarcerated in Albania. The Minnesota Lawyers International Human Rights Committee reported that according to the director of prisons in Albania, Edmond Caja, as of October there were some 1,100 prisoners convicted of common crimes in Albania; this number is less than half of the 2,500 Mr. Caja reported to Helsinki Watch in April. Interviews of prisoners held in a Tirana labor camp by Helsinki Watch confirmed that they had been uniformly denied basic due process rights. In those rare instances where personnel from the government Bureau of Legal Assistance did provide representation, it was not possible to argue the innocence of a client, according to lawyers interviewed. In addition, convicted prisoners do not receive a copy of their judgment of conviction and sentence. Lawyers may ask to see the judgment but are barred from showing it to their client without permission of the court.
In view of such absence of due process, it is a violation of international standards for any of these prisoners to remain in custody without being granted a new trial in accordance with the minimal due process requirements. The report, by focusing on proposed reforms, fails to address this pressing need to redress past wrongs.
Moreover, such wholesale deprivation of due process is especially disturbing in instances involving imposition of the death penalty. The report does not address this subject. Article 6 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), to which Albania acceded on October 4, 1991, provides that the death penalty may only be imposed "for the most serious crimes" and only "pursuant to a final judgment rendered by a competent court." In addition, safeguards adopted by the UN Economic and Social Council in 1984 provide that the death penalty may only be carried out after a trial "which gives all possible safeguards to ensure a fair trial, at least equal to those contained in . . . the ICCPR."
Albania reduced the number of capital crimes from 34 to 11 in 1991, but these 11 include certain economic, non-violent offenses, as well as treason, espionage, terrorism and premeditated murder. Six people were sentenced to death in Albania in 1991, all for crimes
11
Albania
involving murder, according to Amnesty International. Of these, four were executed. Although the particulars of their trials are unknown, it is almost certain that international standards of due process were not observed.
The report correctly notes that Albania implemented a reform program in 1991 intended to establish a market-oriented economy. These reforms have severely disrupted the economy, however, and reports from Albania during the year described significant increases in crime and hooliganism. These developments, as in the rest of Eastern Europe, pose a continuing threat to the development of democracy. In particular, in early December, the political crisis as well as official statements that food supplies would last only one week provoked three days of food riots throughout the country. Credible sources report that two people were killed in the city of Lac on December 8 when shots were fired during one such riot. In addition, on December 7, then President Alia reportedly issued an emergency decree authorizing security forces to shoot if necessary to keep order and protect Albania's food supplies. The report gives only brief attention to these developments.
While the fundamental right to human life continued to be inadequately respected in Albania in 1991, nonetheless, as the report notes, political and extrajudicial killings were greatly diminished. There were no reports of targeted political killings during the year (although there were reports of arrests and beatings, especially in connection with the March elections). There were, however, a series of incidents involving shootings by police and military personnel, including the killing of three unarmed demonstrators and one police officer on February 23 during a demonstration in Tirana at the Military Academy, and the killing of four persons and injuring of 57 in the town of Shkoder on April 2 during a demonstration protesting fraud in the March 31 elections.
The government's response to these killings was inadequate. There was no known official investigation of the February killings at the Military Academy. Following threats from the opposition Albanian
12
Albania
Democratic Party (ADP) to boycott the opening of the parliamentary session, the government announced a commission to investigate the violence in Shkoder. On July 29, three police officials were put on trial for the Shkoder shootings. The trial was suspended on July 31, however, and no new trial date has been set. (The report incorrectly notes the trial was suspended in mid-November.) The inadequate response of the government to the Military Academy and Shkoder killings fueled public discontent and appears to have helped hasten the collapse of the communist-controlled government.
In its discussion of extrajudicial killings, the report fails to mention what appears to be a practice by police authorities of use of excessive force in violation of international law. For example, on February 22, 20-year-old Arlan Lenja was shot and killed. Lenja had intervened at the request of two 18-year-old youths who were being detained by two soldiers and a policeman and was shot by one of the soldiers. On March 6, security forces clashed with rock-throwing youths near Skanderbeg Street, where most of the embassies in Tirana are located. Three youths were reported killed that day, including 14-year-old Spartak Deliu, who was shot by a soldier. In another incident, an 18-year old boy was shot and paralyzed on March 11 by an armed man described as a "gardener" when he entered the premises of a villa belonging to Haxhi Lieshi, president of Albania during Enver Hoxha's rule and at the time a member of the Presidential Council. The boy was apparently seeking water for workmen working near the villa.
The right of citizens to leave Albania continues to be limited, and 1991 again saw masses of Albanians seeking to flee. The report accurately describes the killing and wounding by Albanian authorities in March of Albanians seeking to leave. It inaccurately states, however, that the authorities refrained from using deadly force to control would-be emigrants after March. In fact, credible reports indicate that at least one civilian was shot during clashes between police and people seeking to board ships in the harbor town of Durres on August 7 when thousands of Albanians sought to flee to Italy and Malta. In addition, Helsinki Watch cites unconfirmed reports from Albanian journalists that another civilian was shot by security crowds during clashes with guards in the
13
Albania
port of Vlore on October 17. Further, Agence France-Presse reported on June 12 that an Albanian naval patrol boat opened fire on a boat carrying fleeing Albanian refugees, killing two and injuring four.
Far from prosecuting the individuals responsible for these shootings, the Albanian government placed the port of Durres under army control. In June, Prime Minister Ylli Bufi authorized border guards to use deadly force against anyone seeking to illegally leave the country.
During the period of single-party communist rule, Albania was one of the world's most tightly controlled societies. Last year our critique noted that the State Department's report understated the pervasive atmosphere of institutionalized secrecy and fear that pervaded Albania. This year's report has notably improved its reportage in this area. Although the Sigurimi, Albania's dreaded secret police, was officially dissolved on July 2 and replaced by a new institution called the National Information Service (NIS), Albania continued to be plagued by vestiges of its police state past. There has been no investigation into the activities of the Sigurimi and the government has failed to provide any information about the whereabouts of former Sigurimi officers. The newly constituted NIS reportedly consists largely of former Sigurimi officers. According to the director of the NIS, only 40% of the Sigurimi have been retired. Files maintained by Sigurimi on individuals are being kept by the NIS for "archival purposes." No consensus has emerged concerning what should be done with these files, but given Sigurimi's likely interest in keeping this information secret, there is concern that the NIS may not be the most reliable of custodians.
Although the powers of the NIS have been curtailed and its activities are intended to be independent of political parties, the decree establishing the NIS permits its employees to employ methods that infringe on an individual's civil rights in cases in which the constitution has been violated. The ADP and others contend that the Sigurimi agents have continued to engage in illegal activity, including arrests of hundreds of Albanians. In addition, opposition leaders and journalists reported receiving harassing telephone calls. On August 31, the German paper
14
Albania
Die Welt contained an interview with Dr. Sali Berisha, chairman of the ADP (and now President of Albania), in which Dr. Berisha reported intimidation of members of the opposition during the attempted coup in the former Soviet Union in August. Dr. Berisha described threatening phone calls and stated that opposition members had received photographs of former communist leader Enver Hoxha in their mail.
Among its many strides on the path towards respect for human rights was Albania's opening to the world's human rights community. As the report mentions, the government recognized Albania's first domestic human rights organization, the Forum for the Defense of Human Rights. Also of note was the establishment of the Society of Ex-Political Prisoners to protect persons who have been persecuted, expelled, interned or imprisoned for political reasons. A hunger strike sponsored by the Society in September led to the enactment of legislation declaring former persecuted persons innocent of any crime and entitling them to compensation. Albania permitted a visit from the International Helsinki Federation, acceded to the ICCPR, signed the Helsinki Final Act, was admitted to the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) and admitted a CSCE fact-finding mission. In addition, in response to inquiries from the United Nations, the government submitted a report to the Under-Secretary-General for Human Rights on human rights conditions in Albania in 1991. Unfortunately, the government's report was, for the most part, self-serving, stating, for example, that the March "elections were in general held correctly. . . . The atmosphere in which they were held was quiet and normal."
The report correctly states that The Law on Major Constitutional Provisions is silent on the subject of women's rights. However, it somewhat disingenuously reports that Albanian law has long provided women with equal pay and equal access. The reality is quite different. The New York Times reported that the country has a patriarchal tradition that dates back well over 1,000 years. Divorce is discouraged and women in addition to work outside the home are often expected to perform all of the household tasks ~ made more difficult by shortages, long lines and the lack of labor-saving appliances.
15
Albania
Albania has traditionally been more tolerant of ethnic minorities than some of its neighbors in Eastern Europe. In the March elections, the Omonia Party, which represents Albania's Greek minority, won five seats. However, The Law on Major Constitutional Provisions omitted reference to articles contained in the draft constitution that specified the right of national minorities to mutual contact within and without Albania's borders. The law on the formation of political parties subsequently passed by the parliament appears to prohibit the formation of parties based on ethnicity.
Albanian workers continued to establish and develop independent trade unions. Coal miners in Albania's largest coal mine struck in January, demanding pay increases, better working conditions and postponement of the elections. Also in January, strikes by transport workers and taxi drivers paralyzed Tirana, while industrial and dock workers staged strikes in Korcu and Durres. In May it was reported that some 350,000 workers took part in a general strike for higher wages and to protest the shootings in Shkoder. In general, the strikes were tolerated by the government although independent Albanian unionists claimed three union organizers were arrested in connection with the May strike. A new strike law was adopted by the parliament in 1991 granting the right to strike, but only for economic purposes.
So far, the developments in 1992 point to continued progress in the observance of human rights in Albania. Upcoming events, including adoption of the new constitution, will test the newly elected government's commitment to fulfilling the promises of the past year.
16
