ARGENTINA
1991 marked a significant deterioration in tlie rule of law and respect for human rights in Argentina. Judges, prosecutors and journalists investigating official abuses of power, along with human rights advocates and a prominent filmmaker, were threatened with death, harassed and/or attacked, and the offices of a newspaper critical of the government was bombed. Acts of anti-semitism, including desecration of Jewish tombs, increased significantly.
The State Department's report on Argentina discusses many of these incidents. However, it often fails to provide details necessary to understand their severity, or to place the incidents in proper context. As political and economic relations between Argentina and the United States continue to solidify -- due largely to President Carlos Menem's free-market initiatives and his active alignment with the United States' position on a host of issues — the basic underpinnings of stable political democracy in Argentina appear to be threatened.
The problem of police violence continued to be serious in Argentina in 1991. The State Department reports that "some observers believe that police often use deadly force without sufficient cause," and focuses primarily on actions taken in response to the notorious cases of a young woman who was raped and murdered allegedly by police officers in Bahia Blanca, the torture and murder of a drug trafficker in Córdoba allegedly by police officers, and the torture and murder of a high-school student allegedly following his arrest by police officers at a rock concert in Buenos Aires. However, the report does not mention a 1991 study by the new human rights director in the Argentine Ministry of the Interior, which reviewed 678 reported cases of physical abuse of prisoners in police custody in the greater Buenos Aires area between 1984 and 1986 (following Argentina's return to democracy). That report documented 267 cases involving wounds confirmed by medical examiners, including 10 cases of medically confirmed electric shock. Moreover, although the report indicates that "police were indicted in several cases in which their use of excessive force or of weapons resulted in unlawful killing," it does not mention that, despite official
22
Argentina
governmental findings of physical abuse and torture, not a single police officer or other security agent has been convicted of such offenses. The report indicates that a bill was passed to limit to 10 hours the time that the police may detain a suspect without judicial intervention, failing to mention that Congress passed the law over President Menem's veto. Finally, it inexplicably fails to mention the deaths in July of 12 of the 40 inmates in Federal Jail Number 13 in Santa Rosa, La Pampa, following a prison uprising, in connection with which charges against the entire prison staff were pending at year's end.
Among the most significant developments in 1991 was the further erosion of judicial authority and independence. President Menem accelerated that process in 1990 by securing the passage of a law that expanded the Argentine Supreme Court from five to nine members and by packing the court with his supporters. These actions set the stage for challenges to judicial and prosecutorial independence in the lower courts as well -- including a series of threats against judges hearing controversial cases and disciplinary actions against prosecutors pursuing human rights and corruption cases. Furthermore, the report fails to note that the independence of the National Prosecutor for Administrative Investigation was compromised when, in February, President Menem decreed the resignation of the agency's head, Ricardo Molinas, while he was investigating official corruption involving a former Minister of Public Works and a close advisor to the President. The six newly appointed members of the Supreme Court formed the majority that upheld the constitutionality of that decree in September.
Acts of intimidation against the judiciary intensified in 1991. Although the report notes that there were "several instances in which judges were the victims of threats, bombings, shootings, and other attempts at intimidation," those incidents merit more than a terse description. In May and June, for example, Raul Casal, a judge investigating threats against another judge by a "parapolice" group, was himself threatened with death, as were members of his family. Judge Casal was the third judge to be threatened in the same case in the last two years - a case in which police sub commissioner Luis Patti was accused of torturing a suspect with an electric cattle prod. In July, two
23
Argentina
federal judges investigating drug trafficking cases also reported receiving death threats. The report fails to address the critical need for an independent judiciary in Argentina ~ or the effect of such threats on the ability of the judiciary to remain independent.
The most significant, public and sustained harassment of judges occurred during a trial before the civilian federal appeals court (the second-highest court in Argentina) of leaders of a December 1990 military rebellion, the carapintadas (painted faces). Although the report discusses some of these incidents, it does not address the political significance of the case, or the numerous threats the case elicited. There were two bomb scares when the trial started in April 1991, causing evacuation of the courthouse. Court employees were threatened by the defendants and by a defense lawyer, who reportedly told the press, "we will put the judges through the meat grinder." According to press reports, a secretary in one of the judge's chambers received a telephone call at home stating, "once we are through with the judges, we will continue with the court workers."
Judge Jorge Casanovas, chief justice of the federal appeals court and one of three judges hearing the case, was a primary target of the threats. While the report discusses these incidents, it omits significant details. It states that his "apartment was fired upon," without noting that the shots were fired by a person using a high-powered rifle with a telescopic sight while Judge Casanovas ate lunch with his family. It also fails to note that the Minister of the Interior admitted that the attack probably came from ultra-rightist sectors of the military, and that one day before the attack, the lawyer for a carapintadas leader stated that "the carapintadas are going to prevent this trial from going forward." The report notes that the government "enhanced police protection for the judges," but does not mention that the court's president publicly criticized the government for placing the judges in "no man's land," or that, in addition to the threats and attacks, the judges reported that their telephone conversations were being monitored. The report states that "three human skulls inscribed with the names of [Judge Casanovas'] children were sent to him in July," but fails to mention that the skulls were delivered to him on the same day at three different locations he
24
Argentina
regularly frequented. The report also fails to mention that in August, the court issued an opinion reducing the sentences of certain carapintadas defendants.
The report does not mention other controversial cases against the police and military that failed to progress in 1991. Charges of torture lodged against police subcommis s ioner Luis Patti remained stalled at the end of 1991, as did a case involving the September 1990 arrest and subsequent "disappearance" of Andrés Alberto NUnez, even though Nunez' name was later discovered in a police precinct register. In 1991, as in 1990, there was no serious judicial investigation into the apparent murder of members of an armed group that raided the military quarters of La Tablada in January 1989, despite strong circumstantial evidence suggesting that at least four of the attackers were killed by the army after they surrendered. Calls for the creation of an independent commission of inquiry were ignored throughout 1991.
In an improvement over last year's report, the 1991' report correctly notes that "judicial proceedings in the complex, highly emotional efforts to ascertain the whereabouts and identity of children of those who were 'disappeared' by the security forces during the 1976-83 military dictatorship appear to have stalled, " that disciplinary proceedings against two federal prosecutors who were pressing those actions remained pending at year's end, and that "the Government has done little to support the investigation and resolution of these cases."
The report erroneously states that legislation passed to provide indemnification for political imprisonment would allow family members to file claims against members of the armed forces; such claims are no longer possible due to both statutes of limitation and laws closing off the possibility of trials. While the report notes the authority of the Argentine police to adjudicate misdemeanor cases, it should have elaborated on how this authority is implemented. It is generally exercised in an arbitrary manner; senior police officers are entitled to impose, on their own authority, sentences of up to 30 days' administrative detention, without need to obtain judicial approval. In October, the Supreme Court, witii
25
Argentina
President Menem's appointees forming the majority, upheld the constitutionality of police-authorized administrative detentions.
Another omission in the report is its failure to discuss the November Supreme Court ruling (again, with a majority comprised of President Menem's appointees) affirming a lower court's denial of legal status to the Argentine Homosexual Community (CHA) and the adverse effects of the ruling on freedom of expression and association in Argentina. The lower court had denied the group's application for status on the ground that in addition to meeting statutory standards, CHA must also meet societal objectives which a homosexual group did not. In the face of mounting international outcry following the Supreme Court's decision, President Menem asked CHA to reapply for legal status, which the government approved in March 1992.
In 1989 and 1990, observers predicted that President Menem's decrees pardoning 280 military officials and civilians charged with human rights violations, and his subsequent pardon of nine former junta members convicted of human rights violations, could herald a new era of lawlessness and impunity in Argentina. The events of 1991 indicate that those predictions may have been accurate. The year saw threats and physical attacks not only against judges, but also against government critics ~ including human rights advocates, journalists and a prominent filmmaker - by persons with alleged ties to the government, the military, and rightist supporters. The report acknowledges these incidents, but seriously understates them.
The "anonymous telephone threats" against the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo cited in the report, for example, included numerous death threats against Hebe Bonafini, the organization's president, which began shortly after Bonafini publicly criticized President Menem for pardoning Argentina's nine former junta members convicted of human rights violations. The report also fails to mention that the daughter of a founder of the group, whose own mother was allegedly tortured and murdered by the military in 1977, received numerous written and telephonic threats in 1991. She was told that she would suffer the same fate as her mother. Although the report states that the group's office was
26
Argentina
"vandalized," it fails to mention that the offices were burglarized no less than four times between March and June, and that confidential written and computer records were taken. It also fails to mention that there has been no meaningful inquiry into these incidents by government authorities. The report should also have at least referred to these events in the section covering governmental attitudes towards nongovernmental human rights investigations.
The report notes that in July, "three journalists received menacing anonymous letters from a group calling itself the Peronist Moralizing Command." In fact, at least eight reporters and foreign correspondents received such letters. The report fails to mention that the letters were delivered after presidential advisors publicly stated that criticism of the president should be toned down, or that the letters warned that "[tjhe damage done to the country, its institutions, and the President's image will not be left unanswered." The report also does not mention that the offices of a leading opposition newspaper, Pagina 12, were bombed in February or that a parcel containing a fake bOmb was delivered in August to the home of a radio journalist following his interview with an opposition party member. It also neglects to mention the overt attempt to limit criticism of the government coming from Pagina 12 when the government pulled all official advertisements from the paper. The government reversed this action only in the face of domestic and international outcry.
The May attack on filmmaker Fernando Solanas is described in the report in a manner that underplays its brutality and significance. Solanas, a critic of President Menem, had accused the government of corruption. The report indicates that he was "wounded," without noting that he was shot six times in the legs, and without disclosing that he was warned by the gunmen to "keep his mouth shut." Two former intelligence officers were arrested and charged in the shooting.
In December, a leading Argentine human rights lawyer and chairman of the human rights group Centro de Estudios Legates y Sociales, Emilio Mignone, referred to the wave of lawlessness in Argentina as the "boomerang" effect of pardons and other concessions
27
Argentina
granted by President Menem and former President Raul Alfonsin to military officials charged with human rights violations and other crimes, noting diat impunity was beginning to affect not only political opponents of the government, but wealthy and privileged sectors of society as well. The arrest in November and December of a kidnapping ring whose members included high-ranking police officers, intelligence agents and military officers implicated in torture, murder and "task force" operations during the military dictatorship confirms Mignone's observation. Although President Menem, to his credit, has moved vigorously against the arrested gang members, the investigation could reach the highest levels of police, intelligence and military hierarchies, and it was unclear at year's end whether the president or the courts would take decisive action against those implicated beyond those persons already arrested. The report gives President Menem credit for "busting" this kidnapping ring without addressing the government's fundamental unwillingness or inability to address the underlying power structures --vestiges from the military dictatorship ~ that threaten Argentina's chances to create or sustain a rights-respecting regime.
28
