BULGARIA
The State Department report on Bulgaria continues in the positive vein of the prior two years. It is generally well-balanced, recognizing the encouraging progress since the ouster of Todor Zhivkov and the progress made by the post-Communist government, yet acknowledging that problems still exist, especially with regard to national minorities. As in prior years, the report unfortunately focuses on political events, easily identifiable benchmarks of progress, as opposed to providing a substantial analysis of human rights concerns. While it is important to acknowledge the significant progress Bulgaria has made in liberating its political system, it is equally important to recognize that certain human rights problems persist.
One single issue, discrimination against ethnic Turks, gypsies and other national minorities, loomed large in Bulgaria in 1991. The report focuses on the events themselves, rather than the human rights issues surrounding those events. In doing so, it fails to convey the depth of the tension and unrest generated by reviving nationalism.
The report appropriately highlights two major political achievements, the passage of the Constitution in July and the parliamentary elections in October. In July, Bulgaria's Grand National Assembly adopted the country's first democratic constitution since the Communist takeover in 1945. The report provides a good exegesis of the protection of civil liberties and human rights in that document, but omits any discussion of the acrimony and human rights violations leading up to its adoption.
In the final weeks prior to the adoption of the Constitution, scores of legislators, mainly from the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF) and the Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF), which has a predominantly ethnic Turkish membership, walked out of the proceedings to protest what they felt was an attempt by the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) to slow the work of the legislature and to block necessary reforms. The walkout was accompanied by protest rallies, hunger strikes and some violence against the protestors. The
44
Bulgaria
Constitution was finally adopted with the understanding that it would require substantial amendment.
One failing of the new Constitution is that it bans political parties formed on an ethnic, racial or religious basis as well as ones which aim at a forcible takeover of state power or incite ethnic, racial or religious hatred. Another perceived shortcoming of the new Constitution involves accountability for past violations. Only crimes against peace and humanity have no statute of limitations. Some have argued that this would provide Communists with a legal loophole to avoid future prosecution for past misdeeds. Even with these obvious flaws, the adoption of a new constitution which embodies significant human rights reforms was a significant achievement. In addition, it provides Bulgaria with the legislative foundation necessary to implement economic and social reforms within a legal context that respects and protects civil liberties.
The second major event noted in the report is the parliamentary elections on October 13. The report accurately notes the participation of over 40 individual parties and coalitions. The report makes only minor mention of the role played by the constitutional ban on parties based on ethnic or religious belief. This ban significantly infringed the right of political participation of ethnic and religious minorities.
In August, the MRF was denied the right to register as a political party for the upcoming elections by the municipal court in Sofia. Under pressure from western press and the diplomatic community, the Supreme Court reversed the decision and allowed MRF to register Just days before the election. The court based its decision on MRF's participation in the 1990 elections, ruling that is was "grandfathered" into this election. Nonetheless, 54 members of Parliament filed a complaint in opposition to the ruling. In spite of the MRF's success in being allowed to register, other ethnic organizations, including Ilinden, a Macedonian nationalist group, and International Macedonia Revolution Organization, were denied registration on the grounds that they are separatist organizations that threaten the security of Bulgaria. Although the report mentions the
45
Bulgaria
banning of Ilinden in passing, it does not sufficiently emphasize the restrictions on political participation of minorities.
The elections were generally regarded as free and fair. The MRF fared surprisingly well, being the only party besides the UDF and BSP to pass the four percent threshold. Nonetheless, the new government of Prime Minister Filip Dimitrov, formally approved on November 8, does not include any representative of the MRF. It is generally believed that including the MRF in the new government would have exacerbated Bulgaria's ethnic tensions. In fact, prior to the election, the BSP and some nationalist organizations used the MRF's participation in the election to fan the embers of anti-Turkish sentiment and to arouse fears of separatism and concern for Bulgaria's national security.
The report makes little or no reference to the appearance of a number of radical nationalist organizations with strong anti-minority views. In 1991, neo-Nazi organizations were active in Sofia, Varna and Mezdra. In addition, there has been a resurgence of nationalist organizations with strong anti-Turkish rhetoric. Ethnic Turks and gypsies comprise approximately 20-25% of Bulgaria's population. The leader in this effort to cultivate anti-Turkish sentiment is the BSP. In the last two years, however, several other groups have emerged. These include the Bulgarian National Radical Party, the Fatherland Party of Labor, the Bulgarian National Democratic Party and the People's Committee for Defense of the National Interest. These groups claim to defend Bulgaria's integrity and national ideals. They view the MRF, the predominantly Turkish political party, as a threat to Bulgaria's national security and as promoting the "Islamization" of Bulgaria.
These groups were largely responsible for the demonstrations, strikes and school closings in the aftermath of attempts to introduce Turkish language lessons into the curriculum of Bulgarian schools. The State Department's report devotes only a few lines to an event that closed as many as 65 schools in Kurdzhali, Shumen and Razgrad and continued to be the focus of national attention and debate for nearly nine months. The nationalist parties led major strikes in schools to protest the
46
Bulgaria
experimental teaching of Turkish for two hours per week in the public schools. Similarly, Turkish parents and students protested that only two hours of instruction were being offered, and only on an experimental basis. The strikes forced the government to postpone the long-promised language classes until September. In November, the National Assembly passed a law prohibiting the teaching of Turkish in Bulgarian schools. This was later amended to allow instruction as an optional course after regular school hours. The report implies by its tone that the matter has been resolved. The "resolution" was the poor compromise which does not incorporate Turkish language classes into the public school curriculum and demonstrates the depth of the continued discrimination against the ethnic Turks in Bulgaria.
The report says little about the ethnic Macedonian minority. Geographically, the Macedonia region includes parts of Greece, Yugoslavia and Bulgaria. Bulgaria has traditionally denied the existence of a Macedonian nationality, though for a brief time after World War II it did recognize and include Macedonian nationals in its census. In May, in Blagoevgrad, members of the banned group Ilinden disrupted a ceremony honoring a Bulgarian national hero, Gotse Delchev. There were other minor skirmishes, but few reports of violence.
In spite of the ongoing ethnic tension in Bulgaria, there were a number of bright spots not mentioned in the State Department's report. During 1991, the Muslim call to prayer was heard in the country for the first time in 40 years. Turkish newspapers have also appeared. Finally, as a result of the year's strife and upheaval, representatives of the 10 political parties that won more than one percent of the vote in the October elections will meet for round table discussions on Bulgaria's ethnic problems.
The report briefly mentions the trial of former dictator Todor Zhivkov, but ignores the fact that no member of Zhivkov's government was tried for the serious human rights violations committed during his tenure. Instead, former officials were tried for abuse of power and accumulation of wealth. For example, Stoyan Ovcharov, former minister of the economy, was convicted of illegally arranging for Zhivkov's
47
Bulgaria
grandson to attend university in Switzerland. In Zhivkov's trial, rather than being charged with crimes related to the harsh imprisonment of dissidents in concentration camps in the 1950s or the forced assimilation of the Turks, Zhivkov was charged with misappropriating state funds and abusing power by granting favors to friends and relatives. Meanwhile, those accused of serious human rights violations are not being prosecuted.
The relatively minor scope of these charges and the omission of others indicates that the government is not committed to investigating and prosecuting serious human rights violations of prior governments. For instance, in May the BSP refused to hand over documents in its archives relating to the period between 1944 to 1948 during which thousands of Bulgarians were imprisoned and executed for their opposition to the Communist party. Further, there has been no public indication that the prosecutor's office has attempted to use judicial means to obtain these documents to investigate these events. In fact, the Prosecutor General of the Armed Forces, Colonel Lilko Yotsov, announced that there could be no trials for the wardens of the "death camps" at Lovech and Skravena and other places because the statute of limitations on the crimes had expired.
An example of the failure to pursue more recent human rights violations is the case of approximately 20 former ethnic Turkish political prisoners. Amnesty International wrote to Bulgaria's Procurator General in October urging the government to investigate the allegations of torture and inhumane treatment of these former prisoners. They claimed that they had been tortured in pretrial detention during the 1984-1989 assimilation campaign to force them to sign false confessions. It remains to be seen whether the Dimitrov government will demand accountability. The report does not address these issues.
The report correctly notes that freedom of the press is flourishing in Bulgaria. This is the most obvious evidence of Bulgaria's progress towards democratization. In 1989, there were only 275 newspapers in Bulgaria, almost all of which were controlled by the government. In January 1991, there were over 600 newspapers, of which 135 were
48
Bulgaria
published privately and 125 were published by political organizations. Both British Broadcasting Corporation and Voice of America broadcasts are received in Bulgaria, as well as British Music Television and French TV-5. It appears that the only real restraints on freedom of the press in Bulgaria are those inherent in its transition to a market economy, such as a shortage of newsprint and materials.
The report correctly notes that trade unions for the most part operated freely throughout 1991. There were some isolated reports of discrimination against union members: a company director in Bourgas dismissed an entire department of 30 people for the sole purpose of ridding the company of 20 members of PODKREPA, one of the two large trade union confederations in Bulgaria. In addition, there were reports of regular dismissals and punitive acts against PODKREPA members at an enterprise in Primorsko.
While continued attention to human rights concerns in Bulgaria is justified, it is also important to remember that the problems of 1991 do not compare in scope or severity to those that existed under Todor Zhivkov. On most fronts, Bulgaria has made significant strides to observe human rights. All former political prisoners have received amnesty. Most restraints on foreign travel and emigration have been removed. There appears to be a high levef of commitment to democratic principles. Freedom of the press is flourishing, the secret service has been disbanded and laws passed which prohibit gathering information on citizens regarding race, political affiliation, religion and trade union membership. Bulgaria continues to struggle with the recognition and acceptance of the role of its national minorities in the political and economic life of the country. These problems will not diminish with the privatization of land and means of economic production. The State Department's report recognizes a linkage between discrimination against minorities and Bulgaria's unstable economy, but does not squarely assess the impact political and economic developments had on human rights in 1991 or their longer term implications.
49
