BELIZE
The year 1991 was much like 1990 in human rights terms: there were no political prisoners, no restrictions on expression or travel, no official censorship of the media. Belize's open media policy, initiated in 1990, remains a bright spot in the region. Now an independent station produces nightly news programs and a local nongovernmental organization (NGO) provides weekly critical forums on current events --and to date, there have been no government efforts to censor what is broadcast. NGOs, moreover, continue to proliferate, and their ideas receive a sympathetic hearing from government. As a result, new economic and social plans are projected and discussed constantly -- it is the decade of the workshop, people say — and there are new employment opportunities for educated and talented young Belizeans.
At the same time, these are boom times in Belize, with an overall growth in GDP of nine percent -- yet unemployment is still an official 14% overall, and 25% for women; wages are still as low as US$.75 an hour in some sectors; and education dropout rates remain high. An attempt to form a union — and the first strike since 1981 ~ failed when the company hired immigrant replacement workers. Government promises to change the laws regarding union recognition and institute a minimum wage had not been realized by year's end.
This year the State Department has qualified its descriptions of participatory democracy and begun to address some of the structural inequality that dims the democratic promise for many. At times the criticism is hard to understand, as for example with regard to the media, which has focused unprecedented attention on human rights issues in the lives of ordinary people. The report concentrates solely on the Broadcasting Corporation of Belize (BCB), the autonomous corporation set up in 1990 to replace the state-run Belize Broadcasting Network. The parallel move, the authorizing of independent radio and television stations which for the first time produce and broadcast local news and features, goes unremarked, in favor of allegations of "indirect government influence" from "informed observers" over news and feature reporting on the BCB.
29
Belize
This skepticism is puzzling in view of the quite remarkable new visibility for human rights issues afforded by the popular call-in formats on radio and television programs alike. Police abuse has long been a dirty secret in Belize, known primarily to the legal profession, who quite regularly get acquittals on the basis of "improperly obtained confessions." In 1991, complaints of such abuse to a call-in radio program encouraged more and more people to talk about their experiences, to the extent that personal experiences of mistreatment at the hands of the police became daily fare. This same program frequently broadcast forums and conferences by the Human Rights Commission of Belize (HRCB), and advised people to file reports of police abuse to the Commission, while two television stations hosted programs on domestic violence. Largely as a result of this increased attention, the number of reports of police abuse increased dramatically ~ from nine in 1990 to 27 in 1991 " as did those of domestic violence. (The overall human rights complaints, which include violations of civil, economic, social and refugee rights, increased from 59 to 125.)
Not mentioned in this year's report is the fact that the HRCB, along with Amnesty International and regional affiliates, has appealed to the Governor General for mercy in the cases of two persons convicted of murder and sentenced to death in 1991. The appeal of Catalino O'Neil was dismissed June 12; that of Dean Vasquez was denied on September 7. The death penalty is mandatory for murder in Belize, as it is in most countries of the Caribbean, a holdover from colonial administrations. The Governor General acts on the advice of the Advisory Council, which had not issued a decision by the end of the year.
In February, hearings began before the Commission of Enquiry set up to investigate allegations of torture of Guatemalan national Roberto Ar^valo Cruz by Belize security forces in October 1990. Further hearings in May heard testimony from hospital personnel where Ar^valo had been taken before deportation. However, the Commission had not reported by the end of the year.
30
Belize
The report's skepticism with regard to the media is absent elsewhere; for example, it notes the active role of the church in political life, including the "broad-based partnership of the Government and several different churches active in education" which "successfully operates and administers most of Belize's primary and secondary schools." This is surely the most benign light in which to view the church control of education, which has resulted in inefficient — and unequal - allocation of resources, despite relatively high spending on education (20% of public sector spending in 1990), since 93% of the budget goes to teacher salaries and other funds are allocated on a matching basis to monies raised by denominations. It also overlooks rising drop-out rates; only 59% complete eight years of primary school while only one in 10 completes high school according to UNICEF. These shortcomings are important because of the way in which the education system institutionalizes inequality, especially between urban and rural areas.
In general, however, the report correctly stresses the two areas where discrimination and inequality are most endemic, namely the situation of women and the mistreatment of nonunionized workers, especially undocumented refugees.
It has again noted increasing tensions caused by resentment of Central American immigrants, as well as the strains on social services and, rather more obliquely, the effect on labor relations. The report then stresses government efforts to address these problems, including a new refugee law clarifying the distinction between refugees and illegal immigrants and the effort to speed up work permit processing through the creation of an Office on Refugee Affairs within the Foreign Ministry.
In November Belize announced it would accept 100 Haitian refugees under the auspices of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), with financing from the United States. The refugees, who were tested for AIDS, were to be settled on land near the capital along with Belizeans, but by the end of the year they had not arrived.
31
Belize
Curiously, the report does not take up the major example of Belize's growing resentment of refugees, namely the roundup and detention, in the early hours of October 31, of some 75 Central American vendors and construction workers in Belize City who could not produce work papers; even those claiming to have given papers to Belizeans for safekeeping were not allowed time to produce them but were hustled off to detention. Those who could not finally show their papers, numbering some 27, were then deported.
While complaints were made to the HRCB, the UNHCR and the police, no one would press formal charges; the response of the Police Commissioner was that while the police were within their rights, the offense was on the part of certain Belizeans "harbouring these aliens" who resisted the arrests.
Moreover, the total indifference of the press and public — despite the coincidence of the roundup with the visit of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, Mrs. Sadako Ogata, to Belize ~ is a striking indication of the level of resentment of this growing element — now estimated at 20% of Belize's population.
The report contains a welcome discussion of the abuse of migrant workers, especially in the banana industry, noting that undocumented workers in this industry are especially vulnerable to the fairly routine practice of failing to pay workers. The badly underfunded HRCB has aggressively investigated conditions in the banana and citrus industries and has encouraged workers to report on wage and other abuses. Their reports, including lack of sanitation and impure drinking water at a time when Belize is trying hard to avoid the cholera epidemic threatening the region; poor and unregulated provisions for schooling and medical care; and most recently, dangerous levels of exposure to pesticide sprays, begin to uncover a pattern of exploitation of migrant and undocumented workers from neighboring Central America which has too long been ignored by both political parties and people in authority. In the case of the spraying, the HRCB and the UNHCR have been trying to get the workers moved; while the industry has agreed to provide transport, the Foreign Ministry does not regard it as a priority.
32
Belize
While the report does not make the connection, part of the reason for the resentment of the Central American migrants and refugees is precisely the opportunity afforded employers by a large number of desperate refugees to continue to pay substandard wages, and thwart workers' efforts to organize unions through dismissals and replacement by migrant workers.
This was the outcome of a highly publicized strike in April. As the report notes, workers at Civic Textile Co. in Belmopan struck to demand the reinstatement of 16 workers, including six members of the executive committee of the Women's Workers Union. The union was formed in March 1991 to demand promised piece-rate wages and better working conditions at the plant, which employed 120 women at $US.75 per hour ~ the price of a bar of soap in Belize. A Board of Enquiry, comprised of an attorney and an outside representative for both union and management sides, held hearings on the case in April. Reports and commentaries were broadcast on television and radio - with numerous call-in programs - and the union won support from women's groups and other labor unions in the country, as well as from the Caribbean Human Rights Network.
The hearings highlighted the role of the Labor Ministry in approving violations of Belize's labor laws and regulations — a practice that has been commonplace, but never formally investigated or acknowledged. In fact, the Board of Enquiry formally criticized the Labor Ministry for its lax enforcement of labor laws. It was revealed, among other things, that the Labor Commissioner had agreed to allow the company to hire immigrants who did not have work permits to replace those dismissed, promising to speed up the processing of their papers.
The Board of Enquiry found that the workers' rights had been violated and ordered the dismissed workers reinstated. However, the company instead canceled its orders and closed its doors. The Economic Development Ministry gave it a July deadline to reopen and rehire the workers or lose its development concession, whereby it was exempt from various import duties. As the deadline approached, the fired workers
33
Belize
were in the process of negotiating with the company, and requested an extension of the deadline. But the Minister for Economic Development declared he was washing his hands of the matter and revoked the concession. Thereafter the company reopened without a concession and with a small staff of immigrant workers.
With the exception of the outcome, the report noted these events accurately ~ and indeed, the incident replaced the descriptions of labor peace that formally characterized earlier reports. The catch-22 by which unions are allowed to organize but employers not obliged to recognize them -- and indeed have been allowed to dismiss organizers for union activities - has long rendered the labor law a farce in Belize, and was the subject of a specific resolution passed at the Sixth Annual General Assembly of Caribbean Rights, held in Haiti in April. Despite righteous rhetoric on this issue by both parties, the law has still not been changed.
The situation of trade unions has not improved. The report this year cites "an estimated 10.3 percent of the labor force" represented by unions, including the professional workers in the civil service. This is much reduced from the extraordinary 30% cited in 1989 and reduced again from last year's figure of 12%. Not surprisingly, though the recently created export processing zone, as the report notes, is not exempt from the Labor Code, there are no unions in the zone.
The fact is, however, that all labor force estimates ~ and thus those for unionization and unemployment ~ rely on a 1984 labor survey which has never been updated. The Economic Development Ministry itself states that a significant number of new jobs have been in areas such as citrus and bananas, "which rely heavily on low-cost migrant labour from neighbouring countries." Structural unemployment remains a problem, the Development Plan notes, as "evidenced by the shortage of labour for manufacturing and construction in Belize City despite its high concentration of jobless." The problem is particularly serious for urban youth; a 1989 youth survey estimated unemployment as high as 42% among youths ages 14 to 23.
34
Belize
In a second incident, the workers at Pyramid Island resort on Caye Chapel, who are not union members, were dismissed without warning when the company suddenly closed its doors in April to begin construction of a new facility. A total of 43 families, who lived and worked at the resort, had 48 hours to leave the island.
With regard to acceptable conditions of work, the report notes accurately that there is no uniform minimum wage in the country and that current legal minimum wage rates are outdated, but concludes as well that real wage rates "provide a relatively decent standard of living for a worker and his family." This is not even the position of the government, which noted in its Development Plan that "low growth in per capita incomes . . . coupled with low minimum wage levels are both indicators of a depressed wage structure, especially when social services costs and increases in the cost of living are taken into account." Per capita income is currently $US 1,250 per year.
An effort to implement a uniform minimum wage fof manual workers encountered opposition from the banana industry, which claimed that the proposed wage of $1.15 per hour would drive them out of business ~ and has not been approved by the Assembly.
The State Department has also expanded its discussion of the discrimination faced by women in virtually all aspects of society. However, while it acknowledges only that they "face some social and economic prejudices," such as low status and low wage jobs, it makes the questionable statement that "women generally received the same wage as men for similar work. ..." The government itself, by contrast, stated in the Development Plan that "gender bias has continued to be a glaring feature of the labour market with female base level factory wages remaining lower than those of males in a comparative working environment."
While this critique last year questioned the observation that women actively participated in "all spheres of national life," explaining that the nature of their participation was highly unequal, the report repeats this observation, stating that "both the Governor General and the
35
Belize
President of the Senate are women." True, but both positions are honorary, nominated rather than elected, and almost entirely ceremonial. The Governor General, as the report states elsewhere, "represents Queen Elizabeth II in the largely ceremonial role of Head of State." The Senate is a wholly nominated body, with no power to influence Cabinet decisions. Only two women have ever been elected to the Assembly and there are no female Cabinet members. The civil service has never had more than two female permanent secretaries out of 13 to 16 at any one time, and only three over its entire postcolonial existence.
The State Department to its credit acknowledges not only the continuing problem of violence against women but also the active role played by a local organization, the Belize Women Against Violence Movement (WAV), which is working to set up a shelter for battered women and a hotline for rape victims. Like the HRCB, its work has concentrated on getting women to report instances of rape and domestic violence: an attorney who works with WAV estimated that only 10% of rape cases are reported, of which only half ever reach the courts.
WAV, with the help of the same attorney, in 1991 drafted legislation on domestic abuse and marital rape. Additional changes would repeal evidence laws, so that the burden is on the accused to prove consent. However, WAV's efforts are all on a volunteer basis. It, like the HRCB and the floundering legal aid organization, is dependent on small outside grants just to staff an office. While the government has committed itself to increasing the safety of women, WAV currently fears its proposals will languish or be watered down in the Cabinet for lack of an attorney to stay on the case.
Women have succeeded dramatically in recent years in putting the issue of women's rights on the human rights agenda. The government became a party to the UN Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women in 1990, upgraded the Women's Bureau to department level and drafted a National Policy Statement on Women. Yet no funds were allocated to the new Women's Department, making it little more than a name change. Clearly a more active commitment is needed. A two-day workshop on Women's Rights
36
Belize
as Human Rights hosted by HRCB, WAV and the Commission for the Defense of Human Rights in Central America (CODEHUC A) in October concluded: "Women were considered to be denigrated, degraded, and discredited by the family, the culture, the educational and legal system."
Poverty of women is endemic, yet women average 5.2 children, three times the rate in the rest of the Caribbean. Adolescent pregnancy is widespread; according to UNICEF, in 1988 46% of mothers had their first child before age 19. Family planning education is nonexistent in the church-nm schools, while the 1990 budget reduced spending on social services and kept the health sector static. The Belize Family Life Association, which has provided virtually the only information and access to contraception and family planning services for rural women, lost its funding from the U.S. Agency for International Development and may have to curtail services. Abortion is illegal, yet common, and deaths due to botched abortions are a continued concern to hospitals. No official figures are available, but a report by the Pan American ^Health Organization estimates that 22% of maternal deaths result from complications following illegal abortions, making it the leading cause of maternal death.
Alarmed at this situation, the government issued an initial policy statement on women that promised to "protect the right of women to determine the number and spacing of children they desire," and toward this end "will provide easy access to reproductive care information through compulsory family life education in both public and private schools . . . community education, hospitals, and the rural and urban health clinics."
The same problems obtain with regard to rights of children. In cooperation with UNICEF, the government signed the World Summit Declaration on the Survival, Protection and Development of Children in June. In August, a two-day workshop was hosted by the Ministry of Social Development to draft a National Plan for Children. Representatives of NGOs and other autonomous agencies participated, with technical support from UNICEF. They have their work cut out. According to a 1991 UNICEF report, there are no child abuse reporting
37
Belize
laws, no systematic data collection in child abuse by police, hospitals, schools or any institution, and no professionals trained in the field. The report concluded: "The real situation of children and women is basically unknown. The ministries are understaffed and undertrained. The Ministry of Social Services has no planning unit." They note that "insufficient use and distribution of resources is prevalent and has contributed to a general decline in the social economic status of the poorer, harder to reach sectors of society." With over 90% of the education budget going to teacher salaries, all special education, including early child development, services for the disabled and preschool programs must seek external funding sources. Currently, 54% of children aged 5-14 do not get a basic education.
Finally, we stated in 1990 that the period of time a suspect could be detained before being brought to court had been reduced from 72 to 24 hours in 1989. In fact, while the resolution was introduced in the Assembly it apparently was not approved.
38
