BRAZIL
The State Department's report on Brazil gives a generally accurate overview of the most serious human rights violations in Brazil during 1991. It fails, however, to adequately analyze in any depth certain recurrent human rights problems involving, principally, the killing of minors in Brazil's major cities, persistent extreme racial and social inequalities, and discriminatory treatment by the courts in cases involving violence against women. The State Department continues to give unwarranted praise to the government for recent human rights initiatives, while downplaying evidence of official complicity in human rights violations and the general climate of impunity.
In an improvement over last year's report, the State Department now recognizes the widespread use of death threats as a separate and important human rights problem in Brazil. It correctly identifies the high number of extrajudicial killings and death threats against rural activists by landowners and their agents, and of criminal suspects and minors by vigilante groups in urban areas, as the principal human rights problems in Brazil. Generally, the report adequately discusses these problems in the context of rural violence and identifies the most significant extrajudicial killings and death threats against rural leaders.
The report's discussion of the extrajudicial killings of minors is considerably weaker. A flaw in last year's report is repeated again with its omission of any specific cases related to the killing of minors. Remarkably, the report fails to mention a notorious case on November 14, in which seven children between the ages of nine and 17 were taken from their homes in the municipality of Duque de Caxias in the Baixada Fluminense region near Rio de Janeiro, made to lie face down near the bank of a river and shot in the head at point-blank range, killing six. The case attracted international attention to the death squads that operate in Rio de Janeiro's poorer neighborhoods. In a country where it is estimated by human rights groups that an average of three children a day die due to violence, the case was only unusual because there was a survivor. The report's omission of a single specific case only serves to trivialize the rampant killings of poor, darker-skinned Brazilian children.
39
Brazil
The omission is all the more glaring this year since the State Department's own instructions for the preparation of the country reports now provide that "the most important and relevant cases, including all egregious abuses" should be cited in each section of the report.
Two important cases relating to urban violence are mentioned in the report but are not adequately discussed. In the case of Fausto Ribeiro da Silva Filho, a lawyer for the urban squatters movement who was killed in August, the report mentions that human rights groups suspect that he was murdered by opponents of the squatters movement. The report should have also added that the inquiry into da Silva's killing has been stalled and that no one has been brought to justice, thereby providing clear evidence of the climate of impunity in which such killings are committed.
Special attention should have been paid to the case of Volmer do Nascimento, the Rio de Janeiro coordinator for the National Street Children's Movement (MNMR). Although the report correctly notes that he has received frequent death threats, it fails to convey the extent to which Nascimento has been threatened in a widespread effort to silence and discredit him. Since he delivered documents to the Ministry of Justice in November 1990 detailing the involvement of judges, police and local businessmen in the killings of minors, he has been sued for libel by five judges and has been subjected to vicious verbal attacks by some members of the press. On April 25 Nascimento was abducted by kidnappers and held hostage for 48 hours. The State Department wasted a valuable opportunity to demonstrate the level of persecution that Nascimento and other prominent human rights activists face in Brazil.
In the same section, the report credits the government with initiatives to combat violence against minors despite charges by human rights groups that such measures are ineffective. By crediting the government with its assertions that local police broke up 15 organized vigilante groups in Rio de Janeiro during the first half of 1991 and omitting any mention of official complicity with some death squads, the report gives the misleading impression that such killings are on the decline. Nowhere is it mentioned that Brazil continues to have the
40
Brazil
highest rate of homicide in the world with approximately 370 killings a day.
Despite mounting evidence of official complicity in human rights violations, particularly in the killings of minors, the report completely ignores the problem of impunity. A Rio de Janeiro Legislative Investigating Committee (CPI) released a report on November 1 attributing a leading role in the execution of minors in Rio de Janeiro to Joao Pedro Bueno (Pedro Capeta). According to the CPI report, Capeta was supplied with false identity books identifying him as a commissioner for minors that were issued by judges in the municipality of Duque de Caxias in the Baixada Fluminense region of Rio de Janeiro. The CPI report found a connection among judges, police and murderers in a context of absolute impunity. According to the report, the crimes are occurring because it is commonly believed that there will be no investigation into the killings of street children. Witnesses to killings are reluctant to testify for fear of reprisals. The CPI report was supported by initial data disclosed by the Congressional Investigating Comnlittee in Brasilia (which included the names of some public officials). No official investigations, however, followed up the reports.
While it is noted that most of the victims in the murders of minors are black and poor, the report does not adequately reflect race discrimination and social marginalization as significant human rights problems in Brazil. What is apparent in this year's report is that the State Department has softened its criticism of social inequalities at a time when Brazil's trade and economic policy is viewed more favorably by the Bush administration. For example, in the introductory section, the report places more emphasis on the Collor government's movement toward a free market economy than on Brazil's persistent extreme social inequalities. While it is noted that income distribution remains marked by wide disparities, the report fails to point out that it is one of the most skewed in the world (as the 1990 report accurately mentioned). Income distribution statistics show that the richest five percent of Brazil's population share in excess of 35% of the national income, while the poorest 50% of the population share only 11% of such national income. Recent trends show that gap to be widening.
41
Brazil
The impoverishment of a majority of Brazil's population is a significant human rights problem in itself and has left the urban poor relatively unprotected against human rights abuses by death squads which are often sponsored by wealthy businessmen. Many of the more than 60 million Brazilians who earn less than the minimum wage (approximately US$57 a month) are meninos da rua (street children) who are often the primary targets of death squads. The report ignores the importance of the income gap as a factor contributing to the impunity in which many killings are committed.
The report also fails to convey the significance of race discrimination as a fundamental human rights problem in Brazil. Extrajudicial killings, torture, arbitrary arrest and detention disproportionately affect blacks in Brazil and race discrimination, although often subtle, is pervasive. The report correctly notes that black consciousness organizations complain that blacks bear the brunt of police brutality and encounter substantial de facto discrimination. This section in the report would have been stronger, however, if the State Department had also commented upon the ineffectiveness of the legal system in addressing these problems. Due to the inherent weakness of Brazil's anti-discrimination law, which has been in effect since 1951, most cases never come to trial. Lawyers at Geledes, a legal aid organization in Sao Paulo which represents blacks in discrimination cases, themselves receive frequent death threats.
While the report identifies the high incidence of physical abuse against women as a human rights problem in Brazil, it fails to mention a major setback to women's rights during 1991. On August 29, a court granted an acquittal based on the defense of personal honor in a case where a husband stabbed to death his unfaithful wife and her lover. This judgment was passed in spite of a prior ruling on March 11 by the Superior Tribunal of Justice ~ Brazil's highest court -- in the same case, that the honor defense had no basis in law. One prosecutor estimated that in the interior of the country the honor defense is successfully invoked 80% of the time. Discriminatory treatment by the courts continues to occur frequently in cases involving violence against women.
42
Brazil
The report's failure to cite the recent evidence of the alleged involvement of the judicial system in the killings of minors may be its most glaring omission. Even Brazil's Foreign Minister has admitted publicly that judges and prosecutors — as well as police — may be involved in the killing of minors. For some reason, the report also ignores an internal report prepared by the Brazilian Federal Police and made available to the press in June which found that members of the security forces were directly involved in the murders of destitute street children. Given the significance of the allegations, it is understandable that such charges would be handled delicately. But to ignore completely credible evidence of this magnitude is a material omission.
In 1991, the Collor government undertook fundamental changes in the economy which have been viewed favorably by the United States government. Unfortunately, no such fundamental changes have occurred in the human rights arena as persistent human rights problems continue to worsen. It is also clear that there is a high degree of involvement of certain judicial officials in such human rights violations, particularly in the killings of minors, which, unfortunately, is not reflected in the report.
43
