CHILE
This year's report on human rights in Chile is an improvement on previous years' both in accuracy and in comprehensiveness. It is not without flaws, however, particularly in its failure to describe the political context surrounding events, and the causes of violence and discord in Chilean society.
The fundamental human rights issue in Chile during 1991 remained the legacy of the Pinochet era, and the vast number of residual human rights problems. Among these are the military's continuing power, the lack of confidence in the impartiality of the judiciary and continuing violations by groups such as the uniformed police, Carabineros. To touch upon each of these issues as if they were separate and unrelated, as the report does, gives a distorted view of the underlying structural problems and challenges that face President Aylwin's coalition government. The military dictatorship's legacy, institutionally, constitutionally and legally, combined with Pinochet allies in the judiciary, the military, security forces and the Senate, casts a shadow from the past and also prevents further reform.
The report's introduction begins by minimizing and isolating these problems. It describes a "separate, independent judicial branch which, however, is dominated by appointees of the former military regime. " This is an oxymoron. Of the 19 judges on the Supreme Court, 18 were appointed by General Pinochet. Another indication is the fact that of the 8,700 writs for amparo and habeas corpus presented between 1973 and 1988, only 10 were accepted by the courts. A military appeals court in 1990 overturned the only conviction ever against a member of the military for a human rights violation committed during the Pinochet dictatorship (the case brought by Carmen Gloria Quintana and the family of Rodrigo Rojas, mentioned in the report). It is patently wrong to call the judicial branch "independent," even if the statement is later qualified.
Similarly problematic is the statement that "civilian control of the military is increasing but not complete." The fact remains that General Pinochet is still commander-in-chief of the armed forces and that
53
Chile
President Aylwin has no power to remove or appoint armed forces commanders or officers. While the appointment of a civilian as defense minister is a step forward, the experience in Chile and elsewhere in Latin America shows that that step alone does not ensure civilian control over the armed forces or troop loyalty. For example, on January 8 (in response to the "Pinochecks" corruption scandal in which the armed forces paid $3 million to General Pinochet's son), the army generals declared their unrestricted loyalty to General Pinochet, warning that any threat to him would be "a grave threat to national security."
The single most significant event of the year was the publication in March of the report by the National Commission on Truth and Reconciliation, known as the Rettig Commission Report. The Commission was appointed by President Aylwin to investigate cases of death and "disappearance" that occurred during the military dictatorship, rather than all human rights violations as the report seems to suggest. This limitation on the scope was in part because, as a practical matter, it would have taken too long to investigate all of the cases of torture, forced exile and the general suppression of civil liberties such as freedom of speech and assembly and freedom from arbitrary arrest and invasion of one's home. The numbers of such cases are legion.
Of the 2,279 cases that the Rettig Commission Report describes, responsibility for 2,115 was assigned to the security forces (in particular, the secret police organizations, the National Intelligence Directorate (DINA) and its successor the National Intelligence Center (CNI)); 164 cases were found to be the work of armed opposition groups (including 132 victims who were members of the armed and security forces). Another 641 cases were deemed unclear and in need of further investigation; 508 cases reported to the Commission were not covered by its mandate, and 448 cases covered offered little information more than the victim's name. Church groups have said that an additional 450 people were killed by the security forces which the Rettig Commission Report did not document.
The State Department's report correctly emphasizes that DINA took its orders directly from General Pinochet in its campaign of
54
Chile
eliminating political opposition. General Manuel Contreras, ex-head of DINA, once said that "General Pinochet knew of everything I informed him of" and that he informed Pinochet of "everything the DINA did." The report also challenges the dictatorship's claim that it was fighting an internal war, since it met with very little armed resistance and established control over the country within days of the 1973 coup. However, the report understates the situation when it says that the judiciary was "ineffective" when faced with human rights violations. The judiciary nurtured a climate of impunity that allowed violations to continue year after year by dismissing virtually all habeas corpus petitions and dismissing or closing any investigations or prosecutions of alleged human rights violations. The judiciary thereby became an actor in the repression, not merely a passive and ineffectual bystander.
Regarding missing persons whose fate is still unknown, the report should have said that the police and armed forces have refused to help locate or trace anyone. Indeed, military personnel on active duty did not cooperate with the Rettig Commission ~ the. army "recommended" that its personnel not make any statements. Nor did the security forces cooperate, saying, accurately, that all of DINA's and CNI's files relating to that period had been burned. Prior to the handover of power to President Aylwin, CNI transferred its files and personnel to the military, which then destroyed the files and found jobs for many in the armed forces and the police force. General Manuel Contreras, former DINA chief, denied that any torture or "disappearance" ever took place, and called the Rettig Commission Report "Marxist propaganda." One hundred twenty-five bodies of the "disappeared" were found in Area 29 of Santiago's main cemetery in September; General Pinochet angered many when he claimed not to know anything about them and said "what good economy" it was to bury two or more bodies in each grave.
The Rettig Commission made several recommendations: that the government pay reparations to the victims' families (implementing legislation on which was approved on January 31, 1992), set up an organization to discover the fate of those still missing, and also, which the report does not mention, reform the Supreme Court nomination
55
Chile
system to increase the judiciary's independence, appoint an ombudsman to protect citizens against abuses of authority and transfer cases to the civilian courts. Approximately 230 cases have been transferred as a result of the last recommendation.
In addition to the question of material reparations, there is the question of moral reparations, i.e., revealing the truth and obtaining justice. Although the Rettig Commission Report is clearly valuable in bringing to light and acknowledging human rights violations, its fundamental failing is that it falls short of revealing the full truth by failing to identify the perpetrators. It lists the names and details of all of the victims, but those of the perpetrators (many of whom are known) were not released in the published version. Instead, in a futile gesture, they were passed to the courts for prosecution. The military government promulgated an amnesty in 1978 covering offenses committed through March 1978. The law was reaffirmed by the Supreme Court during 1991. Ninety percent of the deaths catalogued in the Rettig Commission Report took place prior to 1978. Offenses committed after 1978 will be subject to military court jurisdiction; given the past performance of these courts, the likelihood of conviction is low, even after new reforms limiting jurisdiction to members of the military or security forces. The State Department's instructions on the preparation of reports state that government failure to prosecute abuses amounts to eidier secret instigation, tacit condonation or an inability to control such abuses. Although none of these descriptions quite fits the situation in Chile, the report should abide by its own instructions and point out the glaring failure to prosecute human rights violations in Chile.
It is wrong to say, as the report does, that President Aylwin "reaffirmed the validity" of the amnesty law. In fact, the president had no choice; given the Supreme Court's rigid stance, it would be virtually impossible to secure support in the Senate to overturn this legislation. Highly controversial, rolling back the amnesty could also trigger a military uprising, as occurred in Argentina. Instead, President Aylwin, taking a position supported by many human rights organizations, asked the Supreme Court to investigate cases covered by the amnesty law, establish facts and determine guilt, and then apply the amnesty by
56
Chile
negating the sentences. The court continues to refuse to do this, arguing that the amnesty law even proscribes investigations. Attempts to combat the amnesty law by arguing that it is inconsistent with the international human rights covenants ratified by Chile failed when the Supreme Court refused to accept the covenants' supremacy over national law and when it refused to accept that Chile had been in a state of war during the Pinochet years so that the Geneva Conventions were not applicable. (This contrasts with the military's claims that it was involved in an internal war.)
The report does not mention the history of Santiago Appeals Court Judge Carlos Cerda. He was expelled from the bench by the Supreme Court in January 1991 for refusing to close a case against certain senior military officials for the 1976 "disappearance" of 13 persons. Judge Cerda's argument was, firstly, that the amnesty law only applies once the perpetrators are identified; secondly, that the crime of depriving someone of their liberty is a continuing crime that lasts until they are released, and thus the amnesty does not apply to those cases where the victim was not freed before 1978; and thirdly, that to close the case violates international human rights norms and Article 143 of the Chilean Code of Criminal Procedure, which states that a case should not be closed until the investigations are exhausted. In the end Judge Cerda closed the case and after two months' suspension, was reinstated.
One alternative strategy for penetrating the legal inviolability of the armed forces has been recently proposed by President Aylwin: reforming the law to restore the presidential power to remove military officers, in order to discipline military subordinates. At present, the president may not remove incumbent service chiefs (including General Pinochet) or even junior officers. Many of those known to have committed human rights violations during the dictatorship are still on active duty and their removal could prove a confidence-building measure for those demanding justice. It should also be noted that the president is also limited by law in his ability to reduce the military budget, one of the largest in Latin America; the law prescribes that 10% of copper sales (about $300 million per year) should go to the military budget which cannot be cut below the index-linked equivalent of its 1989 level.
57
Chile
President Aylwin's delegation of responsibility to the judiciary and the refusal by the judiciary to investigate or prosecute human rights violations has seriously angered large sectors of the public and opposition groups. This is a crucial part of the background which the report omits and which provides context to understand the armed attacks described in the report.
The report's discussion of political and extrajudicial killing is slanted, giving events the wrong priority. Rather than beginning the section with the more than 2,000 deaths catalogued in the Rettig Commission Report, it describes attacks by various organizations, which led to 12 reported deaths. It is no coincidence that the bomb attacks and assassinations largely took place immediately before and after the release of the Rettig Commission Report. Senator Jaime Guzmân, assassinated three weeks after the publication of the Rettig Report, was not simply "a leading rightist political figure" -- he was General Pinochet's close friend and chief civilian adviser, principal draftsman of the Pinochet constitution and defender of the military dictatorship. His killing was said to be a retaliatory act, caused by anger and frustration over the perceived shortcomings of the Rettig Commission Report and the reaction of the military to the Report. In contrast, the State Department's report provides excellent context to explain the assassination of Carlos Perez Castro, a military doctor who assisted CNI in its torture practice. The treatment of this case should be a model for the other cases described in this section.
President Aylwin had requested the armed forces and others responsible for the excesses of the past to acknowledge "the pain caused and cooperate in diminishing it. " General Pinochet's response was "the army denies [the Commission's report] both historical and juridicial validity" and he refused to apologize: "The army sees no reason to ask for pardon for its patriotic labor ... for having rescued freedom and national sovereignty at the insistence of the Chilean people." The Supreme Court's response was also disquieting to those concerned with human rights. The Court accused President Aylwin of threatening the country's political stability, calling the Rettig Report "impassioned, reckless and biased" and faulted it because it "places the justices on a
58
Chile
plane of responsibility almost equal to that of the authors of the abuses of human rights."
As a result of the Guzmán and Pérez assassinations and other actions by extreme left groups — Lautaro Youth Movement (MJL) and the dissident wing of the Manuel Rodriguez Patriotic Front (FPMR-A) -- the entire left has been branded and the political climate polarized, although the communist party, the socialist party and the umbrella leftist organization (Revolutionary Left Movement or MIR) have joined the government in denouncing these acts. Communist party members continued to receive death threats after the Guzmán assassination. In addition, the violence, in a vicious circle, led to pro-Pinochet demonstrations, calls for the military to return to power in order to eradicate such "left-wing subversion" and calls for "anti-terrorist" initiatives. President Aylwin took steps in that direction by ordering the formation of an elite police brigade to combat political violence, made up of a combination of uniformed and civilian police under the control of a civilian, and introduced the concept of plea-bargaining for informants.
Since the release of the Rettig Commission Report, 200 cases of human rights violations have gone before the courts, but not a single member of the security forces has been jailed, and only two have been indicted. The only case to make some progress was specifically excluded from the amnesty law ~ that of former Chilean Foreign Minister Orlando Letelier and his aide Ronni Moffitt, a U.S. citizen, who were assassinated by a car bomb in Washington, D.C. in 1976. There has been substantial U.S. pressure on Chile to bring the perpetrators to justice. The Kennedy-Harkin Amendment conditioned the resumption of U.S. economic and military aid to Chile on sufficient progress having been made in prosecuting those responsible. At the end of 1990 and the beginning of 1991, President Bush considered the conditions fulfilled, lifted the ban on trade benefits under the Generalized System of Preferences (a move supported by Chile's labor movement), and more controversially, restored military assistance. Some thought this action to be precipitous because the Letelier-Moffitt case had not yet been transferred to civilian jurisdiction, and ill-advised because General
59
Chile
Pinochet continues to be head of the armed forces. But in July, at President Aylwin's request, the Supreme Court appointed Supreme Court judge Alfredo Bañados (President Aylwin's first appointee to that court) to reopen the investigation. In September, to the surprise of many, Judge Bañados indicted and put under house-arrest the ex-head of DINA, General Manuel Contreras, and DINA's ex-chief of operations. Colonel Pedro Espinoza (who had previously been indicted in absentia in the United States). In November, the indictment was upheld by the Supreme Court but the men were released on bail. The report states these facts, but it does not indicate that Judge Bañados has received death threats. Transferring the case to civilian jurisdiction and arresting such leading figures of the military dictatorship previously untouchable was a major triumph and should have been treated more thoroughly in the report. The fact that the Letelier-Moffitt case involved a U.S. citizen, took place on U.S. soil, and generated a lot of U.S. pressure explains its remarkable treatment.
The report should have mentioned the attempted murder of human rights activist and lawyer Guillermo Ceroni, who brought a legal action against Colonia Dignidad which had been used as a torture center by DINA (now finally closed down since the Justice and Interior Ministers ordered its legal status to be canceled). Mr. Ceroni's home was bombed and he was fired at by members of a right-wing group. His assailant was identified by police as a member of the "Group of Friends of Colonia Dignidad." The case is under adjudication.
The report's section on torture is too brief, given this issue's importance in Chile. The report does mention that there were 32 cases of torture reported as of August 30, and briefly describes a few of the types of torture. Amnesty International, for example, provides a much fuller description of detention practices. The cases that AI documented, although relatively small in number, are all very serious. All involved beatings, some including the use of electric shocks, and others included rape (which is not mentioned in the report), mock executions, near asphyxiation, deprivation of food, drink and sleep and threats against families. Incommunicado detentions frequently lasted 20 days and examinations by doctors were rare. The detainee's right to a daily
60
Chile
conference with his or her lawyer was regularly violated. One reported case involved such violent treatment that the detainee suffered serious head injuries and his spine was dislocated, as certified by a doctor. Of all the cases that AI documents where an official complaint about torture during 1991 was lodged, not one has resulted in a prosecution. Likewise, there have been no prosecutions for torture offenses committed during the Pinochet dictatorship.
The Cumplido legal reforms of February 1991 made some important changes, but the new laws are not being followed. Amnesty International received reports of denial of access to a lawyer (which is supposed to be a daily right for 30 minutes), or to a doctor. The Cumplido reforms did not go far enough, particularly the provision for incommunicado detention for up to 15 days after arrest for suspected terrorist acts, which remains unchanged from the law that existed under the Pinochet dictatorship. This is particularly worrying, in that this period is the time when the majority of suspects are tortured.
The report should also have pointed out that two members of Movimiento contra La Tortura Sebastian Acevedo were arrested by the Carabineros during a peaceful Santiago demonstration on October 1 and then reportedly tortured. AI also received reports that detainees under criminal investigation were tortured. More should have been said about the Carabineros' Third Commissary in Santiago, the offices of the Carabineros' security branch which was set up to combat terrorism. Known as DIPOLCAR {Dirección Inteligencia de la Policia de Carabineros), it is reportedly the site of torture sessions.
Chile withdrew in 1991 its reservations to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, which means, among other things, that a subordinate is henceforth, but not retroactively, responsible for acts of torture committed on orders of a superior. In addition, habeas corpus, which was suspended under the dictatorship, has been restored. The (UN) Committee Against Torture is still concerned about Chile's implementation of the Convention, and recommends a number of reforms: 1) the Convention should be incorporated into domestic law;
61
Chile
2) additional reforms should be made to the structure of the police, Carabifleros and army (on the positive side, both the investigations police and the Carabifleros are being moved from the control of the Minister of Defense to the Minister of Interior, and police and doctors receive new training on human rights and torture); 3) begin prosecutions of not only police and security forces, but also doctors who assisted in torture sessions and Supreme Court judges in place during the Pinochet era, on the ground that the impunity that they granted was a major factor in the continuation of violations; and 4) institute reforms of the judiciary, especially the military courts, whose independence is impaired because the vast majority of the courts' members are still identified with the previous government.
The report's discussion of arbitrary arrest and detention is reasonably complete, highlighting the events of the year and giving just one example of the numerous cases of large-scale arrests at demonstrations. On this topic, the report provides a brief outline of the year's events in its section on freedom of peaceful assembly. It describes a September demonstration at which tear gas was used and "dozens" (the number reported by Chilean television was 64) of demonstrators were arrested. This demonstration was held on the anniversary of the 1973 coup. It was not only human rights groups who charged that excessive force was used at demonstrations, but also the news media reported the use of water cannons and tear gas.
On the subject of denial of fair public trial, the report is reasonably comprehensive, but scanty on one important subject which has generated a lot of public attention and press coverage during the year: the fate of political prisoners jailed during the military dictatorship, many of whom have been in prison for more than 10 years. The report states that 63 people charged with violating state security laws before the transition to democracy were still in jail at the end of the year, many of whom have never been sentenced. Americas Watch reports a slightly higher figure of 70. In addition, there are approximately 2,000 persons on bail who are awaiting trial or sentencing. There are many due process concerns surrounding the convictions of these individuals, particularly regarding confessions allegedly obtained through the use of
62
Chile
torture. These cases should be re-examined to assess the reliability of the evidence on which the convictions were based.
There were several hunger strikes throughout the year by political prisoners. For example, 93 prisoners in June went on hunger strike to protest delays in their cases. Another hunger strike in October lasted 40 days, during which more than 100 people were arrested at a demonstration in support of the strikers, and there were sit-ins at the prisons by their relatives and supporters, worth mentioning in the report. President Aylwin promised to resolve the situation of all political prisoners by the end of 1991, but was hampered in his efforts by rightist legislators, who have slowed and weakened necessary legislation. In March 1991, one constitutional reform was achieved: the extension of the presidential pardon power to those accused under the anti-terrorist laws.
The report's section on freedom of the press is accurate and complete, citing the important legislation that transferred from military to civilian jurisdiction cases against journalists for "offenses against the armed forces," although the law itself is not subjected to the criticism that it deserves. This is the law that is most commonly used against journalists, and although many of the existing cases were dismissed by the civil courts, a few new cases were brought, for example, against Manuel Cabieses Donoso, editor of Punto Final, who was jailed overnight and charged with libel for a cover image considered to be offensive to General Pinochet, depicting him blowing his nose on the Chilean flag. The report does not mention that during 1991 legislation was repealed which had made it illegal for the media to publish statements by "politically-excluded" groups or individuals (those ruled unconstitutional by virtue of their ideas).
The report's discussion of discrimination is weak. The Mapuche Indians are not simply a "separated" racial group, they are a group of half a million indigenous peoples with significant land rights claims. The Rettig Commission found that approximately 80 of the victims that it investigated were Mapuche, many killed in the first days of the dictatorship because their land had been restored to them by the Allende
63
Chile
government. Toward the end of 1991 the Mapuche began protesting their loss of land: no protected Indian reservations have been established in Chile for over 100 years. In February 1992, for the first time, the government purchased a tract of land for the Indians and are establishing a land fund. In addition, the Indians are seeking bilingual education, a development corporation, and equal access to certain basic rights.
The report discusses some issues of discrimination against women, such as employment and equal pay, and domestic violence. The crime of wife-battering does not exist in Chilean law. There is no mention made of marital rape, also not recognized as a crime in Chilean law, nor of abortion and divorce, neither of which are available in Chile. The State Department's instructions on the preparation of the reports define arbitrary interference with privacy and family as within its ambit, yet the report does not discuss reproductive rights or the right to have the termination of a marriage recognized by the state. Without a legal divorce, it is almost impossible for a woman to claim child support or maintenance; women head 21% of Chilean households, and are often the poorest and most disadvantaged, with very limited access to credit, services and day-care.
In conclusion, the State Department's report is generally accurate and fairly complete in describing discrete incidents, but, as in previous years, it fails to provide the political background to events and the inherited constraints on President Aylwin's government. President Aylwin has made significant attempts to deal with the legacy of the military dictatorship and to move the country toward reconciliation, but has been able to make only small dents in the constitutional and institutional support for the former military regime. The lack of independence of the judiciary, especially the Supreme Court, and its resolute refusal to investigate cases protected by the amnesty law contribute to continuing human rights concerns in Chile.
64
