CHINA
The 1991 report on the People's Republic of China (PRC) continues the trend of the past several reports in being a generally comprehensive and hard-hitting account of the PRC human rights situation. The report reflects a number of improvements over last year's report, in some cases in direct response to points raised in last year's critique. The end result is excellent and leaves relatively few areas open for criticism. To the extent that deficiencies still exist in the report, they involve three general problems: an overly charitable attitude toward Chinese claims and pronouncements on human rights issues, the continuing tendency to give undue credit to the effectiveness of bilateral dialogue on human rights and the presence of several inaccuracies in characterizations of the Chinese legal regime.
With respect to the first problem, the report suggests in the introduction that there was "some loosening of repression during the first half of 1991." While such a loosening might be inferred by the tone of official Chinese statements during that period, there would appear to be no particular basis in fact for this proposition; indeed, the rash of political trials culminating in the Wang Juntao and Chen Ziming trials took place during this period, as the report later discusses. Another example of this type of problem can be found in the section on arbitrary arrest, where it is unclear on what basis the State Department concludes that the Chinese statistics on the number of people still in detention in Beijing on June 4-related matters are "generally credible." So long as the government refuses to publish the names of those persons released from detention and other information on the status of individuals in various stages of the criminal process, it is impossible to determine the credibility of the official statistics.
The report refers to the PRC's human rights white paper, released in November, as "one-sided" and self-laudatory. It fails to point out that the white paper is also in many respects simply inaccurate, containing numerous mischaracterizations of China's legal system and of China's adherence to international human rights standards.
65
China
Although it does so to a somewhat lesser extent than last year's report, the 1991 report still overrates the effectiveness and utility of human rights dialogue between the U.S. and China, and bilateral dialogue between China and other countries. "Serious exchanges," for instance, is an overblown way to refer to most of the inter-governmental and parliamentary meetings that have taken place in the last year. Some visiting delegations, however, such as the Australian one, did produce useful reports.
With specific respect to U.S. efforts, the report mentions the Chinese response given to Secretary Baker in November to the list of political prisoners earlier provided by the U.S., but fails to mention the many defects in this response. As Asia Watch has since reported, the information in the Chinese response was six months out of date when provided, 340 of the names on the list were stated as "unidentifiable" by the Chinese, and the categorization of many of the persons listed was inaccurate. For instance, a large number of cases designated in the Chinese response as "not found legally responsible" in fact involved people who had been sentenced to reeducation through labor which, while not technically a "criminal" sanction, does represent a form of "legal responsibility" under Chinese law.
The remaining defects in the China report range from outright inaccuracies to modes of expression which border on inaccuracy. In the latter category is the reference to the "inadequate access to legal counsel" enjoyed by defendants in last year's political trials. Given the nature of the PRC's criminal justice system and the role assigned to defense counsel, all of which this year's report does a good job of describing, it would have been more accurate to speak in terms of "effective denial" of the right to counsel in these cases.
The report repeats last year's mischaracterization of the 1989 Administrative Litigation Law, which allows for claims to be brought against specific administrative agencies for specific regulatory violations, as a "new law allowing citizens to sue officials for abuse of authority or malfeasance." This formulation gives the government more credit than it is due, at least to this point, for law reform. For instance, the law
66
China
does not permit a person to sue the Communist Party. Information on the attempts by Chinese citizens to use the Administrative Litigation Law in sensitive political cases was just beginning to come to light at year's end and thus could not have been expected to be covered in this report. However, the State Department would do well to focus in future reports on the extent to which this new legal mechanism for rights protection is being implemented and under what circumstances.
The generally good discussion of torture and related issues makes a passing reference to "legal safeguards." In fact, very few legal safeguards exist in PRC law against the use of torture beyond the limited provision of the criminal code prohibiting the use of torture to extract confessions. No legal protections exist to cover people held in administrative detention centers, for instance, from where, as the report points out, a number of recent reports of torture have emanated. In referring to the government's unresponsiveness to claims of torture, the report might also have specifically mentioned China's failure to live up to its reporting obligations under the UN Convention Against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. The PRC is now well over a year delinquent in providing follow-up information to the Committee Against Torture, the body that oversees compliance with the treaty, on various questions raised in response to the PRC's initial report.
On the question of arbitrary detention, the much improved discussion in this year's report still raises a number of questions. To say that "some" regulations on administrative detention methods such as "taking in for shelter and investigation" are unpublished is a great understatement ~ virtually all such regulations are unpublished. Also, it is curious that the report singles out one case of unconfirmed arrest, that of Zhu Mei in Shanghai, without noting that this is just one among numerous cases of people whose precise legal status, not to mention whereabouts, is unclear.
In the discussion of public trials, the reference to the various exceptions in Chinese law to the requirement of a public trial fails to make it clear that the 1988 law on state secrets affords a ready basis for
67
China
denying a public trial in cases involving "counterrevolution. " The report also fails to point out that even "immediate relatives" of the accused have been barred from attending trials in some political cases, for instance that of Ren Wanding. The report might also have usefully pointed out that the barring of foreign observers from trials is not just a matter of "assertion" by the government, but the result of a specific ruling by China's Supreme People's Court. This too undermines the "public trial" rule.
In the same section, the report states that "most" defense lawyers are appointed by the court. First, the basis for this statement is unclear. Second, this discussion fails to take account of the fact that, under Chinese law, there is no requirement that the court appoint a defense attorney for a defendant unless the defendant is deaf, dumb or a minor. Chinese criminologists speaking privately confirm that defense lawyers appear in only a small fraction of publicly prosecuted criminal cases. Finally, the statement that "defense lawyers may be retained privately" could suggest the existence of a private, independent legal profession in China. Such a profession, in fact, does not exist, despite the emergence of some "collective" law firms in which lawyers are not state employees, as are most lawyers in the PRC, but remain subject to close supervision by the local offices of the Justice Ministry.
The accounting of various specific political cases is accurate as written, but it fails to address the precise legal status of people who, like Chen Xiaoping and Liu Xiaobo, are categorized as "released." Chinese law makes subtle distinctions between people who are actually cleared of criminal charges and those who, as in the cases mentioned, are considered guilty of counterrevolution but for various reasons are not prosecuted or sentenced. Such individuals have a criminal record, and their status in society, ability to be employed, freedom to travel and numerous other aspects of their lives, are often severely affected despite their release from detention. This important issue should be given more attention in future reports.
This year's improved discussion of the administrative sanction of reeducation (or rehabilitation) through labor, while noting that the
68
China
sanction permits the authorities to deal expeditiously with "political and other offenders," still characterizes this penalty as one designed to deal with "minor public order offenses." In fact, the legislation on reeducation through labor specifically refers, among other things, to "counterrevolutionary elements, anti-socialist elements and reactionary elements whose crimes are minor, and for whom criminal responsibility is not pursued." Its use by the authorities to deal with political cases is not, therefore, merely a problem of abuse by the police of a statute intended for innocuous purposes, but represents a fundamental human rights defect in China's legal system.
An analogous comment may be made about the report's assertion that mail is opened in China despite the constitution's provision that "freedom and privacy of correspondence ... are protected by law." The problem is not only the failure to respect this provision but, more ftindamentally, the legal deficiency of the provision itself, which seems to require the enactment of specific legislation protecting correspondence. Such legislation does not exist.
In the section on labor rights, it is unclear on what basis the State Department concludes that a 1983 provision in the charter of the All-China Federation of Trade Unions "appears to allow for the existence of nonunion worker groups." The report does accurately note that "no such groups appear to be legally tolerated." With respect to reform through labor camps, the report says that prisoners are required to work "usually for little compensation." In fact, the PRC's regime of reform through labor, as distinct from the administrative sanction of reeducation through labor, does not provide for any compensation for work performed. The report might also have given greater attention to the abhorrent nutritional and health conditions in China's reform through labor camps.
69
