ZAIRE
In its 1991 report, the State Department gives a fairly complete and well detailed account of the human rights situation in Zaire during the year, improving on the accuracy of its 1990 reporting. This newfound willingness on the part of the State Department to openly discuss the flagrant human rights violations in Zaire may be a reflection of the changing political priorities in the last few years and the relative decline in the importance of geo-political considerations in human rights reporting. The United States has less need for its Cold War ally, President Mobutu Sese Seko, now that the Angolan civil war is winding down. Even Zaire's wealth of natural resources does not preserve its former position as a favored friend of the United States, following equally endowed South Africa's start down the path of political reform.
Despite its continued improvement, the report omits or fails to convey the importance of many significant events, and does not provide the reader with a true understanding of just how desperate times are in Central Africa's largest country. Following 27 years of Mobutism, Zaire has been ail but abandoned by its former allies. Belgium cut off economic and military assistance following the massacre of students at Lubumbashi University in May 1990. The IMF and the World Bank followed suit in the fall of 1990, cutting all but humanitarian aid in disgust at President Mobutu's failure to formulate, let alone implement, a meaningful economic policy. The United States stopped the flow of military aid in 1990, after President Mobutu refused to allow an independent international inquiry into the Lubumbashi massacre, and terminated all economic assistance but humanitarian aid following the looting and killing of civilians by state security forces in September 1991. France too cut off aid in October 1991, as the September rioting continued. In March 1991, France also, under pressure from Canada, changed the site of the 1991 Francophone Summit from Kinshasa to Paris, a major blow to President Mobutu's prestige and to the anticipated boost that the conference would have provided the Zairian economy.
Characterized as "a walking bank balance in a leopard skin hat" by Bernard Kouchner, French Secretary of State for Human Rights,
438
Zaire
President Mobutu led the way in the establishment of the "kleptocracy" which governs his nation, where police often arrest people simply as an excuse to extort money from them, and where children are expected to pay a sort of pourboire or tip to their teachers in order to be admitted to class. The graft is more attributable to the extreme poverty and spiralling four digit inflation than anything else. The minimum wage for professionals of approximately 85,000 zaires per month (less than US $22) is simply not enough to provide for the basic necessities of life. Newspaper accounts indicate that almost every family in Kinshasa has at least one member selling small food items in the streets; all of this in a country with substantial mineral reserves, producing, for example, nearly one half of the world's supply of cobalt.
In 1991, institutionalized corruption reached new heights, with the advent of a series of "pyramid schemes," where investors placed their zaires in companies like Bindo Promotion, receiving outrageously high rates of interest (doubling money in four days or 10 times as much after 45 days). The government looked on in tacit approval, until the pyramid came tumbling down on May 13, at which point everyone lost money. Although not directly supported by the state (the Zairian League for Human Rights claims that the "magic banks" were funded by public money), this scheme could not have continued without at least the permission of the authorities. In fact, a primary reason that the business failed was the greed of two of President Mobutu's top military leaders, General Bolozi (Commandant of the Gendarmerie Nationale) and General Kpama Baramoto (who led the May 1990 commando operation at Lubumbashi University where a still unknown number of students were killed). Each invested large sums of zaires; reports claim that Bolozi and Baramoto earned four billion and 23 billion zaires respectively.
The report discusses the pluralism which revolutionized Mobutu*s single-party state in 1990 and 1991. President Mobutu, having declared in his April 24, 1990 speech that Zaire was moving to a multi-party system, with an eye towards presidential elections in 1991 and a constitutional referendum, was forced by national opposition and international pressure to live up to his promise. Political parties proliferated despite the obstacles placed in their path by the government.
439
Zaire
such as a requirement that opposition parties register, then wait for three months to be officially recognized, before being able to publicly organize and participate in the political process. In fact, the report correctly points out that, by the end of 1991, approximately 300 parties were registered, many, it was charged, created at the government's instigation in an effort to splinter and thereby dilute the effectiveness of Mobutu's opposition.
The State Department's analysis is an improvement over the 1990 report, which we criticized for not drawing the necessary conclusion of government instigation or interference as the moving force behind reported human rights violations. However, the report fails to describe adequately the strength of the opposition after the formation of the "Sacred Union." The Sacred Union was comprised of 130 opposition parties, including the three largest: the Union for Democracy and Social Progress (UDPS) headed by Etienne Tshisekedi.wa Mulumba, the Union of Federalist and Independent Republicans (UFERI) headed by Nguza Karl-I-Bond, and the Christian Social Democratic Party (PDSC) headed by Joseph Ileo Songo Amba. The solidarity of the Sacred Union was broken by the defection of Nguza Karl-I-Bond in late November 1991, when he accepted the post of Prime Minister, following the dismissal by President Mobutu in October of Etienne Tshisekedi, the unified opposition's choice. President Mobutu has frequently alternated between arresting and torturing his opponents or making them part of his government; the events at the close of 1991 were a classic example of this phenomenon.
The report fails to convey the perseverance of the political opposition in the face of innumerable incidents of persecution by security forces. While the report does mention certain events such as the sacking of the UDPS and UFERI party offices in Kinshasa in early September, with resulting loss of life, and the breaking up of a peace^l opposition demonstration in October by tear gas attack, it completely omits any reference to the so-called April 13-15 "massacre at Mbuji-Mayi." The UDPS claimed that the massacre in this diamond mining town resulted in the slaying of 42 of its supporters (the Mobutu government's own official death toll was 9). The deaths occurred over the course of two
440
Zaire
days of demonstrations protesting tlie arrest of UDPS members at a political meeting on April 13.
The report notes the use of scalding water sprayed by modified cannons by security forces to break up a UDPS rally in the Limete suburb of Kinshasa in April, injuring dozens of people. However, it makes no mention of the death of a UFERI supporter, M. Musans, in Lubumbashi on April 14, as security forces interrupted a peaceful UFERI rally, nor of the similar use of water cannons and tear gas by security forces on June 17 to disperse a peaceful opposition party rally calling for a national conference. Independent newspapers reported that 200 people were claimed to have been injured by the security service's use of excessive force to break up the peaceful demonstration. In addition, both Tshisekedi of the UDPS and Karl-I-Bond of the UFERI were arrested on the way to the march, detained briefly, and reportedly assaulted, before being released. In November, 17 people were reported killed when a bar frequented by opposition followers was bombed; official Zairian Television reported only 14 injuries. The report does not mention this event either, but accurately notes, in its discussion of the many different branches of state security forces, that "no discernible improvement in their observance of human rights" has taken place and that the human rights violations are probably "condoned by the authorities."
In its brief discussion of the worsening economic situation, the report states that the annual per capita income fell below US$100, but does not point to the fact that many Zairians are dropping out of the money economy altogether, and that the infrastructure of the country is disintegrating due to the economic crisis. Those desiring to enter a hospital in Kinshasa are finding it necessary to provide their own bedding, food and medication. One observer noted that the only thing on the menu of a hotel in an outlying town was "fried caterpillars." The universities were completely dysfunctional in 1991, due to lack of ftinds and government reaction to student unrest.
We criticized last year's report for erroneously asserting without proof the independence of the judiciary in Zaire. This year, the State Department has responded to the criticism by a complete reversal of
441
Zaire
position. The report states in the opening sentence of the section on denial of fair public trial: "The judiciary is not independent of the executive branch and has been consistently responsive to priorities and objectives set by the Government and the Presidency." This is a very strong statement and an accurate assessment.
As the report also states, the Zairian court system, already compromised by long-standing corruption and executive branch interference, was completely paralyzed by a magistrates strike. After a false start in the beginning of the year, the strike lasted from May to December 1991. The strike sought to address the related concerns of the scanty wages paid to these civil servants and the lack of independence of the judiciary, with very limited success.
The report does an excellent job in this section of comparing the rights ostensibly guaranteed criminal defendants with the reality of "predictably varying compliance with acceptable procedure." The report also points out that the Ministry of Citizen's Rights and Liberties was completely ineffectual as a "watchdog against human rights abuses," and that all pretense of its role as a guarantor of human rights in Zaire ceased with its absorption by the Ministry of Justice in 1991.
The worst violence of the year was also a direct result of the economic conditions. It occurred in late September, when troops in Kinshasa began looting and pillaging in protest over their inadequate wages. The looting began on September 22 with the 31st Parachute Brigade, stationed near Ndjili International Airport in Kinshasa, which started looting at the airport, and moved into the town proper, immediately joined by other troops and security forces. Troops in Kolwezi and Lubumbashi soon joined in. According to Amnesty International, this rioting resulted in over 200 deaths, and 1,500 injured. The report points out that the riots will result in a further worsening of the economy, having destroyed investor confidence as well as the physical plants that were burned. President Mobutu reacted to the riots by offering the armed forces a 90% to 150% pay raise, since he could not survive politically if he lost their support. However, as the national
442
Zaire
treasury is essentially bankrupt, it remains to be seen where the money for the raise will come from.
The State Department is to be commended for doing a better job this year of pointing the finger of blame where blame is due: the Mobutu government. In the section on political and extrajudicial killing, the report concludes: "The frequency of these incidents [resulting in loss of life] and the rarity of disciplinary action indicate that the use of excessive and lethal force is condoned by the authorities." The report responded somewhat to our criticism last year that it had not been sufficiently critical of the security forces, stating in the introduction that all of the armed security forces were "employed to quell internal dissent and were responsible for human rights abuses, including arbitrary harassment, physical mistreatment and unauthorized detention." The report also discussed at length the security forces' participation in the widespread looting in September and October, and stated that "[p]rivate citizens continue to be beaten and robbed by security officials."
Moreover, the report notes that "the National Security Council guidelines issued in 1990 to end unlawful and incommunicado detentions and the practice of internal exile" still have not been implemented and "thus have had minimal impact on security force behavior." The report would be more accurate if it stated that these guidelines have had no impact on behavior. Wholesale violations of Zairian citizens' human rights by security forces will certainly continue and may worsen yet as the economic situation becomes more desperate and the government has less to give to appease those that it has armed, organized and turned loose on the population.
The report goes on to discuss the continuing controversy surrounding the student massacre at Lubumbashi University. After originally refusing to allow an independent international investigation into the incident (the United Nations Commission on Human Rights was permitted to conduct a closely monitored one-day inquiry according to the report, but had not issued its findings by the time the State Department's report was published), the trial of those that the government had proffered as responsible began in March 1991. The trial
443
Zaire
was hampered by a series of bizarre incidents, many not mentioned in the report, such as the continuing liberty and subsequent disappearance of two individuals who claimed to have participated in the massacre. According to the government, only one student was killed; local human rights groups count the death toll at more than 100 students.
The incident involved a squad from one of Zaire's numerous security forces, which descended on the Lubumbashi University campus after electricity had been cut off, indiscriminately hacking or shooting students to death. The mass murder was apparently in revenge for an attack on students belonging to the same tribe as President Mobutu, who were suspected of being government informers. Two alleged members of the commando unit vanished before they could testify at the trial, as did Rector Digekisa Piluka, a student accused of the "attempted murder" of the students thought to be government informers. Digekisa Piluka was being held at Makala prison pending trial. Prior to testifying, he was sent to a hospital from which he mysteriously escaped into exile. He was then tried in absentia and sentenced to 13 years and six months for subversive propaganda, attempted murder and forged documentation.
The further fallout from this affair is that the Chief Doctor of the Makala Central Prison, Dr. Losilo Sokolamo, was arrested on May 8 for signing the authorization permitting Digekisa to go to the hospital from whence he escaped. Dr. Losilo himself remained a prisoner in Makala, held without formal charges being filed until July 3, when he was released after protests by the Zairian League for Human Rights and the National Order of Doctors.
Despite the fact that the government would not admit to more than one death resulting from the violence, the state prosecutor requested the death penalty for those officials and students (tried in absentia) allegedly involved. However, when the verdict came down on May 19, the former governor of Shaba province and other convicted officials only received sentences of between 10 to 15 years. The report correctly notes: "The extent of the involvement of security forces in the Lubumbashi attack has not been and may never be adequately addressed.
444
Zaire
leaving considerable question as to whether all those responsible have been brought to account."
The report notes that there are persons still unaccounted for who disappeared during the various political protests in May and December 1990. Moreover, it cites the alleged presence of an elite security force known as "Les Hiboux" or "the owls" because they prefer to strike at night. The State Department is to be commended for bearing witness to this not well publicized force.
Another positive aspect of the report is its contrasting of the legal protections ostensibly provided by the Zairian system with the actual state of affairs in the country. For example, the report notes that torture is forbidden under Zairian law and its use proscribed by official policy, yet its use by security forces is commonplace. Another example is the discussion of the state of religious freedom in Zaire, which is nominally protected by the Constitution, yet sects such as Jehovah's Witnesses are persecuted and denied the right to be "officially recognized."
The report had been criticized in the past for ignoring the input of local human rights groups which are, after all, in the best position to bear witness to the indignities and atrocities inflicted on many Zairians. In 1991, however, the State Department commendably chronicles the appalling state of the Zairian prisons, citing the complaints of various local human rights organizations about the conditions to which prisoners are subjected. According to the Zairian League for Human Rights, prisons are filled to twice their capacity, prisoners are held for days without receiving any food and are denied medical attention, and many are held for long periods of time without any formal charges being filed.
The Mobutu government still controls and manipulates the media. As the report accurately points out, the Zairian government firmly controls the nation's radio and television stations and regularly infuses programming with Mobutu propaganda. The independent print media, the voice of Zairian opposition, is frequently the target of harassment, arrest and violence at the hands of government agents. Although the report mentions some of these problems in general terms, the analysis of
445
Zaire
their root causes is sometimes weak. For example, as the report notes, Elima, the largest opposition newspaper, continues to be a target of harassment. On May 11, its publisher, Essolomwa Khoy, was arrested. While nominally arrested for criticizing the Zairian Army, it was widely believed that the real motivation for the action against him was an article appearing two days before calling for the President to step down. The report fails to look beyond the surface of this incident to question the official rationale, despite the fact that the crime with which Essolomwa was charged, betraying military secrets, is not part of the penal code, and only applies to soldiers.
The report notes in passing that the opposition pressured President Mobutu into agreeing to allow a "National Conference," instead of the constitutional referendum he proposed in his April 24, 1990 speech. The report further notes that the Conference was postponed repeatedly, and that when it finally began, the President and his supporters (the Popular Movement of the Revolution or MPR) exerted considerable effort to prevent it from accomplishing anything meaningful. Thus, the report concludes, when, if ever. President Mobutu will hold the promised free elections remains an open question.
However, this cursory discussion ignores the important context surrounding "national conferences" in the region. In French-speaking West Africa, the term "national conference" has sounded the death knell for the reign of several of the region's dictators. In Benin, President Kerekou bowed to pressure from his country's international creditors and permitted a national conference to begin in February 1990. The conference declared itself "sovereign" as one of its last acts, and Kerekou found himself voted out of office in March 1991. In the Congo, separated from Zaire by only the width of a river. President Sassou Nguesso had to submit to three months of intense public criticism of his 12-year regime. He is likely to lose in elections in 1992. President Eyadema's Togo appeared to be headed in the same direction, with his ministers "jumping ship," making public apologies for having been associated with a regime responsible for such heinous abuses of the public trust and human rights. In light of the above, it is clear that
446
Zaire
forcing President Mobutu to acquiesce to a national conference was no mean feat.
Finally, it is curious that the report makes only a vague and offhand reference to the fact that President Mobutu's term was to expire on December 4. In fact, on that date, he made a televised speech making it abundantly clear that he intended to stay in power. The omission of this incident violating the Zairian citizens' right to change their government may come from the State Department's stated preference for a transitional government based on a sharing of power between President Mobutu and his opposition, despite the President's acknowledged loss of legitimacy.
In conclusion, while the State Department provides solid reporting in the 1991 report, its analysis pays insufficient attention to many of the violations enumerated and sometimes discounts the significance of relevant events.
447

-^î	iáú ItoB iOwííoM iffôbifâ-ï*! n&svmd
'M-^
'wîîcîî.; if; «v^. -rVesiOiató ^^ lii'"jiiÍÍií1Í'yii ntinííMÍi r nul il ' itó ifp^'
ÄteS Itt fe siiÂic'4iriïcîk>R, múi nk" «pti'tôj^ fôr h«ving Um fimmm íá^osés of léi'
