COLOMBIA
The 1991 State Department report on Colombia states in unequivocal terms that during the year members of the armed forces committed massacres, "disappearances" and torture, and that the police and security forces frequently beat and tortured detainees. The report acknowledges that targets of serious abuse by members of the security forces included leftist politicians, labor organizers, human rights workers and peasants. It also correctly reports that both "disappearances" and kidnapping increased in 1991 and that the army is reluctant to distinguish between members of armed opposition groups and noncombatants during counterinsurgency operations.
Despite these serious human rights violations, Colombia continues to receive substantial U.S. military aid. While the State Department should be commended for its candid reporting of human rights violations, the executive branch and Congress must give the report serious attention when considering whether Colombia is eligible for future security assistance under Section 502B(b) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961. Given the country's dismal human rights record, continued funding of the Colombian military and its activities threatens to exacerbate existing problems.
As a genera] matter, the report does a better job this year at understanding the links among armed insurgents, drug traffickers, paramilitary groups and the military than in previous reports. Whereas past reports have attributed violence in Colombia principally to drug traffickers and armed opposition groups and sought to describe the two as close collaborators, the 1991 report provides a more balanced account and acknowledges that 1) in some areas there is coordination between members of armed opposition groups and drug traffickers while in others there is none; 2) army units have assisted or participated in paramilitary activity; and 3) paramilitary groups have been funded by drug traffickers in some cases.
The report nevertheless makes a serious error in stating that the main sources of human rights violations are "powerful narcotics
70
Colombia
terrorists" and "leftist guerrilla movements." Under international law, human rights violations are those crimes committed by agents of the state or agents acting under color of state authority. The State Department's failure to appreciate the distinction between violent crime committed by private citizens and human rights violations committed by state agents improperly shifts attention away from the principal concern of human rights law — the protection of citizens from abuse of state power. While murder, kidnapping and threats carried out by individual drug-traffickers must be analyzed in any report on violence in Colombia, these crimes are not properly characterized as human rights violations. Similarly, abuses committed by insurgent forces are not violations of human rights but violations of the rules of war. The actions of armed opposition groups should therefore be scrutinized under common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions of 1949, which sets forth the minimum standards to govern internal conflicts, and any violations should be discussed in the report's section on violations of humanitarian law.
The report's flawed characterization of human rights violations reflects policy statements made in a human rights report issued by the Attorney General's Office {Procuraduría General de la Nación) in September 1991, upon which the State Department relies heavily in its own report. The State Department does, however, use information from other sources and provides a generally reliable account of human rights practices in Colombia during the year. In the section on political and other extrajudicial killings, the report includes principal cases which highlight responsibility by drug traffickers, paramilitary groups, members of the military and insurgent forces. The report appropriately mentions the November massacre of seven judicial officials in Usme, generally attributed to FARC {Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia) guerrillas, the December massacre of 20 members of the Paez indigenous peoples in Cauca, widely thought to involve a land conflict with drug-traffickers, the August massacre of a rural family in Fusagasugá by eight members of the Thirteenth Army Brigade, and the murders of more than 90 members of the left-of-center Patriotic Union {Unión Patriótica) party, presumably by paramilitary groups. Attention is also properly called to the alarming number of "clean-up" killings of street children,
71
Colombia
drug addicts, beggars and other marginalized citizens in urban areas and the participation of police in these crimes.
The report asserts that paramilitary activity was lower in 1991 than in the previous year and that "narcoterrorism" declined as well. It attributes this phenomenon to the Gaviria administration's policy of providing immunity from extradition and reduced sentences for traffickers and others who turned themselves in. Although the report does not provide statistical evidence to show that paramilitary violence actually declined, it does correctly note that more than 225 members of one of Colombia's most brutal paramilitary groups operating in the violence-ridden region of Magdalena Medio surrendered their arms to the authorities. The report also draws attention to the 1991 conviction of paramilitary members for the March 20, 1988 massacre of banana workers at the Honduras and La Negra farms in Colombia's Urabâ region. The report should have also noted, however, that a May 1991 decision of the Disciplinary Court, which rules on jurisdictional matters, held that the public order court in which the case proceeded did not have jurisdiction over four members of the army's Voltigeros Battalion in Urabâ who were accused of being accomplices in the massacres. The court concluded that the military criminal justice system had in personam jurisdiction over them.
The report correctly points out that notwithstanding the constitutional guarantees of due process, the right to a speedy trial and the right to representation by counsel, most persons accused of criminal offenses never come to trial but serve the minimum sentences applicable to the crime they are accused of committing and are then released. Suspects in drug-related and terrorism cases, however, are subject to a different set of difficulties as a result of a law issued by President Gaviria in November 1990. Commonly referred to as the Statute for the Defense of Justice, Law 2790 was issued pursuant to state of siege powers and converted into permanent legislation in October 1991 by a 36-member Special Commission that was appointed after the Colombian Congress was dissolved by the Constitutional Assembly.
72
Colombia
As the report explains, the law was intended to strengthen an existing system of special courts which had jurisdiction over crimes involving terrorism and drug trafficking. The new courts established under the Statute - known as public order courts -- were designed to protect judges hearing sensitive cases, to process cases more rapidly and to improve the conviction rate. In cases in these courts, only the prosecutor {fiscal) knows which judge is assigned to his or her case. Judges keep their identities secret during pretrial hearings and the trial itself through the use of one-way glass and microphones with voice distorters in the courtroom. Written opinions and decisions handed down do not carry the name of presiding judges. Witnesses and experts may also remain anonymous and the "faceless" judges may permit them to give written evidence instead of appearing in court.
Trials which proceed in public order courts are closed to the public. Witnesses may not be impeached due to their anonymity, and defendants are prohibited from making copies of some evidence used against them because certain evidence may now only be viewed v?ithin the confines of a courtroom. Neither the defense nor the prosecution may bring charges of incompetence or bias against a faceless judge or move for a change in venue. The Statute authorizes members of the judicial police to directly incorporate evidence they consider to be relevant into the government's brief, and under certain circumstances they may remain anonymous. Article 22 of the Statute provides that the testimony of witnesses and experts may remain sealed when it would be "convenient" to protect the identity of the declarant. Other evidence obtained during the investigatory stages as well as certain judicial rulings may also remain secret. To complicate matters further, Article 20 of the Statute prohibits the pretrial resolution of any evidentiary disputes.
Not only do these provisions tend to prevent early recognition and fair disposition of constitutional and procedural issues, the restricted right of access to evidence may seriously infringe upon a defendant's due process rights and the right to prepare an adequate defense, especially if the evidence is material to guilt or punishment. While the report acknowledges some of these difficulties, its assertion that "defendants
73
Colombia
[appearing] before the public order courts enjoy all the procedural rights guaranteed by the Constitution" is questionable at best.
The procedures established under the public order court system also fail to meet basic standards set forth under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the American Convention on Human Rights, both of which Colombia has ratified, as well as the Universal Declaration on Human Rights. Article 14(3)(e) of the ICCPR provides that the accused has the right to cross-examine witnesses and obtain witnesses in his or her favor. The American Convention contains similar provisions, and the Universal Declaration provides more generally for the right to a fair and public hearing. In the interest of providing more thorough analysis, the report should have referred to Colombia's obligations under applicable human rights treaties.
In addition, attacks against several "faceless judges" during 1991 cast doubt on the new system's ability to effectively protect judges sitting in the new courts. On August 10, a group of unidentified individuals fired several rounds of machine gun fire at a public order judge travelling in a bullet-proof car in northern Bogotá. The judge's bodyguards fired back and a shoot-out followed for several minutes before the assailants finally fled. The judge had reportedly presided over several murder cases implicating Medellin drug trafficker Pablo Escobar, who was imprisoned in 1991.
Other cases which illustrate the widespread violence against judges and lawyers merit special attention as well since such attacks undermine the rule of law and send an unmistakable message to other lawyers and judges involved in sensitive cases.
• Since January 1991, Jorge Gómez Lizarazo has received death threats allegedly from members of the army's Fifth Brigade. Mr. Gómez, a lawyer and President of the Regional Committee for the Defense of Human Rights of Santander (CREDHOS), has worked on behalf of people affected by the Fifth Army Brigade's counter insurgency operations in the Magdalena Medio region of Santander and Antioquia in September 1990. Mr. Gómez'
74
Colombia
bodyguard, José Humberto Hernández Gabanzo, who was hired after the local mayor took up a collection in reaction to the threats to Mr. Gómez, was murdered on March 19, 1991.
•	On October 18, a man identifying himself as a messenger for the FARC guerrilla forces entered the office of Criminal Investigatory Judge José Gustavo Núñez Suarez and warned him that he would be killed if he did not leave his office in Saravena, Arauca department. Five days earlier, local police had detained a suspect in connection with a recent murder who was reportedly carrying a list of people to be assassinated. Judge Núñez's name appeared on the list after the murder victim's name. He had replaced another judge assigned to the area who fled after receiving threats a few week earlier. According to reports, four out of five courts in Saravena now have no judge.
•	On December 6, a manilla envelope was delivered to the offices of the Committee in Solidarity with Political Prisoners containing a death threat for attorneys William Peña Barrios and Ramiro Antury. The threat was signed by the paramilitary group MAC {Muerte a Comunistas, or Death to Communists). The two attorneys have represented criminal defendants before public order courts and persons accused of committing political crimes. Shortly before the threat was received, Mr. Peña had presented closing arguments in a case he was handling for the family of Jorge Eliecer Agudelo, treasurer of a local union who "disappeared" and was allegedly murdered by members of the army.
Finally, the report should have noted the potential implications of other provisions in the Statute for the Defense of Justice, including the creation of a Public Order Investigative Unit within the military and broad powers given to the Judicial Police. Under the Statute, the Judicial Police will consist of teams of the technical corps of Judicial Police, members of DAS {Departamento Administrativo de Seguridad) or members of the National Police. As the State Department notes, however, the Colombian police have been implicated in an unprecedented
75
Colombia
number of human rights violations. The Attorney General's human rights report, which covered a 16-month period ending in April 1991, reported that state agents allegedly committed 560 homicides, 68 massacres, 664 cases of torture and 465 "disappearances", and attributed responsibility to the National Police and DAS agents in approximately 60% of the cases it investigated. The dangers in increasing the role and influence of the police under public order courts - which by definition hear politically sensitive cases - are indeed real and potentially disastrous for human rights.
Despite peace negotiations with the Simón Bolívar Guerrilla Coordination, made up primarily of Colombia's two remaining armed opposition forces, insurgent warfare and counter-insurgency operations continued throughout the year. Opposition forces carried out kidnappings, sabotaged oil pipelines and ambushed government forces in which civilians were killed. As the State Department notes, there were also reports of indiscriminate bombing and strafing by these groups of civilian populations caught in areas of armed conflict. However, the report fails to state its own view of these reports or address the government's international obligations as specified in common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions regarding the treatment of the civilian population in attacks against insurgent forces. According to the Andean Commission of Jurists, more than 1,300 acts of war took place during the first 10 months of 1991 between the army and insurgent forces. Local groups estimate that there are now more than 30,000 internally displaced families in Colombia who have fled armed conflict, political and drug-related violence and poverty, and a national conference on internally displaced people was held in Cundinamarca in late 1991 to address the problems of the displaced. The report should have devoted more than three sentences in its section on violations of humanitarian law to internal conflicts given the extensive violations taking place and their enormous impact on Colombian society.
In summary, this year's report on Colombia is significantly better than past reports, providing a more accurate and balanced description of the human rights situation. Although still flawed, on the whole the State Department should be commended for its improved reporting.
76
