CUBA
This year's report on human rights in Cuba is devoid of most of the undocumented exaggerations of the reports of the 1980s. Most of the report's factual findings are accurate and not overstated. It provides commendable detail, particularly in regard to the treatment of dissidents, including arrests and officially organized assaults, as well as releases from prison. There are issues and events on which the State Department could have provided more information, but owing to the difficulty in collecting and confirming data in Cuba, the factual deficiencies are not major.
Cuba saw increased repression in 1991, in part through the use of newly created "voluntary" civilian groups which verbally and physically attacked dissidents, the unexpected release from prison of a number of dissidents, some of whom were long-term prisoners, and the continued use of arrest and detention to both silence critics and keep in Cuba those trying to leave the country without permission.
The report reflects 1991's increased repression of Cuban dissidents and related nascent political organizations. While its characterization of this post-November actjvity as "a wave of repression" may be exaggerated given the severe conditions beforehand, there is no doubt that at the end of the year deplorable activities increased. A new tool for the intimidation of government critics that appeared mid-year were the "Rapid Response People's Detachments" {Destacomentos Populares de Respuesta), government-sponsored groups of ordinary citizens working closely with security forces. (Somewhat bizarrely, the report mentions that "[a] large portion of the members are women and young people trained in martial arts.") These groups intimidate by verbal and physical harassment ~ including so-called "acts of repudiation" ~ dissidents and other critics of the government. The report lists many of those who were the targets of these groups. In some cases, the security forces arrested those being attacked and let the attackers go free. This new phenomenon is disturbing and merits close monitoring.
77
Cuba
The report is on target in strongly criticizing the Cuban government for its failure to permit Special Representative Rafael Rivas Posada of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights access to the country. The refusal resulted in a UN report which understandably expresses great frustration with the Cuban government and a review based almost exclusively upon incidents reported by Cuban exile groups in the United States and international nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), not on the Special Representative's own first-hand investigations and assessments.
However, the report should have also discussed the futility of the exchanges between the Cuban government and two UN thematic rapporteurs, S. Amos Wako for Summary and Arbitrary Executions and P. Kooijmans for Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. During each of their tenures, these two Special Rapporteurs have sent the Cuban government numerous letters describing individual cases of alleged executions, torture or mistreatment and asking for responses or explanations. These requests are routinely answered by Cuban officials with short nondescript denials. The increase in repressive political acts suggests an even greater need for involvement by intergovernmental organizations as well as NGOs to monitor rights violations.
This lack of Cuban government cooperation with intergovernmental monitors is mirrored with respect to international NGOs. While the report notes the absence of international monitors, it neglects to emphasize the arrests of more than 150 Cuban rights activists since 1989. It notes the arrest of Luis Pita Santos in October 1991, but omits mentioning that he is the president of the Association of Defenders of Political Rights (ADEPO), a human rights monitoring group, and that three other members of the group were similarly arrested. The group had called for a demonstration later in October. Only days after their arrest, three of those arrested ~ Reinaldo Betancourt Alvarez, Aníbal Cruz and Julian Jorge Reyes ~ were tried on trumped-up charges, convicted and sentenced to two- and three-year prison terms. The trials were severely flawed and lacked international due process protections. Mr. Pita was not tried with the others; Amnesty International reports that
78
Cuba
he was instead confined first to the Havana Psychiatric Hospital and later the psychiatric wing of a military hospital in Havana.
For many years, State Department reports have rightfully criticized the overly restrictive emigration policies of the Cuban government. There were important improvements in Cuba last year, e.g., lowering the age for those allowed to depart from 45 years for men and 40 for women to 20 years of age for both groups. As accurately noted in the report, many dissidents were permitted to emigrate in 1991. It is important to note the U.S. reaction to the opening of emigration --cautious responses from the State Department and the dramatic slowdown of the processing of Cuban visas ~ appears inconsistent with the United States' previous "open door" policy. The new U.S. policy may have implications for future illegal boat and raft emigrants who risk the Florida straits. While again mentioning in this year's report the fact that it is a crime to depart Cuba without permission, the State Department now stresses the need for legal migration through established procedures. As we noted last year, the Cuban government should remove travel controls, but so too should the United States government, which effectively bans the travel of U.S. citizens to Cuba in all but limited categories.
As noted in last year's critique, it is hypocritical for the State Department to blame the deteriorating Cuban economy on poor relations with the Soviet Union when the United States maintains a full embargo against Cuba. Additionally, although U.S. citizens may travel to Cuba, they may not spend U.S. currency without the permission of the Treasury Department, effectively blocking visits to the island. A candid discussion in the report addressing the effects of U.S. policy is necessary to consider properly the Cuban economic situation.
One area in which the report could have provided greater information is the subject of prisons. While the report accurately describes cases of ill-treatment following peaceful protests of prison conditions, particularly at Combinado del Este Prison in January, it should have noted reports of deaths of prisoners during the year. Americas Watch reports that five prisoners were killed at various
79
Cuba
prisons; Amnesty International reports that at least seven persons were killed in May at Nieves Morej(3n Prison in Sancti Spiritus and at least two others in other prisons after beatings by guards. Mr. Posada's January 1992 report describes reports of eight deaths in prison; Special Rapporteur Wako reports receiving information on 10 deaths in different prisons between February and July, including Combinado del Este, Bayamo, El Guayabo and Guanajay.
The report is generally accurate in noting increases in arrests and a trend toward shorter sentences and detention periods; release of political prisoners before the end of their terms is also noted. It also indicates that there are approximately 200 political prisoners and detainees according to "reliable human rights monitors." This figure is probably accurate though lack of access makes assessment difficult. Amnesty International lists 56 persons who are prisoners of conscience and perhaps 200-300 possible prisoners of conscience, the latter group made up largely of persons arrested and held for trying to leave Cuba without permission. During 1991, there were a number of releases of political prisoners which are appropriately described in the report, with details about their sentences and whether their releases occurred prior to scheduled release dates. This balanced reporting of both the violations and the progress the Cuban government has made in releasing dissidents should be repeated in future reports in order to represent fairly governmental conduct.
The report's discussion of discrimination based on race, sex, religion, language or social status is improved from that found in the 1990 report. This year's report repeats its statements from last year that evidence of domestic violence and sexual assault against women is "anecdotal," that there is a "lack of statistical evidence" and that victims are reluctant to file reports or press charges. Given the continued absence of reliable information, this year's report appropriately omits last year's unsubstantiated remark that "[s]ome Cubans believe that the incidence of rape is high. ..."
One additional comment deserves mention. It regards an unfortunate practice that should be avoided in the future. The report
80
Cuba
refers to the harassment and incarceration of two activists, Samuel Martinez Lara and Maria Elena Cruz Varela, in no less than four different sections, but fails to acknowledge the other listings. The net effect is that certain parts of the report appear "padded," potentially compromising the credibility of the report. This could be easily solved with cross-references to other discussions of that individual's case.
81
