DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
The State Department report correctly identifies the principal human rights problems in the Dominican Republic in 1991. Illegal and prolonged pre-trial detention, mistreatment of detainees — sometimes rising to the level of torture - and a variety of government actions taken against organized labor are appropriately highlighted. It also notes that "the poor treatment of Haitian migrant workers [and] the sweeping repatriation of Haitian workers" were major human rights concerns. While the report commendably delves into the violations involving Haitians and Dominicans of Haitian descent, the State Department's reporting should have been much more thorough and comprehensive on this crucial question.
For example, the report wrongly suggests that Dominican citizens and foreign citizens, particularly Haitians, had freedom of movement within the Dominican Republic during 1991. Military searches of public and private transportation in areas bordering Haiti continued to be widespread, with detention of Haitians and "Haitian-looking" Dominicans commonplace. While the report is correct in stating that there were "no unusual legal restrictions" on travel for Dominican citizens, these restrictions were nonetheless enforced in practice by agents of the government.
The most egregious violations of the freedom of travel of Dominicans and Haitians resulted from the government's repatriation campaign, which began in June and continued until September 30. While acknowledging the involuntary repatriations and expulsions of Dominican citizens, the report fails to characterize these human rights violations as severe. In expelling scores of their own citizens, government representatives frequently justified their actions by saying that the person was "Haitian looking" or had "admitted" to having a Haitian heritage. Expelled Dominicans reported numerous incidents where the military or police destroyed their citizenship documentation. The government's expulsions of Dominican citizens flagrantly violates the Dominican Constitution, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (to which the Dominican Republic acceded in 1978) and
82
Dominican Republic
the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (to which it acceded in 1983).
The report also underestimates the magnitude of the human rights violations which accompanied the campaign of repatriations and expulsions. While a Presidential decree in June provided for the repatriation of Haitian sugar cane cutters below the age of 16 and over the age of 60, government forces invoked the decree in raids of Haitian neighborhoods in Santo Domingo and other cities and indiscriminately detained persons of all ages and professions. Dominican soldiers rounded up and expelled people between the ages of 16 and 60 with no connections to the sugar cane harvest. Armed units of the National Police, the Cascos Negros special forces and the Immigration Department conducted unannounced sweeps through communities known to have high concentrations of Haitian residents, forcing hundreds of people to abandon their homes and frequently forcibly separating families. Children as young as 13 were forcibly removed from public streets without any opportunity to contact their parents and later sent to Haiti. In scores of cases where legal Haitian residents of the Dominican Republic showed their documents to the military or police representatives, the documents were destroyed, confiscated or disregarded, and the individuals detained and later expelled. Many of those expelled, both Dominican and Haitian citizens, reported being beaten when they were arrested or while they were in detention. Several deportees reported the theft of their belongings by the authorities.
Relying on a Dominican government source, the report underestimates the number of people who were forcibly removed from the country. According to the report, only 6,000 persons were involuntarily repatriated between June and September 30. This fails to reflect the Haitian government's reports of having received 10,000 expelled persons at the border crossings and estimates of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) of some 5,500 forcible repatriations as of early August, with continuing expulsions at the rate of 500 persons per week until September 30.
83
Dominican Republic
While the report's assessment of the number of Haitians who fled the country during the repatriation campaign is consistent with other nongovernmental sources, the report's explanation of these persons' motivation for leaving is misleading. The report ascribes to these 50,000 to 55,000 persons a desire to avoid "losing their possessions." In fact, the violent implementation of the expulsion campaign created a panic that spread throughout Haitian communities in the Dominican Republic. Aware of the military raids, beatings and forcible expulsions of legal Haitian residents and even Dominican citizens, these tens of thousands of Haitians and Dominico-Haitians fled a growing wave of violence committed by agents of the Dominican government. Leaving the Dominican Republic on short notice, these persons abandoned many of their belongings, including property, homes and household appliances. While some were able to liquidate these assets at far below their value, others simply left, driven by fear of imminent military raids. The report fails to identify the Dominican government as the agent responsible for this massive flight.
The report also neglects to mention that the Dominican government has not acknowledged the human rights violations committed during the campaign. Since September, the government has failed to admit to the expulsions of its own citizens and has not provided any avenue for their safe return to the Dominican Republic. Nor has it created a plan to replace or restore documents illegally destroyed or confiscated from Haitians with the legal right to reside in the Dominican Republic. No reparations plan exists to restore the stolen or abandoned property of those who were forcibly expelled.
The report states that the Dominican Republic has a tradition of granting political asylum. Since the Haitian coup d'etat on September 29, however, the Dominican Republic has refused to grant political asylum to any Haitian applicants, although several have been found by the UNHCR to have credible claims. Not only has the government failed to provide the means for refugees to apply for asylum, it has intimidated Haitians, aggressively discouraging them from petitioning. In one instance, a group of Haitian refugees was confined to a church
84
Dominican Republic
surrounded by Dominican soldiers for several months beginning in November in the border town of Dajabon.
The report states unequivocally that "nongovernmental human rights organizations operate freely without government interference" and that "the Dominican Republic participates in international and regional human rights bodies to support efforts to promote human rights in international forums." It fails to note that the Dominican government has denounced virtually every report from international human rights groups and the media documenting human rights violations, typically minimizing reported violations as "isolated incidents." Rather than accept responsibility for government sponsored or condoned human rights violations, the Dominican government has blamed competitors for tourism and political opponents in foreign countries for sponsoring attacks on its human rights record.
The report's discussion of discrimination significantly understates the level of bias based on nationality, race, sex, language or social status that exists in the Dominican Republic, citing as improvements the ability of children to obtain the documentation to attend school or the ability of women to obtain a divorce or to bring public attention to incidents of domestic violence. The report observes "[flor historical reasons and because of sharp cultural differences, there is a prejudice against Haitians in Dominican society." It fails to indicate that widespread discrimination -- in employment, in education, freedom of movement and equal protection under the law ~ is the government-condoned or fostered expression of this prejudice, whether explicitly by law or practice or implicitly, by the government's failure to arrest, prosecute and punish those who discriminate. Instead, the report obliquely states that "[t]his often translates into discrimination against those with darker skin." Contrary to the report's assertion, it is frequently impossible for Dominico-Haitian or Haitian parents of Dominican children to obtain the documentation required to allow their children to attend school; "Haitian-looking" people fear they will lose their jobs, possessions or identity cards. These are some consequences the report fails to emphasize regarding the government's unwillingness or inability to prevent abuse or provide adequate redress or compensation.
85
Dominican Republic
The report's discussion of worker rights is both incomplete and inaccurate. While the Dominican government fmally recognized a sugar cane cutters' union in 1991 following several years of having refused to do so, plantation managers have persisted in their refusal to cooperate with union members. Conditions on the cane plantations remain poor: armed field guards continue to patrol, living and working conditions remain sub-human, and the voucher payment system ensures that workers will never escape perpetual indebtedness. Despite growing international pressure, the state sugar corporation continued to use children to harvest sugar cane during the year.
While the report focuses on the 1990-91 sugar harvest, it fails to mention that the use of compulsory labor continued into the 1991-92 season. At the start of the 1991-92 sugar harvest, armed guards were stationed at strategic points to prevent Haitian sugar cane cutters from leaving the fields. In addition, deceptive recruiting practices continued. Some Haitians seeking political refuge were detained and taken to sugar cane plantations. The military participated in the recruitment of sugar cane cutters, detaining Haitians at military posts near the Haitian border until vehicles were found for the trips to the plantations.
The Dominican government failed to enact measures for the improved treatment of the sugar cane cutters. Although it had proposed improvements in the treatment and pay of Haitian sugar cane cutters, following the September coup in Haiti virtually all of these changes were abandoned.
The report fails to acknowledge the government's complicity in widespread child labor violations and to condemn government-sponsored child labor practices. While it admits that "many of the child labor restrictions in the Labor Code are ignored," it minimizes these flagrant and admitted violations of child labor laws by stating that "young people including minors younger than 14 years of age . . . engage in a variety of work which technically violates labor regulations. . . ." In a country where nearly 400,000 children work, characterizing this exploitation as a "technical" violation is simply astounding. Coupled with the failure to condemn the government's inadequate attempt to prevent employers from
86
Dominican Republic
exploiting children, this understatement parallels the government's indifference to blatant violations of the Dominican Labor Code and international treaties ratified by the Dominican government which forbid child labor, including the Convention on the Rights of the Child, to which it acceded on June 11, 1991.
Moreover, the report states that the Consejo Estatal de Azúcar (CEA), the state sugar council, found 70 Haitian children working on the plantations, that it repatriated these children, and that it issued orders to employees "prohibiting the hiring of children under pain of dismissal." The CEA's ability to find 70 children and repatriate them comes as no surprise because, as the report indicates, children regularly work in the cane plantations. But the report fails to indicate that the CEA is in large part responsible for the systematic recruiting efforts of its agents, whom CEA pays on a "per head" basis, to lure Haitian children ~ many more than 70 - over the border. Contrary to the report's implication that those children who cut cane merely accompany their parents to work in the cane fields, many children who live on the plantations work iix the fields independently of their parents. Children who arrive alone from Port-au-Prince or rural Haiti, most often without their parents' knowledge, must work to survive. The CEA, far from being unaware of the situation or unable to prevent it, actually promotes child labor through its recruiting practices and then- "pays" those same working children directly, in vouchers, for each ton of cane they cut. Most of the children do not attend school because they must work full time to help support their families or to support themselves. Even when they work full time, the children rarely make enough money to eat, buy shoes or leave the cane plantations, if and when they are permitted to do so. Furthermore, children of Haitian descent, including those who were born on Dominican soil and are thus Dominican citizens under the Dominican Constitution, are often unable to attend school because government officials will not provide them with the proper identification cards.
While the report addresses several of the problems faced by sugar cane cutters of any age working for the CEA, its discussion of several specific problems should have provided greater detail. For example, the CEA payment in vouchers leads to the perpetual
87
Dominican Republic
indebtedness of sugar cane cutters to CEA-owned company stores. The vouchers are subject to a 10% to 20% discount at the stores and can only be changed for cash at the full value once every two weeks. Thus, the "merchants" mentioned in the reports who exchange the vouchers at "exorbitant discount rates" are themselves agents of the CEA. Efforts to reform the voucher payment system were abandoned following the September coup in Haiti. These practices persisted throughout 1991. Furthermore, while the workers are paid by the ton of sugar cut, CEA employees at the weigh stations regularly shortweight the tonnage and keep the difference for themselves. Thus, the sugar cane cutters' actual income often slips far below minimum wage.
As the report accurately describes, the government's response to widespread abuses of Haitian sugar cane cutters was to appoint 20 inspectors who were charged with monitoring the treatment of tens of thousands of workers scattered in hundreds of cane communities in all parts of the country. In July, the Dominican Secretary of Labor himself expressed doubt that the inspectors would have significant impact on the notorious corruption of the CEA, particularly the practice of cheating when cut cane is weighed.
The predominantly Haitian sugarcane workers live in deplorable conditions in the government-run "worker villages." Overcrowding, scarcity of potable water, insufficient cooking facilities and fiiel are typical. Children in the villages rarely go to school. While the government periodically announces efforts to improve living conditions for Haitian workers, evidence of such efforts is minimal.
Overall, the report's discussion of worker rights is disappointing, particularly given the fact that these issues have been under review for several years by the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative in connection with the Dominican Republic's participation in the Generalized System of Preferences trade program. To date, the U.S. Trade Representative has refused to suspend the Dominican Republic from that program.
88
