ALGERIA
The State Department's 1991 report on Algeria is informative and in some areas quite detailed. Yet it suffers from some political and cultural bias, as weil as apparent lack of familiarity with some cultural and religious matters. Its presentation of the events of last year at times subtly reflects an attitude of tolerance towards the anti-democratic actions of the Algerian government and military.
The report characterizes the social turmoil in Algeria as "the Islamist violence and the government reaction thereto," thus giving a pro-government slant to its version of events. This characterization suggests that the victims of the military crackdown, and not its perpetrators, were responsible for the ensuing bloodshed. The report does not define the term "Islamist;" its use of the term, however, assigns to one category a diverse group of people with significant ideological differences.
The report places in context the causal chain that resulted in severe political unrest. It highlights the fact that Algeria is governed by a single party, the National Liberation Front (FLN), whose members control the National Assembly, the military and government, but it does not make the link between the unrest in the middle of the year and the government's decision to open the electoral process to other parties.
The report is imprecise in its analysis of some events. For example, in describing the events of June, prior to the proclamation of the state of siege, it groups together in indiscriminating fashion as "Islamist violence" such activities as organizing and participating in rallies and demonstrations, as well as calling for a genera! strike, to protest the gerrymandering of the National Assembly, and the army's encirclement of towns on the eve of the elections. Other non-Islamist parties, like the National Party For Solidarity and Development, the Algerian Movement for Justice and Development and the Workers Party supported these protests.
17
Algeria
The report candidly describes the widespread repression that followed the June demonstrations. It rightly notes the authorities' reaction as "use of excessive force" and lists in the introductory section such violations as the "detention of thousands of Islamists" and the "brutal treatment of detainees." The section on use of excessive force gives a good summary of what this excessive force consisted of, detailing such practices as firing teargas into hospitals and crowded apartment buildings. This section can, however, be faulted for its repeated reference to "FIS rioters." The authorities' brutal overreaction to the June protests was very broadly targeted so that its victims included many who were neither FIS supporters nor rioters. This pejorative description of the victims of state violence tends to exonerate the government for its excesses, a tendency which the State Department should seek to avoid.
The report's different treatment of governmental abuses is best illustrated in its discussion of freedom of speech and of the press. The report states that "[e]xcept for those FIS leaders imprisoned after the declaration of the state of siege, Algerians at all levels of society may generally express their opinions, and criticism of the government is widely heard." It also notes that individual columnists have been able to publish pieces that were critical of the government, though not the military management of the state of siege.
While these statements are literally accurate, they fail to convey the suffocating effect these government actions have had on free speech. After all, as the report acknowledges, the FIS constitutes the major opposition group in the country. What better measure is there for freedom of speech and of the press than that which is accorded to its major opposition group? The arrest and detention of the FIS' leadership has had a profoundly chilling effect on others who wish to express similar points of view.
Furthermore, the report's assertion that people in all levels of society may generally express their opinion freely is false. As it notes, the Algerian government has created an FLN-controlled holding company for II major Algerian newspapers and magazines, a move which attempts to monopolize access to newspaper printing presses in Algeria.
18
Algeria
With that structure in place, the imprisonment of FIS leadership, the ban on criticism of the military and the cancellation of legitimate elections, one questions which "levels of society" are still permitted to air their views.
The last paragraph of the section of freedom of speech and of the press complains that "[rjeligious indoctrination in Koranic themes has taken the place of secular education in some elementary schools." The report does not explain how it differentiates between teaching and "indoctrination." This sentence follows earlier observations regarding pressures in favor of Islamic thought, dress and behavior. These comments can be read as further support for the thesis that the FIS has created a situation in which governmental repression becomes justifiable.
Another set of problems relates to the discussion of the treatment of Berbers. Algeria's population is ethnically mixed. Many Algerians are both Arab and Berber. Even some of those in government and in the FIS are partly Berber. The report fails to reflect this complexity in its discussion of Berber ethnic consciousness. The report praises the Algerian government for its fair treatment of the Tuareg. The Tuareg are defined simply as nomadic. It is not clear whether the State Department is aware that the Tuareg are perhaps the "purest" of Berber. If so, it would have been informative to point that out to balance the overall picture about the condition of the Berber in Algeria.
The report contains several inaccuracies in its treatment of women's issues. It asserts that there are no Islamic courts in Algeria, only "civic" [sic] and military courts. In fact, the country's family code, enacted by the ruling party, is based substantially, though not exclusively, on the Shari'a (Islamic law).
The report attributes such objectionable behavior as spitting on western-dressed women in the street to "Islamists." Without further evidence it is tendentious to associate this form of intimidation with a particular political faction — the term Islamist having been used to denote FIS supporters or sympathizers elsewhere in the report. It is these
19
Algeria
oversights, in what is generally a strong report, which can be read as anti-FIS, pro-government bias.
The report mixes a discussion of Shari'a with a discussion of the cultural prejudices of certain "Islamists" and of the rise of "Islamic fundamentalism," another value-laden term. It suggests that denial of work outside the home to women is an Islamic demand. While some FIS members or "Islamists" have made such demands, it is misleading to call this an "Islamic demand."
The report is badly informed in its discussion of the 1984 family code. Where the Algerian code attempted to mitigate some of the more egregious standard patriarchal interpretations in Shari'a, the report does not acknowledge this. For example, until recently, it was a standard feature of Muslim family codes to grant males an unfettered right to engage in polygyny. The Algerian code does not include this provision.
Over the centuries, many Muslims (both male and female) repeatedly provided more restrictive interpretations of these passages. Indeed, the Tunisian code which prohibits polygyny altogether provides the most restrictive interpretation. The Algerian code represents an effort on the part of the government to preserve for women some of their rights. For example, it requires the husband to disclose his marital status and intent to both his present and future spouses. Each spouse can then file a suit against him in court for fraud or divorce, as the case may be. To evaluate the practical usefulness of such a provision would require additional information regarding the economic opportunities available to Algerian women, their ability to require in the marriage contract that the husband take no additional wife, the kind of damages available to wives whose husbands violate such a condition and other information that the report should have distilled if it wished to inform the reader on Algerian family law. Instead, it delivers the significantly unenlightening statement that the code "permits polygamy."
Another example of partially true and, hence, misleading statements made by the report relates to the issue of alimony. The report states that the law "awards only 4 months of alimony to the woman
20
Algeria
regardless of the husband's means and the circumstances of the divorce." The report does not explain that the wife could be entitled to receive at divorce a significant settlement in cash or property or a combination of both if a pre-nuptial agreement has been entered into. What the report could have noted is that, generally, this system has not been working properly in the interest of divorced women for quite a while. The reasons are complex.
In general, the report gives a sound picture of the state of human rights in Algeria. Unfortunately, this is marred by the report's occasional use of imprecise language, a lack of familiarity with the culture and religion of the country under scrutiny and, most seriously, by a tendency to characterize the FIS and its supporters as violent and monolithic.
21
