EGYPT
The report gives a generally well-informed and balanced picture of the chronic human rights problems prevailing in Egypt, many of them attributable, as the report correctly notes, to the near permanent state of emergency in force continuously since 1981. The report is occasionally slow to render an opinion on whether a pattern of abuse is present, and to assign responsibility for such abuse, thus failing to meet the requirements laid down in the State Department's instructions for the preparation of the country reports. Notwithstanding these lapses, the report represents an improvement on last year's creditable effort.
The introductory section to the report is strong and informative. It is particularly to be commended for the prominence it gives to the role of the Ministry of the Interior's General Directorate for State Security Investigations'(GDSSI) involvement in the torture and ill-treatment of prisoners and detainees. This section also draws attention to the "authorities' failure to punish the perpetrators" of torture and abuse of prisoners. It is particularly appropriate that the State Department should seek to encourage the Egyptian authorities to take practical steps to combat torture, which has become commonplace for political and other detainees in Egypt, by focusing on an aspect of the problem, the absence of prosecution of alleged torturers, which is well within the authorities' power to rectify.
In an improvement over last year, the report is candid in stating correctly that, "the people do not have a meaningful ability to change the government," noting in this regard the dominance over all aspects of political life of the ruling National Democratic Party.
The section on extrajudicial killing is marred by a form of words which conveys the impression that the security forces only resorted to use of lethal force when confronted by "Islamic extremists" who were "sometimes armed." Repeating a mistake from last year's report, the State Department appears determined to characterize state violence simply as a response to violence by nongovernmental groups. This approach is inconsistent with the information presented elsewhere in the
89
Egypt
report. For example, the reader is informed that in confrontations, members of the security forces "usually do not give the warning prescribed by law." We are also told that police fire killed a (presumably unarmed) student demonstrating against the Gulf War at Cairo University. (We are not informed if this fatality is included among the eight "extremists killed in clashes with police.") The report should be more forthright in its criticism of excessive use of force by the security forces, and should clearly identify illegal resort to force by the police as a violation of human rights.
The State Department is so anxious to appear balanced on the issue of political violence that it repeats a report of the killing of People's Assembly Speaker Rifaat al-Mahgoub in October 1990 which appeared, rightly, in last year's report. The State Department is right to present the context of periodic incidents of political violence which occur in Egypt, but it should be cautious not to give the impression to the government that abuses by violent opposition groups give the authorities carte blanche to respond in kind.
The section on disappearance is improved by the reporting of three case examples of unresolved "disappearances" dating from years prior to 1991. In all of the cases, the individuals concerned are alleged to have "disappeared" in police custody, and it is alleged that they may have been killed under torture. The report is to be commended for drawing attention to the government's failure to respond to inquiries about two out of three of these cases.
The section on torture which is detailed and informative, and rightly gives prominence to the work of the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights (EOHR), should have been stronger in its condemnation of the authorities' failure to prosecute members of the security forces allegedly involved in abuse. The report informs us that a policeman and a State Security Officer were sentenced for "torturing a detainee to death in 1989" without providing adequate context to show how scandalous this minimal level of response is to a well-documented and extensive problem. The report should have informed the reader of the scores of instances in recent years in which courts have ordered the release of
90
Egypt
prisoners because of credible reports that they have been the victims of torture, but in which no criminal investigation of the alleged torturers has ensued. The system appears to be breaking down in the branch of the Public Prosecutor's Department responsible for investigating allegations of abuse against detainees and prisoners. Hundreds, and probably thousands, of uninvestigated torture allegations, recorded by Public Prosecutor's Department officials, are sitting in files at Public Prosecutor's offices around the country. Action on these files would do much to deter the practice of torture among security officers.
The State Department should have been more robust in its criticism of detention procedures under the state of emergency legislation. Rather than stating that "it cannot be determined how many were imprisoned for exercising basic freedoms," the report should have noted, as it did last year, the frequency with which courts ordered the release of state security detainees. This would have led the State Department to comment, as it should have done, that detention orders are evidently issued in too arbitrary a fashion.
The report should also have paid more attention to the prolonged and indefinite detention of some detainees who, according to Amnesty International, are repeatedly served with detention orders, or held by the State Security Police illegally without any official detention order. Some of these detainees are held for continuous periods of over a year without charge or trial. Court orders for their release are overruled by the Minister of the Interior.
An improvement over last year's report is the inclusion of information relating to the sweeping powers of detention under ordinary legislation. However, the report still understates the draconian nature of this legislation. Law 95 of 1980 permits detention without charge or trial for up to five years for those accused of broadly defined offenses against national unity and established religion. This omission from the report is perhaps excusable because this legislation is rarely invoked.
The report is unnecessarily indirect when discussing the powers of the President or his representative to interfere with the verdicts of
91
Egypt
(Emergency) State Security Courts. The report states: "His powers imply that he may cancel an acquittal and order a defendant retried for the same offense." This is precisely what the Prime Minister, acting on powers delegated from the President, has done in a number of cases. This is more than an implication, it is a fact.
One of the strongest parts of the report is the excellent, pithy listing of limitations on judicial independence and due process. This paragraph, which describes the primary areas where the executive branch of government encroaches into the judicial sphere, is a model of conciseness which makes clear the burdens under which Egypt's judiciary must function. Egypt's judicial independence, rightly commended in the report, exists in spite of imbalances imposed on the system by the emergency law and other abusive legislation.
The section on freedom of speech and press is curiously low-key on the serious deterioration in freedom of expression during 1991 brought about as a direct result of the prosecution of author Ala'a Hamed, publisher Mohamed Madbouli and printer Fateh Fadl. These three men were sentenced to eight years' imprisonment by an (Emergency) State Security Court for their parts in the production and distribution of a novel. The Distance in a Man's Mind, which was deemed to "show contempt for religion." The report's account of this case, in addition to omitting one of the defendants, fails to explain its serious implication for the future of free expression in Egypt. The case gives a graphic lesson to writers and publishers in Egypt: if they produce a controversial publication they could be liable to prosecution and even imprisonment. Although the sentence of the (Emergency) State Security Court has not yet been imposed, Mr. Hamed spent 14 months in pre-trial detention. Ala'a Hamed was a relatively unknown writer; Mohammed Madbouli, on the other hand, is one of the major publishers of fiction in Egypt. His prosecution demonstrates to writers in Egypt that the increasingly powerful axis between the Islamic Research Academy of al-Azhar University and the State Security Public Prosecutor can reach them all. The report appears oblivious to the grave implications of this verdict.
92
Egypt
In contrast, the section on freedom of assembly and association is strong and informative. In its account of the dissolution of the Arab Women's Solidarity Association (AWSA) under the powers of the highly restrictive Law 32 of 1964, the report might have added that the state-approved "women's" group, Women of Islam, to which AWSA's assets were transferred, is headed by a man, Farouk Ali Hemeda, a senior official in the Ministry of Social Affairs.
The report is right to highlight the lack of legal status for the domestic human rights group, the EOHR, and the regional nongovernmental organization, the Arab Organization for Human Rights, as violations of the right to free association. These restrictions are discussed further in the section relating to nongovernmental human rights monitoring where, to its credit, the report exposes threats made against EOHR lawyers seeking to visit prisoners in pursuit of the organization's work.
In another improvement from last year, Egypt's violative treatment of asylum seekers from sub-Saharan Africa is discussed in the report. This issue remains under-researched, not only by the State Department. The report would also have benefitted from some reference to Egypt's treatment of non-Egyptian Arab nationals resident in the country. Palestinians have long been the target of special attention from the security services and much unreported abusive treatment. In the context of inter-Arab hostilities arising out of the Gulf War, other disfavored Arab nationals, such as Yemenis and Iraqis, could have been expected to have been targeted for abuse. Perhaps we can look forward to reporting of the situation of these vulnerable groups in next year's report, if the improvement evident in this year's is maintained.
93
