MOROCCO AND THE WESTERN SAHARA
In 1991 there were several remarkable exceptions to Morocco's generally poor record on human rights, and the State Department report was quick to point to the good news. The notorious Tazmamart prison was confirmed as having been shut down, news that belied the previous official Moroccan position that Tazmamart existed only in the imaginations of those who wished Morocco ill. The section devoted to Tazmamart in the report is well done although it falls short of a detailed description of the dire conditions of the prison and the documented effect those conditions have had on prisoners who came out alive. TTie report makes no comment on the duplicity of the official Moroccan stance regarding Tazmamart. But the release or transfer of prisoners who had been held in Tazmamart for years finally forced Moroccan authorities to admit its existence.
Among those released in 1991 were Abraham Serfaty and M'barek Touil, both after almost two decades of protests by international human rights groups. Serfaty was released from prison and expelled to" France on the same day on the trumped-up charge that he was not Moroccan by origin, but rather Brazilian. (The charge, made by the Ministry of the Interior, was adopted to explain Serfaty's pro-Polisario attitude, i.e., no true Moroccan can support Western Sahara independence, therefore he must not be Moroccan). Touil, held for almost 20 years in solitary confinement, is married to a U.S. citizen and was released in September. It is noted that his release came curiously close to King Hassan's state visit to the United States in September 1991 but Touil's reunion with his family in the U.S. was held up by Moroccan authorities until January 1992. In addition to these two men, the report acknowledges the release of many other prisoners of conscience as well as several hundred Sahrawis following a royal amnesty in June. The State Department is unable to ascertain the number of Sahrawis that remain under Moroccan detention despite estimates by Polisario and international human rights groups as high as 1,000 people.
Another repeated shortcoming of the report is its failure to evaluate the Moroccan government's insistence that it holds no political
229
j
Morocco
prisoners. In classic Kafkaesque logic, Morocco reclassifies those who hold different political ideas as criminals. The report includes the King's statement to French journalists that any Moroccan supporting Western Saharan independence threatens state security and implying that pro-independence views equal criminal behavior. Nonetheless, while the report mentions the official denial of political prisoners (in a generally strong section on denial of fair public trial), its response is inadequate given the available information on political prisoners compiled by human rights groups both in and outside of Morocco.
Morocco's inauguration of the Consultative Council on Human Rights (CCDH) in 1990 raised expectations for 1991 but, as the report points out, the CCDH yielded few tangible results following its investigation of reports of police misconduct during the Fes riots of December 1990. The report notes that the investigation got bogged down in inter-organizational bickering and uncooperative responses from officials involved. The other noted effort of the CCDH, its recommendations for improved treatment of prisoners, did not translate into a change in official behavior. The Council's problem lies in its lack of independent authority. The report rightly points out that while the King endorsed the groups' recommendations and the Parliament enacted new laws based on them, the King failed to promulgate the laws by decree, the final step required by the Constitution. The report describes the same unfinished process with regard to CCDH recommendations on government contact with international human rights organizations; every step but the King's final promulgation was complete, thereby rendering irrelevant the royally appointed CCDH and frustrating the efforts of the other Moroccan human rights groups that submitted recommendations for improving conditions. The report can be faulted for failing to condemn such a charade.
The report's section on disappearances was surprisingly brief and uninformative concerning "remaining unresolved [cases] over a lengthy period." A failure to report adequately on these grave violations has been a long-term problem of the State Department's report. Although it does discuss the release of Sahrawi prisoners that had been classified as "disappeared," it gives no background information, invoking the same
230
Morocco
excuse as in the past of being unable to confirm Polisario allegations of human rights violations. The report also omits the alleged "disappearances" of people in Morocco proper, notably trade unionists Abdelhaq Rouissi and Houcine El-Manouzi. The virtual lack of follow-up on instances of "disappearances" must be addressed in future reports.
In response to international criticism for its treatment of the strikers and young people involved in the December 1990 disturbances in Fes, Casablanca and other cities, the Moroccan government seemed to make an effort to avoid subsequent confrontations. As a consequence, a demonstration of 300,000 Moroccans protesting the U.S. military involvement in Iraq and Kuwait was tolerated by the government ~ despite the government's support of the international military effort to repel the Iraqi invasion - and while 200 arrests resulted, there were no reports of prosecution or long-term imprisonment of the demonstrators. By late February, however, ail demonstrations were banned, dealing a hefty blow to the already circumscribed free speech and freedom of assembly rights of Moroccan citizens. The report curiously omits, mention of the arrest and detention of eight demonstrators who were tortured and released a month later for protesting the war and raising the Palestinian flag in public. Their trial ~ for the crime of public disturbance ~ violated basic international standards of fairness, including the court's refusal to allow a medical expert to testify to the visible traces of torture on the young men's bodies and its admission into evidence of the protesters' "confessions" taken during detention, apparently under duress.
The report does accurately indicate that torture continues to be common in most prisons. Instances of torture are particularly egregious in garde ^ vue, detention for persons awaiting charge. Methods of torture include electric shocks, beatings and sleep, water and food deprivation, as well as methods named the "parrot" and the "airplane," by which prisoners are suspended in contorted positions for long periods of time, and immersion of prisoners' heads in buckets of urine. As the report notes, these tactics are used by police to obtain confessions from prisoners. Dates of prisoners' arrests and confessions are altered by police to conceal the length of time the detainees have been held to make
231
Morocco
it appear that the law is being followed and to conceal the extent to which they have been held in incommunicado detention. The report fails to note that when a suspect caimot be located by the authorities ~ particularly a person connected to a political "crime" ~ it is a common practice to hold a relative in place of the suspect.
To protest these conditions, prisoners have organized hunger strikes. The report does not mention a well publicized hunger strike of 34 prisoners (26 of whom were Islamist political prisoners and the other eight were imprisoned for membership in a Marxist organization) in the Ghbila Prison in November and December which resulted in the hospitalization of 11 prisoners. The prisoners were protesting the confiscation of their personal property, medicines and blankets, as well as random beatings by guards who reportedly had been in charge of torturing prisoners at the dreaded Laalou Prison (closed by the government in 1989) and Derb Moulay Cherif (a detention center in Casablanca). Similarly, the report makes no mention of the deaths or torture in police custody reported by the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture including the torture of a teacher who allegedly had written letters to the press.
The report resorts to euphemism when discussing the Moroccan bombing of Sahrawi civilians in the Western Saharan towns of Bir Lahlou and Tifartiti, near the Mauritanian border, referring to these attacks as "significant military action" without giving an opinion on this act of apparently unprovoked aggression. Shortly before a representative of the UN Secretary-General was to visit and install the UN supervisory body to monitor a referendum to decide the territory's final status, the Moroccan government used an F-1 bomber to bomb settlements, clinics and gardens. The goal of the attack, as the report notes, was to drive Polisario supporters into Algeria and Mauritania. In addition, there were reports of Moroccan troop movements into the Polisario-controlled zone. According to Polisario reports, 19 people were killed and 60 more were missing after the unprovoked attack.
The State Department, while relating some of the complex background of the voter identification issue, which is key in the run-up
232
Morocco
to the UN-sponsored referendum on the Western Sahara, fails to make any assessment of Moroccan government policies. The report would have been improved by clearly voiced opposition to any attempt by the Moroccan government to gerrymander or to intimidate Sahrawi voters.
With regard to the protection of the rights of women, the report makes the following comment: "The law and social practices governing violence against women reflect Morocco's Islamic culture and the importance placed on the honor of the family." While it is sensitive to the complex relationship of gender and society in a specific context, such a statement may too easily dismiss women's inferior status to men. The report profiles some instances of unequal treatment of men and women, notably in family and inheritance laws, and speculates on others {e.g. domestic violence), but it fails to draw any conclusions on the generally beleaguered status of women in Morocco other than that the imbalance is a by-product of Islamic culture; this pejorative generalization is not informative.
The report acknowledges that the people of Morocco do not have the right to change their government, but, by not condemning the denial of a basic political right, the report may be construed as condoning the documented suppression of real opposition (as opposed to the official opposition who are allowed to participate in Parliament but who censor their criticism of the government). Similarly, in describing the gap between what the Constitution guarantees and what actually happens in the streets, jails and courts yet not condemning the double standard, the report weakens its own potential impact.
Perhaps the most important point to be made, and one to which the report refers only in passing, is that the improvements mentioned early on in this critique have not brought about a systemic change. Patterns of gross human rights violations continue in the form of arbitrary arrest, incommunicado detention, death in police custody and unfair trials. Examples of the preceding were documented in detail throughout 1991 and reported by Amnesty International and other human rights groups. While the release of illegally held prisoners is always welcome, and the closing of a brutal prison is met with relief, it is
233
Morocco
alarming to what extent those released depend on the whim of royal pardon during religious holidays or prior to visits to important Western allies. Such pardons are no substitute for far-reaching structural reform in the Moroccan legal system to root out abuse.
234
