ESTONIA
The State Department's 1991 report on human rights conditions in the Baltic Republic of Estonia reflects the dramatic changes in that country over the course of the year. In addition, the report is fairly comprehensive in scope, notwithstanding the fact that the United States had no diplomatic relations with Estonia until September 2, 1991, when it recognized Estonia as a republic independent of the former Soviet Union, and endorsed its membership in the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. The scope of the report is particularly commendable in light of the growing difficulty in monitoring human rights violations due to the splintering of the former Soviet Union.
The report, however, is flawed in several respects, all of which illustrate a basic theme: the report is quick to condemn communist political groups and equally quick to forgive more democratic, majoritarian ones. While accurately describing the repressive actions of the "reactionary forces in the Soviet Union," the report fails to describe completely the actions of the "legitimate government of Estonia," actions taken in response to its longtime occupation by the Soviet Union. Most importantly, the report further fails to acknowledge that those actions threaten the human rights of the non-indigenous population of Estonia. Ironically, it is precisely the more democratic political groups, groups comprising the government, which surrender the moral high ground with respect to the safeguarding of human rights. Finally, in addressing the protections afforded to specific human rights and civil liberties, the report generally substitutes brief descriptions of relevant statutes for any meaningful discussion of actual practices and conditions.
As the report correctly notes, a number of political groups "offering a broad array of viewpoints" compete for political power in Estonia. The Popular Front, for example, is composed of former members of the Communist Party and non-Party intellectuals, who are politically similar to the Social Democrats of Western Europe. Another important political group, the Congress of Estonia, is dominated by former dissidents and their allies from the days before Mikhail Gorbachev came to power in the Soviet Union. In a rare showing of
109
Estonia
unity, the two groups allied in favor of Estonia's independence. By contrast, a third group, ïntermovement, opposes reform of any kind, particularly independence. In fact, many of Intermovement's members strongly supported the attempted coup in Moscow in August 1991. With independence established, however, ïntermovement has sought to market itself as a human rights watchdog group, in particular a watchdog over the status accorded to Russians in Estonia.
The report properly mentions that this turnabout is due, at least in part, to the ethnic composition of Estonia, which includes only a 62% majority of Estonians. Many of the remainder are Russians, who migrated to Estonia as part of the massive population transfers organized by the Soviet Union, including the deportation of more than 70,000 Estonians to remote areas of Siberia. These population transfers contravened Article 49 of the Geneva Convention which prohibits the forcible transfer of civilian populations. As a result, Estonians feared, and continue to fear ethnic extinction. Their response, after declaring the independence of the Republic of Estonia, has been to prevent that extinction: first, to limit annual immigration to one percent of the permanent residents of Estonia; and second, to grant ethnic minorities "every economic, social, cultural and civil right except political rights " according to parliamentarian Tiit Kabin (emphasis added). The repressive effect of such a limitation is not meaningfully discussed by the State Department's report.
Among the political rights withheld from ethnic minorities appears to be the fundamental right of citizenship, and in a case of classic understatement, the report states that "the issue of citizenship [was] at the center of politics," although by the end of the year "the ramifications of possible changes in the citizenship law remain[ed] unresolved." For the Popular Front, "possible changes" meant a "zero option" under which the indigenous population on the date of independence would automatically be extended citizenship. For the Congress of Estonia, however, the only change deemed possible was a law which mirrored the Estonian Citizenship Law of 1938, extending citizenship only to the indigenous population on the date of the Soviet
110
Estonia
invasion - June 16, 1940 -- or their direct descendants. All others seeking citizenship would be subject to strict conditions on naturalization.
On February 26, 1992, the issue was resolved by the Estonian Supreme Council, which re-established the Estonian Citizenship Law of 1938, with retroactive force as of November 6, 1991. The law passed with the minimum 52 votes necessary for its confirmation, with nearly all of the Russian deputies voting against it or abstaining.
The law provides that all those who were Estonian citizens before June 16, 1940, and their direct descendants, are automatically to be extended citizenship. All others seeking citizenship may be naturalized only after two years of permanent residence in Estonia beginning on March 30, 1990, the date on which the Supreme Council declared a transitional period. A waiting period of one year is to follow, after which those seeking to be naturalized must take an examination on the Estonian language, history and culture, as well as swear an oath of loyalty to the Republic, which includes renouncing loyalty to -- 4nd citizenship in — all others. Estonia does not allow dual citizenship except as specified by treaty.
In addition to these conditions, certain restrictions apply, in that certain classes of persons are ineligible fof naturalization. Those classes are: ' military personnel who served in foreign armies; former Soviet intelligence or security officers; recidivists; those convicted of a serious crime; and those having no legal means of economic subsistence.
Disappointingly, the report notes only that "tensions are present" between ethnic Estonians and the Russian minority and that "[n]on-Estonians, especially Russians, have alleged job, salary, and housing discrimination based on Estonian-language requirements for certain jobs." In merely stating that others have "alleged" some discrimination, the report fails to recognize and decry the fact that Estonia's citizenship law threatens fundamental human rights in several respects. While a two-year residence requirement plus a one-year waiting period ~ a "two-plus-one" option ~ may seem liberal, it is patently discriminatory. Naturalization may begin as early as March 30, 1993. Yet in light of the
111
Estonia
fast-paced changes in Estonia, this option places non-indigenous persons, principally ethnic minorities, on "second-class" footing with indigenous persons, principally the ethnic majority, with respect to the most important political and economic events in the near future.
Most importantly, as presently constituted, the Estonian law excludes non-citizens from electing, and being elected as, representatives in the forthcoming elections to the State Assembly. It excludes non-citizens from participating in the forthcoming referendum on the Estonian Constitution. Moreover, the law likely will exclude non-citizens from privatization, as well as the reorganization of higher and secondary education. These excluded non-citizens include the overwhelming majority of Russians. And according to the Soviet Press Digest, "a number of other legislative acts refer to 'Estonian citizens'" as well, including laws relating to property rights. In this regard, at the conclusion of a December 22, 1991 Conference on "Russians of the Baltic Area" held in Riga, TASS reported that representatives of various Russian societies sent an open letter to parliamentarians in the Baltic Republics decrying, among other things, the use of citizenship laws in Estonia and Latvia to "exclude the majority of [Russians] from the coming processes of privatization and active enterprise."
Additionally, the Estonian Citizenship Law contains restrictions on eligibility for naturalization that may impermissibly exclude altogether various classes of non-indigenous persons such as military personnel. By categorically excluding former Soviet intelligence or security officers, Estonia may be deemed to be collectively punishing individuals for their associations, in violation of Article 22 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), to which the Estonian Supreme Council acceded in 1991. And, by withholding citizenship from previously convicted criminals, Estonia arguably is effectively adding an additional ex post facto punishment to that imposed by the criminal law, which would contravene Article 15 of the ICCPR.
Finally, the naturalization requirements made for eligible persons place impermissible conditions on citizenship. Language requirements, for one, are disfavored, particularly in republics containing a variety of
112
Estonia
ethnic groups, each with its own language. (Helsinki Watch suggests that a better way for Estonia to revive the Estonian language might be to offer free language instruction to its non-indigenous population. Such instruction would avoid placing an economic burden on Estonian citizenship.)
While the report highlights the right to change the government enjoyed by Estonians, it does not address the question whether that right is enjoyed by the non-indigenous minority in Estonia. It does not appear to be. In August 1991, the Estonian government stopped the activities of the city councils in Narva, Sillamae and Kohtla-Jarve and city administrative units, declaring that new elections would be held in October. The government's justification was that the cities had supported the attempted coup in the Soviet Union, and that the region --where 95% of Russians live — was planning to proclaim a Northeast Estonian Soviet Republic should the coup be successful. Regardless of that justification, however, the government's action seems to indicate that the right to change the government belongs only to Estonians.
Further, although the report correctly notes that "there were no known instances" of Estonian authorities engaging in arbitrary arrest, detention or exile, Estonian authorities are conducting a criminal investigation of the leaders of Narva, S ill am ae and Kohtla-Jarve, an investigation which has the potential to lead to politically-motivated arrests.
The Chairman of the Estonian Supreme Council, Arnold Ruutel, has urged that "measures to put an end to the [Soviet] occupation mechanism should not be viewed as violations of human rights." The State Department report appears to have in part responded to his urging, if unwittingly. Accordingly, the State Department's 1992 report should look beyond traditional notions of the deniocratic "good guys" and the totalitarian "bad guys," for in this instance at least, regardless of their motives, the "good guys" have endangered human rights in their struggle to shake off the trappings of occupation and to awaken a dormant democracy.
113
