ETHIOPIA
The State Department report, in nearly all respects, accurately reflects the reported information on the human rights situation in Ethiopia after the overthrow of the Mengistu government in late May. The situation was extremely chaotic and the State Department does a good job reporting the major human rights violations and issues in Ethiopia during 1991. However, the report conveys misleading impressions in two respects.
First, the report's introduction understates the deplorable and well-known human rights record of the Mengistu government. The statement that "(cjivil war remained the primary factor affecting human rights during the first five months" conveys an impression that human rights violations were rooted in exigencies connected to war and that the rebel forces committed human rights violations on a similar scale as the Mengistu government. The brutal and systematic repression of that government that reached into every corner of Ethiopian society is well-known. To downplay the well-established repressive system created by President Mengistu and to draw comparisons between that repression and the far more isolated reports of human rights abuses by the rebel forces is seriously misleading.
Second, the report's introduction and summary appears to overstate the reported human rights violations committed by the Transitional Government in comparison to those committed by the Mengistu government. The report's statement that "there were new and serious human rights abuses" under the Transitional Government fails to acknowledge the astonishing and laudable changes in the human rights situation in Ethiopia because it fails to make any comparison with the far more serious human rights violations committed by the Mengistu government. While the report commendably takes the Transitional Government to task for its human rights violations, it would have provided a more accurate picture of the human rights situation if it had recognized, as other commentators have, that the Transitional Government's human rights record must be viewed against the backdrop of the Mengistu government's many years of brutal repression. This
114
Ethiopia
does not excuse the continuing violations but would help the reader understand the context of current human rights issues in Ethiopia.
The report's discussion of political and other extrajudicial killing may slightly understate the numbers killed in the early days of the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front's (EPRDF) takeover of Addis Ababa. Amnesty International reports that 20 or more people were killed in July, rather than nine as stated in the report. Africa Watch reports that after the fall of the Mengistu government, police functions were fulfilled by EPRDF soldiers who generally performed very well. However, there were reports of summary executions of looters during the takeover (which the report mentions), and later on in the year, of common thieves, some of whom had been convicted by "people's courts."
In addition, the report does not discuss the reported massacres of 4,000 unarmed Mengistu soldiers by Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF) soldiers shortly after the takeover. Agence France-Presse, citing officers of the Mengistu forces, reported that in two separate incidents, the EPLF rounded up soldiers, disarmed them and then opened fire. It is claimed that approximately 2,000 were killed in each incident.
The most serious human rights violation under the Transitional Government in 1991 was the detention without trial of former Mengistu government officials. The report accurately describes the imprisonment of these officials and states that by year's end the Transitional Government's Council of Representatives had not established the independent judiciary called for in the July Charter. However, in appearing to attribute this failure to "overwork," the report fails to acknowledge the significance of ongoing detention without trial, which is particularly egregious in a country seeking to overcome the effects of similar violations committed by the Mengistu government.
The report does not discuss conditions in detention centers after the fall of the Mengistu government. Africa Watch reports that they ranged from good (in the Yekatit 66 Political School where high-ranking members of the former government were held) to overcrowded, with
115
Ethiopia
poor facilities. There were many unofficial detention centers, including private houses, government offices and remote police or army barracks, according to Amnesty International. Even so, detainees were reportedly allowed access to families, food and medical care.
The discussion of the Transitional Government's position on freedom of assembly and association is quite good, although a minor omission is its failure to report that the government banned further demonstrations by the United Democratic Nationals (UDN) party in December. The statement that "there were no restrictions of freedom of assembly" in Eritrea does not reveal that no political organization other than the EPLF has emerged and that some opponents of the EPLF remain abroad, possibly indicating their valid fear that some restriction on complete freedom of assembly exists. The discussion of the EPLF provisional government's forced repatriation of former Ethiopian soldiers and their dependents fails to mention that deaths occurred. Amnesty International reports that hundreds died of starvation or illness when they were sent across the border without transport, with few possessions and little money.
116
