UNITED KINGDOM
The extent to which the report on the United Kingdom continues to deviate from the State Department's instructions for the preparation of the reports and to give support to the government's policies is striking. It does not use the same "standards of evidence" applied to other countries nor say when reports are credible (or even official); it fails to discuss, as it should, not only the laws and government claims but also what actually happens in practice; and, overall, it still does not present a balanced and accurate picture of the situation.
Once again, the report's coverage of human rights practices in Northern Ireland along with those in Britain serves to obscure the very different conditions prevailing in Northern Ireland at the same time as it diminishes the nature and extent of the problems in Britain. To do justice to both in a coherent manner, it has been necessary this year to present the critiques separately.
Great Britain
In Britain, many of the failings we detailed last year persist. Instead of repeating them, we focus on four broad areas we feel were a major source of concern during 1991, but which are not adequately reflected in the report. Foremost among these were again concerns over the criminal justice system, which the report fails miserably to reflect. The other three areas are: prison conditions, freedom of expression and the treatment of aliens.
The report notes that "human rights groups have continued to criticize" conditions in some British prisons. It outlines how the government has promised to remedy the situation, without describing what this situation is, making passing reference only to "sanitation facilities and recreational opportunities." It is particularly hard to understand why the report ascribes the criticism exclusively to "human rights groups" when it goes on to note how the government in 1991 committed itself to reform the prison system following the recommendations of an official inquiry. This inquiry, set up under the
403
United Kingdom
chairmanship of Lord Justice Woolf after the widespread prison riots of 1990, found substantial grounds for complaints by prisoners. The Woolf report, published in February 1991, listed 204 proposals and 12 core recommendations. These 12 recommendations are echoed in the government's own proposals. However, apart from some specific reforms already being put into effect ~ such as lifting the censorship of prisoners' letters in all but the top security prisons and liberalizing visiting arrangements - other proposals will only be implemented "as and when" resources allow. Lord Woolfs proposal that prison overcrowding be banned by the end of 1992 was rejected.
The conditions inside some British prisons were also condemned as "inhuman and degrading" in a 1991 report to the British government by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, a body set up under the Council of Europe. This report particularly condemned overcrowding, with examples of three prisoners occupying cells designed for one; lack of sanitation, with prisoners having to urinate or defecate without privacy and within a confined space in front of cellmates; and the absence of out-of-cell activities, with many inmates confined to cells for up to 22.5 hours a day. The report also condemned the widespread use of leather body belts which are used to tie down "difficult" inmates by pinning their arms to their sides.
In a report prepared for the (United Nations) Human Rights Committee in 1991, the Howard League for Penal Reform noted the failure of the British government to produce legally enforceable minimum standards in its jails, to provide an independent complaints mechanism for prisoners, to forbid inhuman punishment such as lengthy periods of solitary confinement, and to implement effective suicide prevention strategies. In July the House of Lords struck down a claim for compensation on behalf of a prisoner for unlawful treatment within the prison system.
Pressure grew in 1991 ft-om police and lawyers for urgent government action to reduce the number of prisoners being held in police cells due to shortage of prison space, most of them awaiting trial. In
404
United Kingdom
September, over 1,800 people were being held in such cells, and the numbers were rising. The police cells allow for no proper sanitation, exercise or visiting facilities, and prisoners are often kept locked up for 23 hours a day. There are fears that the numbers remanded in custody will rise even more due to government proposals to allow courts in England and Wales to remand defendants in custody for up to 28 days at a time instead of the maximum eight days as at present. Given the number of suicides in custody, weekly reviews can serve as a lifeline, particularly where the defendant has been remanded for psychiatric reports.
The report mentions that there are codes of conduct protecting the individual against torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment while in police custody in Britain. These codes are issued under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act of 1984 (PACE) and were revised in 1991 after research showed that the police were flouting the rules in relation to a suspect's right to access to legal advice. However, concern still remains regarding the effectiveness of these rules as they are not directly enforceable against the police. While PACE Sections 76 and 78 allow for any confession obtained in contravention of these codes to be excluded as evidence, this is not an automatic exclusionary rule, and experience has shown (as we noted in last year's critique) that judges are often reluctant to dismiss evidence gathered in breach of the codes. The use of uncorroborated confessions and the issue of police interrogation tactics -- illustrated by the cases below - are not adequately addressed by the report. PACE introduced the tape recording of police interviews, but there is evidence that this is providing little protection. It also should be noted that none of the protections for suspects in the police station apply to those detained under the Prevention of Terrorism Provisions.
The report states flatly that "[fjair trial is provided for by law and observed in practice." This is not by any standard an accurate reflection of the general perception in England and Wales during 1991. The report mentions the highly-publicized quashing of the convictions of the "Birmingham Six" and the "Maguire Seven" after doubt was cast upon the reliability of evidence used to convict them. It does not mention other cases involving miscarriages of justice that have
405
United Kingdom
aggravated the sharp fall in public confidence in the British criminal justice system and the British police. For example, three persons sentenced to life imprisonment for the murder of a police officer during a 1985 riot in North London had their convictions quashed in November and December after information came to light about the misconduct of the senior investigating police officer and his assistant. The senior police officers involved now face charges of perjury and conspiracy to pervert the course of justice. Other recent cases also brought to light how in many instances the police and/or the prosecution have withheld material evidence from the defense. There is no legislation in England and Wales which gives the defense the right to see all relevant evidence. A further significant disadvantage is the relative lack of access to expert forensic advice, which is readily available to the prosecution.
The report mentions the inquiry into the West Midlands Serious Crime Squad, which was disbanded in 1989 following widespread concern over a series of convictions (including those of the Birmingham Six) based on apparently fabricated confession evidence. By the end of 1991, eight men convicted as a result of investigations by the squad had been freed and appeals of another 18 were pending. A study carried out by the National Association of Probation Officers concluded that there are as many as 700 prisoners who were improperly convicted. 1991 saw a massive increase in police compensation payments to victims of malpractice and wrongful arrest.
The case of the Birmingham Six in particular provided the impetus for the establishment by the government in March of the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice in England and Wales, which the State Department report mentions but to which it fails to attribute due significance. The fact that this is the first royal commission named in over 10 years is a mark of the issue's gravity. The Commission's mandate is to study the need for changes in every aspect of criminal law, police practice and trial procedure, from the right to silence in the police station, through the prosecution and trial process, to the handling of appeals in cases where there has been a miscarriage of justice.
406
United Kingdom
Considerable concern was raised during the year about the limit on the availability of legal aid for cases heard in magistrates' courts involving non-payment of the Community Charge (or Poll Tax). 1991 saw the first committals to prison of people who were unable or unwilling to pay the charge, which is a local tax imposed at a flat rate on every citizen regardless of their means. The tax was introduced in 1989 and provoked a massive public outcry because of its failure to distinguish according to ability to pay. It is the only tax for which non-payment is punishable by imprisonment, in this case for a period of up to three months. By the end of 1991, over 150 people had been sent to prison for failure to pay this tax; most of them were on very low incomes. Until October, Magistrates' Courts were routinely imprisoning unemployed people who were without any state benefits or other income. However, in Benham v Poole Borough Council, the High Court ruled that this practice was unlawful and that debtors should not be imprisoned unless they had at least some means with which to pay the tax. For all intents and purposes, there is no legal aid available for these proceedings, which represents a serious threat to their fairness. It is presently the subject of an application against the U.K. government under the European Convention on Human Rights.
Serious concern has also been expressed over possible racial discrimination affecting the outcome and fairness of trials. In 1989, in R V Ford, the Court of Appeal overturned the established practice that a trial judge has discretion in a racially sensitive case to ensure that the jury panel contains an appropriate racial balance. Although this represented a departure from the principle of random selection, it was regarded by the profession and large sections of the judiciary as being faithful to the principle of trial by one's peers. The Court of Appeal's decision has had continuing ramifications throughout 1990 and 1991, and the issue of multi-racial jury panels is firmly on the agenda of the Royal Commission. Of Britain's 527 judges, only two are black, and government figures show that black people make up 16% of the prison population, compared with around five percent of the population as a whole. Black adult male prisoners are serving sentences which are on average 44% longer than those of adult white prisoners. Black women's sentences are on average twice as long.
407
United Kingdom
The report repeats its annual assertion that "[sjtrongly held tradition, an independent press, and a democratic political system combine to secure freedom of speech and press." It continues to ignore an issue we pointed out last year: the growing concern in the U.K. about the erosion of the right to freedom of expression, about which a great deal was written over the year, not only in the press and by domestic rights groups such as Liberty and Charter 88, but also by international organizations. In a report prepared for members of the (UN) Human Rights Committee in April, the international human rights group Article 19 concluded that "the right to freedom of expression and information in the United Kingdom has been steadily eroded in recent years and is urgently in need of protection." In September, Helsinki Watch and the Fund for Free Expression produced a report documenting the extent to which "in recent years the climate for free speech in the United Kingdom has worsened."
In contrast, the State Department's report raises just two matters in this section - again, the Spycatcher case and the restriction on the broadcast of statements made by members of Sinn Fein and other groups ~ but then simply reasserts the government's justification for its actions in relation to both issues.
Two further areas can be cited to illustrate the extent to which the report - to use the language of the State Department's instructions -- misses both the forest and the trees. The first relates to the limitations imposed on the freedom of the press and on freedom of speech during the Gulf War. Journalists in the Gulf were required to remain with a military "minder" at all times, and the media were prohibited from publishing numerous categories of information without prior permission from the Ministry of Defense. There were instances of self-censorship by the BBC. For example, BBC Wales refused to broadcast a speech by a vicar which called for peace on the grounds that it was "inappropriate at a sensitive time in the Gulf conflict." All scheduled BBC interviews with a Vietnamese writer in connection with his autobiographical account of the Vietnam War were canceled after a BBC directive said that this sort of material was not suitable for broadcasting during the war. There were also instances of anti-war demonstrations being curtailed. Police
408
United Kingdom
ordered banners with the slogan "Victory to Iraq" to be taken down on a march in North London, and a person carrying a banner with the same slogan was arrested on another march. In another case a member of the International Communist Party was arrested for selling a newspaper with the headline "Only the Workers Can Stop the War Drive." The report is silent on such incidents.
The second major area on which concern focused during 1991 was the threat posed to freedom of expression by Britain's libel laws. Wrongdoing, both by government institutions and private individuals, escapes scrutiny as members of the press operate under fear of large libel judgments against them. It is, for example, widely believed that details about the wrongdoings of Sir Robert Maxwell remained secret until his death because the press feared libel suits from him.
As last year's critique noted, the U.K. continues to have a blasphemy law which is highly criticized not least because of its discriminatory character, which provides protection only for the Church of England.
Meanwhile, the government's adamant refusal to introduce a Freedom of Information Act continues to give rise to serious concern.
Nowhere does the report mention the controversy raised by the detention and deportation of Iraqis and other Arabs during the Gulf War. During January more than 200 such persons were served with notices of deportation on grounds of national security under the Immigration Act of 1971. Most were detained and a few were flown out of the country. On January 18, the government issued new rules prohibiting the entry and extension of stay of Iraqis. Those who already had an extension of stay were ordered to register with the police. Those who wished to challenge their detention and proposed deportation were allowed to do so before a panel which would advise the Home Office. These hearings, which lasted an average of 40 minutes, were held iii secret and without the presence of a lawyer. No evidence was presented by the government, so the detainees left the hearings still ignorant as to the case against them. Those who applied for a panel review were detained in a
409
United Kingdom
disused wing of Pentonville prison, where conditions were such that the International Committee of the Red Cross declared itself "disappointed" and suggested improvements. Thirty of the detainees went on hunger strike in February to protest the conditions, particularly the breakdown of the central heating which left them sleeping in ceils in temperatures well below freezing.
The government ordered an inquiry after it was forced to release all those detained after the end of hostilities. The inquiry, which reported in December, found that those detained or deported had been identified by the security branch MI5 on the basis of outdated and irrelevant information. MIS was unable to produce any evidence to substantiate its claims that any of those detained had links with the Iraqi military or "terrorist" groups, nor to justify the expulsion of others under sweeping Immigration Act powers. However, the inquiry refused to condemn the security services, and said that they were wise to err on the side of caution.
In 1991 the government introduced an Asylum Bill which would restrict significantly the availability of legal aid and representation for those seeking political asylum in the U.K. The bill caused widespread concern among immigration and asylum lawyers, not least because the government proposed that all advice and representation work should be carried out by a single, government-funded body, the United Kingdom Immigration Advisory Service. This body went on record in August stating that it was not in a position to provide an adequate service even with increased resources, and private lawyers practicing in this area staged a series of public demonstrations. While the government has restricted and temporarily shelved the bill, it has announced its commitment to reintroduce it.
Several human rights groups in 1991 criticized the United Kingdom for its treatment of refugees. The report fails to mention, for example, a 1991 Amnesty International report condemning the government for not correcting serious shortcomings in its political asylum procedures. It particularly criticized two areas of government policy which it felt did not meet the requirements of the 1951
410
United Kingdom
Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees or its 1967 Protocol. First, Amnesty claimed that the imposition of visa requirements, enforced through heavy fines on airlines that bring passengers to the country without proper paperwork, prevents genuine asylum seekers from reaching the United Kingdom and having their claims for asylum properly assessed. Second, it condemned the United Kingdom for routinely placing asylum seekers in detention while their claims were assessed.
Northern Ireland
The report's references to what has occurred in Northern Ireland during 1991 are limited in number, too brief and at times distorted. Several important events and issues are given no coverage at all. The State Department seems to have deliberately turned a blind eye to matters which are of major local and international concern.
In its inifial paragraphs describing the United Kingdom as "a constitutional monarchy with a democratic, parliamentary form of government," reference should have been made to the lack of democracy in Northern Ireland. By way of illustration, most laws for Northern Ireland are not made in the form of primary legislation but by an Order in Council procedure in the London Parliament and they cannot be amended even during the short debates devoted to them. Furthermore, local councilors in Northern Ireland have far fewer powers over local services than their counterparts in Great Britain. Housing, health and education are just three of the matters which are run entirely by appointed, not elected, officials.
In the section on political and other extrajudicial killings, the report records that six people were killed by the security forces in Northern Ireland during the year. In highlighting the death of a 19-year-old student (which the police have acknowledged as a tragic mistake), the report is content to say that the police are themselves invesfigating the incident. No reference is made to the refusal of the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) to appoint an investigator from outside the local force, a standard practice in Great Britain. The unreliability of in-house
411
United Kingdom
police investigations is exacerbated by the absence of any elected body to which the force is responsible: unlike elsewhere in the United Kingdom, and contrary to the impression given in the report, the Police Authority for Northern Ireland consists entirely of persons appointed by a government minister. The same applies to the "Independent" Commission for Police Complaints in Northern Ireland. The report gives no space at all to the other five deaths caused by the security forces during 1991, even though each of them occurred in controversial circumstances.
International as well as local human rights organizations have pointed out the deficiencies in existing mechanisms for investigating controversial killings in Northern Ireland, deficiencies which the United Kingdom government has chosen to ignore. The report should have commented on these conflicting positions. In particular, it should have noted that there is widespread dissatisfaction with the way inquests are conducted in Northern Ireland. Families of victims are seriously disadvantaged at these hearings because they are not given access to all relevant documents, are prevented from cross-examining key security force witnesses and are unable to request that a verdict of unlawful killing be returned. Moreover, the rules on inquests in Northern Ireland differ significantly from those in the rest of the United Kingdom, overwhelmingly to the detriment of victims' families. A recent decision of the House of Lords, Devine v Attorney-General for Northern Ireland, has confirmed this discrepancy.
The report does not acknowledge that in some cases the United Kingdom government has avoided adverse publicity ~ as well as possible judicial amendment to the common law governing the use of force in Northern Ireland - by settling out of court claims brought by widows of men killed by the security forces. During 1991 there were at least three examples of such settlements: several thousands of pounds were paid, with no official admission of liability, to the widows of Daniel Doherty, Anthony Hughes and Aidan McAnespie, shot in 1984, 1987 and 1988 respectively. Yet the government has not altered the law on the use of force so that such shootings do not occur in the first place.
412
United Kingdom
It is instructive to mention that in two recent cases charges have been brought against soldiers involved in the deaths of civilians. In August six members of the Parachute Regiment were charged in connection with the killing in Belfast of two teenage joy-riders in September 1990, and in February 1992 two Royal Marine Commandos were charged with the murder of 20-year-old Fergal Caraher and the attempted murder of his brother, Miceäl at Cullyhanna, on December 30, 1990. But in the same month the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions confirmed that no criminal charges would be filed in relation to the January 1990 killing by security forces of three men outside a Belfast bookmaker's shop.
The most blatant distortions and glaring omissions in this report occur in the paragraphs on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. There is the briefest of references to the criticisms of human rights groups concerning physical and psychological abuse of suspected terrorists held in custody for up to seven days in the so-called "holding centres" in Northern Ireland. In fact, during 1991 there was a crescendo of protest at what was allegedly occurring in the holding centers, particularly in the holding center at Castlereagh in Belfast. Two carefully documented dossiers were prepared on this topic by Amnesty International and the independent locally-based Committee on the Administration of Justice (CAJ), which were submitted to the (UN) Committee Against Torture in its review of the United Kingdom's compliance with the UN Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
The CAJ's submission documented ill-treatment alleged by 28 people between May and September 1991. A common allegation was of repeated hitting with the base or flat of the hand for up to 15 minutes at a time; because the blows were not heavy and were kept above the hairline they produced no marks that could be detected by a medical officer. There were other complaints of heavy punching to the stomach, pressure being applied to the temples, fingers and arms being twisted and genitalia being squeezed. Twenty cases of alleged verbal abuse were also recorded and 13 people claimed that police officers made death threats against them. Detainees were told they would be branded
413
United Kingdom
informers by detectives and two women claimed officers threatened to take away their children. People also claimed they were denied sleep and were told that members of their families had been killed. Several alleged that detectives smelt strongly of alcohol during interrogation sessions.
One of the surest ways of diminishing the risk of ill-treatment while in police custody is to require the video-recording of all interviews with suspects. The State Department reports that human rights groups have urged the introduction of this safeguard. In fact, video-recording of interviews has also been recommended by the person appointed by the United Kingdom government to conduct annual reviews of the emergency laws in Northern Ireland (Lord Colville) and by the body appointed by the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland to advise him on whether the law in Northern Ireland adequately protects human rights, (the Standing Advisory Commission). The Independent Commission for Police Complaints in Northern Ireland has also endorsed the proposal. Still the government refuses to implement it, probably because of opposition from the police themselves.
The rapporteur for the Committee Against Torture hearing in November ridiculed the U.K. government's claim that if video recordings were made of police interviews with suspects in holding centers they might fall into paramilitary hands. He also said that the following practices created conditions for abuse: holding suspects incommunicado for 48 hours, extending detentions for up to seven days, denying access to independent medical examinations, applying a reconstructed standard on the admissibility of confession evidence, and removing the right to silence. The rapporteur pointed out that no formal training was given to health professionals in Northern Ireland to help them identify signs of torture, despite this being an obligation under the Convention Against Torture. In April several members of the (UN) Human Rights Committee expressed similar concern about emergency powers in Northern Ireland and called for greater safeguards against their abuse. While the government indicated in parliamentary debates in 1991 that it was considering the appointment of an "independent commissioner" to
414
United Kingdom
oversee the processing of suspects by the police at the holding centers, no such official had been appointed by mid-April 1992.
The State Department's report completely disregards the controversy surrounding the enforced "integration" of republican and loyalist remand prisoners at Crumlin Road jail in Belfast. In November, the worst incident yet in the dispute occurred: two loyalist remand prisoners were murdered by a bomb blast within the jail, presumably the work of republican prisoners. During a "review of operational policy in Belfast prison for the management of paramilitary prisoners from opposing factions," conducted by Lord Colville, the mass of evidence submitted favored the introduction of segregated prison facilities so that prisoners would no longer be at risk from attacks. Lord Colville, however, rejected the weight of this evidence and endorsed existing arrangements.
In its section on arbitrary arrest and detention, the report ignores the very low charge rates for persons detained in Northern Ireland under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA) and the Emergency Provisions Act (EPA), even though such rates can be useful indicators of the extent of arbitrary arrest and detention (which, for example, the State Department relies upon in its country report on El Salvador). In 1989 and 1990, the figures were 27% and 26% for persons detained under the PTA and 52% in both years for persons detained under the EPA; for the first nine months of 1991 the figure for PTA detainees was 25% and for the first three months the figure for EPA detainees was 56%. The actual numbers involved in the EPA cases are small (in 1989, 45, in 1990, 34 and in the first three months of 1991, 9), but the numbers involved in PTA detentions are much larger. In 1989 there were as many as 1,156 persons released without being charged, in 1990 the figure was 1,150 and for the first nine months of 1991, it was 920. These statistics give rise to a reasonable suspicion that powers of arrest are being exercised in Northern Ireland not to charge people with offenses for which there is probable cause to believe they committed, but to detain them for questioning in an attempt to elicit information which might be of use on a subsequent occasion against the same or other suspects.
415
United Kingdom
The report's account of the Emergency Provisions Act of 1991 does not convey the full extent of the special powers it confers. (The original version of this statute, incidentally, was enacted in 1973, not 1978 as indicated in the report.) The report omits to mention, for example, that a soldier, when arresting any person, need not supply the grounds for the arrest, despite the requirements of Article 5(2) of the European Convention on Human Rights and Article 9(2) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). It also neglects to say that the Secretary of State has failed to issue, despite the Act's mandate, the codes of practice regulating the exercise of police and army powers.
As regards detentions under the PTA, it is astonishing that no reference is made in the report to the United Kingdom's derogation from both the European Convention and the ICCPR. Derogation is required because the European Court of Human Rights decided' in Brogan and others v United Kingdom (1988) that detentions without charge for longer than four days and six hours could not be justified unless the government declared that there was a public emergency threatening the life of the United Kingdom and that lengthy detentions (of up to seven days) were strictly required by the exigencies of the situation. The validity of the United Kingdom's derogation is being challenged in Brannigan and McBride v United Kingdom; in December 1991 the European Commission of Human Rights rejected the challenge but it is now pending before the European Court.
A further omission in the report occurs in relation to access to solicitors. The official statistics reveal that in 1989 and 1990 as many as 67% and 52% respectively of persons arrested under the anti-terrorist laws in Northern Ireland were denied access to a solicitor for up to 48 hours. The figure for the first three months of 1991 (the latest available) is 58%. Even when access is eventually granted, subsequent denials of access can be imposed. Most remarkable of all, terrorist suspects in Northern Ireland are not permitted to have a solicitor present when they are being questioned by the police, a practice which is directly contrary to that in England and Wales. Human rights groups and civil libertarians, as well as individual solicitors in Northern Ireland, have
416
United Kingdom
been campaigning to change the practice. However, the Court of Appeal in Northern Ireland in a December ruling appears to have endorsed the police's right to deny access even if based only on unsubstantiated allegations by police {Ex parte McKenna).
The report's section on denial of a fair public trial begins by saying that "fair trial is provided by law." This is not true: there is no unambiguous statement to that effect in any legislative or common law rule in the United Kingdom, while in Northern Ireland so many adjustments have been made to the traditional principles governing the conduct of trials that there is considerable doubt whether internationally recognized standards of fairness are being met.
The most obvious respect in which "terrorist" trials in Northern Ireland differ from "ordinary" trials is the absence of a jury. The report is incorrect when it states that the right to trial by jury was suspended "because of intimidation of the judiciary, jurors and solicitors." Only one or two instances of witness intimidation were documented prior to 1973 when the juryless, single judge "Diplock court" trials were instituted for certain "scheduled" offenses. Contrary to the report's assertion, the Judicial Statistics for Northern Ireland, issued by the Northern Ireland Court Service, show that the conviction rate of those who plead not guilty in Diplock courts is not "virtually identical" to the rate in regular courts. It is also apparent that many ordinary or "non-scheduled" offenses are tried in Diplock Courts. This arises as a result of the rule (embodied in Section 2(2) of the 1991 Act) that so long as one of the offenses with which a person is charged is a scheduled offense, he or she must be tried in a Diplock court.
The principle that trials should be held in public is not always fully adhered to in the Diplock courts. In several cases, including some tried during 1991, the identity and appearance of witnesses have been hidden from defendants and from the public gallery, allegedly on grounds of public safety and national security.
In the report's discussion of the 1988 change to the law on the right to silence, it asserts inaccurately that "the law itself has not actually
417
United Kingdom
been invoked in a case since its inception." There have been several reported cases where the law was invoked which are reviewed in a 1991 law review article. The author concludes that the 1988 change is neither fair nor effective. Leave to appeal to the House of Lords has been granted in only one of these cases.
Notwithstanding the many serious problems in the administration of justice in Northern Ireland, the mandate of the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice does not extend to these concerns. The report states, however, that the government has indicated it would consider implementing the Royal Commission's conclusions in Northern Ireland. If true, such an action would be subject to a charge of gross unfairness as there would have been no organized input to the Commission's deliberations from Northern Ireland residents.
In the section on interference with privacy, the report fails to record the use of "house arrests" (even though this is possibly a breach of Article 5(1) of the European Convention), and routine body searches during house searches. In Pierce and others v Ministry of Defence, the county court judge for Belfast found that British soldiers had falsely imprisoned occupants of a house when the occupants were prevented from leaving the house to buy cigarettes while a warrantless search was continuing; the search of the occupants themselves was also held to be unlawful because there were no reasonable grounds for it. Damages were awarded to each occupant. The section also makes no mention of the refusal of the British authorities to help the families of prisoners from Northern Ireland who are serving sentences in jails in Great Britain by transferring the prisoners to a jail in Northern Ireland. This contrasts with the readiness with which British soldiers who are imprisoned in Northern Ireland are transferred in the opposite direction. The effect of the authorities' attitude is to punish the prisoners' families as well as the prisoners themselves.
The section on freedom of movement says that persons may not be excluded from mainland Britain under the Prevention of Terrorism Act if they have been born there. This is not correct. The exception
418
United Kingdom
covers only British citizens who have been ordinarily resident in Great Britain for the preceding three years.
The section dealing with discrimination fails to say that the absence of laws on racial discrimination in Northern Ireland is a violation of both the European Convention on Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The plight of "travelling people" is ignored also: the several hundred members of this community are discriminated against in all sorts of ways by public and private bodies in Northern Ireland. Their needs with respect to accommodation, health and education are systematically unmet. Human rights groups have been urging the United Kingdom government for years to recognize and deal with these injustices, but so far to no avail.
Hong Kong
The State Department's report on human rights in Hong Kong during 1991 describes key events, although in some instances it is short on detail and evidences a reluctance to make its own assessment of human rights concerns described. It appropriately notes that the most significant development in the protection of human rights during the year was the enactment of the Bill of Rights which came into effect on June 8. The Bill is modeled on the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) which is applied in Hong Kong by virtue of the fact that the United Kingdom is a party. According to the 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration, the provisions of the ICCPR, as well as the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) and International Labor Organization Conventions in force in Hong Kong, are to remain so after the 1997 reversion of control of the colony to China. This is to be accomplished by the enactment of laws; the Bill of Rights embodies rights guaranteed by the ICCPR. Despite calls for similar legislation regarding the ICESCR, the government has taken no action.
While Article 3 of the Bill of Rights repeals inconsistent existing legislation, it exempted six laws from such repeal for one year, with another one year extension possible. The report mentions the "freeze,"
419
United Kingdom
but does not identify the exempted laws, some of which have been used to restrict basic rights otherwise guaranteed under the ICCPR. The laws are the Immigration Ordinance, the Societies Ordinance, the Crimes Ordinance, the Prevention of Bribery Ordinance, the Independent Commission Against Corruption Ordinance and the Police Force Ordinance.
Since its passage, the Bill of Rights has been an important factor in the legislative process and the administration of justice system, particularly in the field of criminal law. Judicial challenges have dominated the early phase of legal development under the legislation and a body of case law has begun to develop.
The first Court of Appeal decision on the Bill of Rights struck down certain statutory presumptions in the Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as being contrary to the guarantee of the presumption of innocence. Following that decision, which is noted in the report, there have been a large number of similar challenges to various statutory presumptions (a common statutory device found in many legislative provisions), some successful and others not.
Because resort to judicial challenges is expensive and often tortuous, some members of the Legislative Council (LegCo) and others have called for the creation of a Human Rights Commission to provide an efficient and inexpensive administrative mechanism to assist in implementing the law. The Ad Hoc Group of the LegCo agreed generally on the need for such a commission but split on whether it should have adjudicative powers. As a result, the government announced shortly after the Bill of Rights came into force that it would not set up the commission but would instead form a special committee responsible for human rights education. However, nothing has been done in this respect so far. Human rights groups and civil liberties lawyers in Hong Kong believe that the first year's experience under the Bill of Rights has confirmed that many worthwhile cases cannot proceed due to considerations of cost, a concern not addressed by the State Department.
420
United Kingdom
The report's statement in the section on fair and public trial that this right is guaranteed and practiced ignores the long delays in criminal trials that have become common. It is not unusual for a defendant to have to wait for 15 months between initial committal and trial; delays of up to two and one-half years have been noted. In July, in the course of deciding a bail application, a High Court judge noted the problem, stating that it had reached an alarming level. That case has prompted a series of similar challenges. While a variety of factors have been identified as contributing to the long delays, including too few judges, inefficient case flow management and cumbersome procedures, the government has not responded to calls for a comprehensive review of the judicial system to address this problem.
The report appropriately identifies the extraordinary powers of the Independent Commission Against Corruption (ICAC) in its discussion of the arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home or correspondence. As noted, the governing law of the ICAC is one of those exempted from coverage of the Bill of Rights. The report is correct in stating that this law may be modified as a result of the Bill. Yet, it should have provided more detail regarding the ICAC and its authority and expressed its own assessment of the ICAC's impact on human rights rather than merely stating that "some human rights groups have criticized it." The ICAC enjoys wide power to intercept private communications. In a bribery prosecution in late 1991, it came to light that the government possessed copies of personal correspondence between a prosecution witness in ICAC's custody and his wife. The report neglected entirely the wide latitude provided the government under the Telecommunication Ordinance under which the Governor has an absolute discretion to authorize any person to intercept any telecommunication.
The report should also have noted the apparent arbitrary application of another exempted law, the Immigration Ordinance. This law requires Hong Kong residents to produce identity cards on demand. While designed to control immigration, there is suspicion that it has been used to harass government critics. In July, the South China Morning Post reported that authorities conducted an identity card check of
421
United Kingdom
members of the audience attending a courtroom hearing on the legality of a community protest against the construction of a crematorium.
While the report's discussion of the freedom of speech and press in Hong Kong is generally accurate, it should have mentioned the government's amendment in May of the Summary Offences Ordinance, which makes it an offense to raise funds for a non-charitable or political purpose without obtaining prior permission. According to administrative guidelines published at the same time as the amendment, permission will be given only on condition that the fundraising activities occur in designated locations. This amendment foreclosed the United Democrats of Hong Kong (UDHK), a major political party, from soliciting donations on the street prior to the September LegCo elections. UDHK then organized a fundraising concert, but was not allowed to broadcast advertisements for the concert on the grounds that the advertisement was political in nature and thus prohibited by legislation governing electronic media. As a result, UDHK's fundraising efforts In preparation for the election were severely inhibited. There are currently two sets of rules in force regulating fundraising - more liberal standards for charities and a more stringent system for political activities. While some regulatory system may be necessary to protect the public against fraud and abuse, the restrictions on political fundraising activities exceed legitimate regulation.
The report mentions the convictions of five activists for unpermitted use of megaphones (loudhailers) under the Public Order Ordinance. This law also controls the route and time of processions as well as the use of amplification devices and publicity materials. The decision was overturned by the High Court in January on the ground that, as no such prosecution had been brought for over 20 years, the defendants were under the legitimate expectation that there would be no such prosecution. What the report fails to consider in its praise for this demonstration of an independent judiciary is that no future defendants will be able to use this defense, as they would hardly be able to establish such a legitimate expectation in light of this prosecution. It thereby ignores the chilling effect of the prosecution itself.
422
United Kingdom
The report mentions the government's denial of entry to several overseas Chinese students with valid visas to seeking to attend a conference on democracy in China. It should have also noted that in May customs officials impounded a replica of the Goddess of Democracy statue from the 1989 Tiananmen Square pro-democracy demonstrations which was to be used in a demonstration commemorating that event.
The report's discussion of freedom of association inexplicably omits the Societies Ordinance, one of those exempted from the Bill of Rights. This law provides stringent controls on all forms of association. Basically, any organization with a clear objective and a hierarchal structure, without registration under the law, can be deemed an unlawful society and any officer, member or supporters of an unlawful society may be subject to criminal charge. The Registrar of Societies is the Police Commissioner; the Registrar can refuse to register any society on the sweeping and vague grounds that is likely to be used for a purpose "prejudicial to or incompatible with peace, welfare or good order," or that is affiliated with a political organization abroad. The Registrar may also inspect societies' records and direct changes in organizational statutes. While some groups have avoided the restrictions of the Societies Ordinance by registering as commercial organizations, the threat to lawful activities of legitimate groups remains. In early 1992, the Hong Kong Bar Association received a warning letter from the Police Commissioner that it might be regarded as an unlawful society in view of its failure to submit information on its constitutional amendments and changes in membership of its executive council.
The report's discussion of freedom of movement notes a July court decision which, on the basis of the Bill of Rights, struck down a law which prevented people from leaving the territory for nonpayment of taxes. In fact, the case involved a judgment debt, rather than taxes, and was overturned on appeal in November. The appeals court held, inter alia, that the Bill of Rights does not apply to disputes between private citizens.
In its worker rights discussion, the report does not mention the February decision of the Committee on Freedom of Association of the
423
United Kingdom
International Labor Organization. The ILO committee concluded that, in connection with an October 1990 warning issued to leaders of the Post Office Union, the government had "interfered in the workers* basic right to organise their administration and activities and to formulate their programmes, contrary to Article 3 of Convention No. 87." The committee found that the government had threatened retaliatory measures against the workers who at the time had merely expressed their intention to hold a sit-in to pursue legitimate interests.
The report's discussion of the situation regarding Vietnamese boat people notes the increase in the numbers of Vietnamese arriving during the year (to a total of 20,200, approximately three times more than arrived during 1990); that "observers" noted that the government had "substantially improved" the screening process for determining refugee status; that new arrivals are held in "austere, crowded" detention centers" that are "prison-like" and experienced "sporadic, internecine violence" between residents; and, that under an agreement between the government and Vietnam, 87 asylum seekers were forcibly repatriated to Vietnam by year's end. Finally, the report reiterates U.S. policy which opposes the "forcible return of persons classified as nonrefugees" and its support of voluntary repatriation.
This description is disappointing is several respects. While the screening procedures by which asylum seekers' claims are evaluated have improved, they remain significantly flawed in practice, creating a substantial risk that some with a well-founded fear of persecution may be returned to Vietnam. Deficiencies in the process include:
• Adequate legal assistance and advice is not available to asylum seekers at key points in the process. Pre-screening counseling is virtually non-existent, a circumstance which often results in asylum seekers being unprepared at the screening interview. Adequate counseling would not only protect asylum seekers' rights, but would be useful in giving the asylum seeker enough information to decide intelligently whether to wait as long as two years for a screening interview or to consider other options, including voluntary repatriation. While legal assistance can be
424
United Kingdom
offered to some applicants in preparing cases for review by the appeals panel, no legal representation is permitted at the review itself.
•	The asylum seeker's interview with the immigration officer is not public. The officer is assisted by an interpreter, many of whom are ethnic Vietnamese who left Vietnam before 1975 and who have little familiarity with post-1975 terminology. The interview is not read back to the asylum seeker to confirm its accuracy. Immigration officers have no meaningful way to check disputed facts or correct translation errors.
•	The reasons for a denial of an application in the first instance are not provided to the asylum seeker.
•	The asylum seeker has no right to appear before the panel determining his appeal of denial of refugee status. The panel is headed by a former judge, but is organized in two-member panels, the members of which do not have legal backgrounds or expertise with respect to refugee issues. The decisions of the Refugee Status Review Board continue to reflect an unduly restrictive application of legal criteria for refugee status and the failure to accord the benefit of the doubt to applicants.
•	While the office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has unrestricted access to asylum seekers, due to limited resources, it can only play a limited role in monitoring the screening and review process. For example, UNHCR representatives have been able to observe only a small fraction of the cases.
The deficiencies in the screening interview are illustrated by a February decision of the Hong Kong High Court in which it found an interview so flawed as to warrant a new hearing. In that case, the immigration officer had written incorrectly in his report that the Vietnamese asylum seeker. Do Giau, had worked in a government-run factory. This directly contradicted the applicant's assertion that the
425
United Kingdom
Vietnamese government had denied him identity papers because of his family's anti-Communist past and that because of that denial, he had been forced to live an underground life. While the decision was narrowly drawn and did not invalidate the entire screening process, the judge chastised the immigration officer's overall lack of care and thoroughness and recommended that asylum seekers be allowed to review the immigration officers' reports to check for inaccuracies.
Since this decision, voluntary agency personnel have reported some improvements in the process. But the State Department's characterization of them as "substantial" overstates the case. It is useful to note that approval rates for first instance decisions in Hong Kong remain the lowest of any of the Asian countries to which Vietnamese asylum seekers have travelled. As of mid-1991, the Hong Kong rate was 13%, Malaysia 27%, Indonesia 40% and the Philippines 43%. These disparities are surprisingly large, and further call into question whether the Hong Kong process affords asylum seekers a fair opportunity to present their case. One test of the adequacy of the screening and review process is what happens to refugees returned to Vietnam. While the Hong Kong authorities assert that there is no reported case of persecution of returned refugees, according to Asia Watch, returnees have been subjected to interrogations, surveillance, job discrimination, fines and extortion by local officials.
The report's description of conditions in the detention centers as "crowded" and "prison-like" is correct but does not provide an accurate picture. Asia Watch reports that the conditions in the centers are "more squalid and dangerous than those of local prisons. Inmates, who are referred to by number rather than by name, live behind barbed wire, in corrugated metal huts lined by rows of triple bunk beds, or in some cases, in large tents." Assault, rape, substance abuse and gang violence within the centers remain serious problems. In February 1992, 23 people, including five children, were killed in a riot in Shek Kong camp. Another 126 people were injured as rival gangs battled each other. The Lawyers Committee continues to believe that the conditions in the detention centers are the direct result of an inhumane detention policy of the Hong Kong government which has since 1982 been purposefiilly
426
United Kingdom
designed and implemented to deter additional asylum seekers from coming to Hong Kong. These deterrent measures are inhumane, unnecessary and incompatible with international human rights law.
The report accurately notes that the United States opposes Hong Kong's forced repatriation program. Its opposition is muted and less forceful than in the past, in part because of its own forced repatriation, without benefit of any screening procedure, of Haitian asylum seekers.
427
