GUATEMALA
In 1991 the United States continued to withhold Guatemala's military aid, suspended in late 1990, due to insufficient progress on human rights. Not surprisingly, the State Department report notes the continuation of serious rights violations by government forces, and little prosecution or punishment of the responsible personnel. However, like its predecessor, it understates the dimensions of the problem. In addition, the State Department discovers improvement in a situation substantially unchanged since 1990.
The report notes that in 1991, more Guatemalan organizations and individuals decided to decry openly the violence that characterizes the nation's political life. This development, which occurred in the face of a year-long wave of intimidation and violence against human rights groups, trade union leaders, journalists and opposition figures, is cited as "the greatest improvement" during 1991. However, the violent consequences of vocal protest remained unchanged. Numbing daily reports of violence continue to fill the media and human rights reports. It appears, perversely, that Guatemala's killers derive an advantage from their own bloody legacy. The decade of terror which cowed an entire population into silence is now the referent against which the situation is judged. Hence, while the violent consequences of protest remain unchanged, the victims' determination to denounce abuses may be hailed as a noteworthy increase in respect for human rights.
Other sources, such as the United Nations' Human Rights Expert, reported an undiminished level of violence, and more importantly, the continued unwillingness of the security apparatus to submit to civilian authority and the rule of law.
The report credits President Serrano with demonstrating a commitment to control the military and end the impunity enjoyed by security forces and government-linked paramilitary squads. While certain notable developments, including convictions of two army personnel and arrest of several others during his term, are helpful, the president's actions have undermined his determined rhetoric. During the
117
Guatemala
investigation of the murder of anthropologist Myrna Mack, his office circulated a report, prepared by the presidential security force which employed the only named suspect, which portrayed the killing as resulting from a black market deal gone sour. In addition, his allegations in Washington that Amflcar Méndez, leader of the indigenous people's human rights group Rununel Junam Council of Ethnic Communities (CERJ), is "working with the insurrection" and that CERJ is a "parallel organization" to the insurgent movement oifer encouragement to those responsible for the murders of eight CERJ activists during 1991. That President Serrano later refused to disavow such comments suggests that they convey a deliberate message.
One move that the Serrano administration could make to foster fundamental change in the human rights picture, which the State Department could have emphasized to a greater degree, is the abolition of the civil defense patrols (known widely by their Spanish acronym, PACs). As the report acknowledges, they are a major source of human rights violations. In addition to being, as a rule, involuntary, contrary to Guatemalan and international law, they answer to no authority or control. Although Guatemala's army plays a crucial role in the formation, instruction and arming of PACs, it denies all responsibility or control over them, claiming that they are autonomous entities. The army's abdication of responsibility cannot be reconciled with either its harsh reprisal against PAC opponents or the PACs' military utility. Moreover, it sends a message of impunity to the PAC personnel. Not surprisingly, and quite likely by design, PACs have become the surrogate local strong arm of the military, while affording it deniability, plausible or otherwise.
The UN Human Rights Expert, in a report released at approximately the same time as that of the State Department, concluded that the only acceptable solution is the abolition and disarming of PACs. President Serrano's failure, like that of his predecessor, to address the fundamental problem these groups pose is a glaring issue which the report continues to ignore. In one instance, the report gives the president undeserved credit for action taken against PAC abuse. In the discussion of political and extrajudicial killing, it refers to the arrest of
118
Guatemala
two ex-PAC leaders for killings in Chunim^, after several attempts, "due to the intervention of President Serrano." It fails to mention that this only occurred after the Inter-American Court of Human Rights intervened in the case and ordered protective measures, causing the Guatemalan government embarrassment.
The convictions of an officer and a soldier for participation in the December 1990 massacre of civilians peacefully protesting army violations in Santiago Atitlin are themselves noteworthy. However, the army's edict that it would acknowledge no institutional responsibility and permit prosecution of only these two apparently prevented other action on the case, despite the human rights ombudsman's report charging that many more than two persons bore responsibility for the 13 deaths and 17 injuries which resulted. The report should also have noted the sad destiny of the few convictions obtained for human rights violations: nearly automatic reversal by appellate courts on questionable legal grounds, a phenomenon discussed with evident concern by the UN Human Rights Expert:
It is disturbing that in practice the few convictions handed down at [the trial level] in cases of human rights violations have almost always been quashed on appeal, despite considerable evidence to substantiate the initial • convictions .... To be sure the Expert is not in a position to assess the correctness of any judgement rendered by national tribunals. However, it must strike the outside observer as an anomaly that, in cases having a political background, almost no conviction by the trial judge in first instance is upheld on appeal and becomes final. Clearly, with such results, the population has little faith in the proper administration of justice, i.e. one of the basic pillars of a State governed by the rule of law.
The discussion of political killings is similar, although noticeably more brief, to that contained in the 1990 report. The items mentioned in last year's critique apply to this year's report. In particular, the report again minimizes violence against university students and faculty. In fact.
119
Guatemala
it entirely omits mention of students as particular targets of attack, despite evidence of serious violence. The archdiocesan human rights office reported eight students extrajudicially executed in 1991; another seven were reported "disappeared." At the University of San Carlos campus in Guatemala City, the headquarters of the Association of University Students (AEU) was damaged by a bomb exploding outside its offices. In response to the AEU's statement holding the government and armed forces responsible, the Minister of Defense brought defamation proceedings against the group's leader. A month after the AEU bombing, a bomb exploded outside the former law faculty building, injuring a passerby. Five other devices were discovered and deactivated in university buildings.
The report attributes the majority of government-linked killings to the suspicion, well-founded or not, that the victims were sympathetic to or supportive of armed opposition groups. This formulation reduces political violence in Guatemala to an extralegal response to an illegal insurgency, and, without citing sources, credits its perpetrators with the belief that they fight insurrection when they stifle legitimate expression. Human rights groups and representatives of the victimized sectors themselves believe that it is their exercise of basic rights -- collective bargaining, association, speech and press, that makes them targets, while allegations of insurgent leanings or activities are mere pretext. In any event, the report should have made clear that even if true, sympathy or support for the armed opposition does not justify extrajudicial executions. Linking victims to the insurgent forces tars them politically without adding to the analysis of the killings.
The discussion of the Myrna Mack case illustrates the report's failure to adequately describe the full dimensions of a justice system in collapse. For example, the report does not mention that: no less than 12 judges have handled the case; many of these have attempted to escape responsibility for investigating the crime; the National Police inexcusably, failed to take and/or preserve critical crime scene evidence; the investigating agents concealed their report and substituted in court a redacted version which omitted evidence of military involvement, the name of a suspect and the political motive for the crime; the police
120
Guatemala
investigators were obviously frightened by their discoveries, even before their chief, José Merida Escobar, was murdered.
The cursory mention of Merida Escobar's murder -- "a crime that might be linked" to Myrna Mack's murder - should have also included factors which make the connection obvious, if not inevitable. Merida Escobar, head of the homicide investigation unit, was shot within 100 meters of National Police headquarters only weeks after giving incriminating testimony which he privately remarked was his "death sentence." He had recently received death threats referring to the Mack case, and, like Mack, was under surveillance prior to his murder. His detective partner fled Guatemala with his family after police protection was suddenly withdrawn, and he too found himself under surveillance. Even Guatemala's human rights ombudsman called the Merida Escobar killing "a warning" to all those who are pushing for an investigation into Myrna Mack's murder.
The report should have detailed the discovery, according to the judiciary's Forensic Medicine Department, of approximately 108 clandestine cemeteries, which has helped to determine the fate of numerous persons "disappeared" in past years. The government has often asserted that such persons actually joined the armed opposition groups or were the victims of common crime. This omission is especially noteworthy in light of the State Department's 1991 report on Nicaragua, which again highlights the discovery of clandestine graves as a key to resolving the fate of "disappeared" persons.
Perhaps most glaring is the report's omission of the massive campaign of threats and intimidation directed against nearly the entire leadership of trade union, human rights and opposition groups -- one published report noted that 90% of the leaders of such organizations received death threats in 1991. At least 18 such persons have fled into exile, while others were murdered as threatened. Under the circumstances, any diminution in reported violence may reflect a change in tactics rather than increased respect for human rights.
121
Guatemala
A January 1992 United Nations document cites an "alarming rise," not a decline as the report asserts, in violence against street children. The contradiction may be more apparent than real: the report specifically refers to reports of police abuse, which presumably does not include acts by private security agents. In any event, despite government "efforts to end" such abuse, further incidents are not as isolated as the report implicitly suggests. In at least one other case. National Police agents helped plainclothesmen grab a teenage shoplifter, Edwin Estéban Rodríguez García, and put him into an unmarked car. The police agents rode for a while before getting out, while the other captors continued to a clandestine location. There, they beat and tortured the victim before throwing him in a gulley.
Meanwhile, workers at Casa Alianza, the Guatemala affiliate of Covenant House, which shelters street children, continue to suffer at the hands of the police. In January, plainclothes policemen were spotted taking two workers into police headquarters. Not until U.S. Ambassador Thomas Stroock intervened did the police, who had steadfastly denied holding them, relent and release the two.
On a factual point, the report's description of one case, that of the kidnapping of Julio Chocalü Ben (Julio Chualcuben in the report), in the torture discussion is at variance with testimony Mr. Chocalú gave to others. The report indicates that he claimed his military captors accused him of being a guerrilla; according to testimony he gave to the archdiocesan human rights office and CERJ, he was kidnapped as a result of a land dispute between his father and his uncle, the latter of whom was one of his abductors.
The sections on arbitrary interference with privacy, excessive force and violations of the laws of war suffer from the report's piecemeal depiction of military strategy. Reference to "credible reports that those who refuse to serve [in PACs] have suffered serious abuse, including death" understates the widespread campaign of intimidation and violence documented by observers. Further, many indigenous rural communities, including "Communities in Resistance," which refuse to permit creation of PACs, suffer from a deliberate military policy to cut off travel, flow
122
Guatemala
of food, services and supplies, amounting to a policy which illegally and forcibly isolates entire civilian communities from the rest of the nation. The State Department should join the United Nations Expert and human rights organizations in calling upon the army to "revise profoundly" its rural military strategy in this regard. This includes the forcible recruiting practices which have never been regulated by law and are arbitrary in all respects except their disproportionate burden on indigenous youths.
The report uses the passive voice to describe official incursions into private homes, documents and communications: applicable constitutional protections "are not always respected." This formulation minimizes a problem which is an all but integral part of military tactics, especially in rural areas. By contrast, the report's description regarding Nicaragua, where this problem is no more severe, cites "numerous credible reports" of intrusions and restates the issue several times. The disparity between the two country reports should be cause for concern to the State Department, which has made evenhanded assessment a primary objective of its human rights reporting.
The report's description of the alleged aerial attack against the "guerrilla-controlled community" of Caba suggests that the reports were simply incorrect. President Serrano's swift response to the incident, replacing the Air Force Commander, belies the report's facile portrayal of a non-event.
The report notes that the government did not hinder international human rights groups. Yet local groups suffered an overwhelming campaign of threats and violence — something far more drastic than the isolated instances suggested by the discussion. This great disparity indicates that Guatemalan authorities are far more concerned with encouraging international assistance than promoting human rights as such. The United Nations Expert noted the stark situation: "It is alarming and surprising that the [Guatemalan] human rights organizations have suffered heavily during 1991, even paying a considerable death toll." Eight members of CERJ were killed in 1991. There were many reports of intimidation against those who assisted the excavation of
123
Guatemala
clandestine cemeteries. Government human rights monitors were also victimized, including an assistant to the human rights ombudsman who suffered two violent attacks in 1991. The report's assessment of this vital issue is simply inadequate.
The report occasionally employs subtle innuendo to undermine the credibility of local human rights monitors and their allegations. For instance, "report[s]" by Amilcar Méndez (who spent part of the year in exile) that President Serrano made unfair statements charging him with guerrilla involvement are manifestly more than that: they are public and unsubstantiated allegations of treason. In Guatemala's well-documented climate of violence, such incidents are literally life and death matters. The report's dilution of the facts winks at deliberately dangerous signals sent by Guatemala's highest civilian leader.
With regard to the international community's expressions of concern for human rights violations in Guatemala, the response of the Serrano government has been essentially political. President Serrano has repeatedly cast the issue of suspended military aid as one of Guatemalan dignity, in which insuring compliance with human rights conditions constitutes an affront to Guatemalan sovereignty. On one occasion he accused the international human rights organizations of participating in a campaign of "orchestrated slander" against his government. Referring to human rights workers, he said in December 1991, "[mjany persons live well, receive high salaries, to speak ill of us. They get paid to misinform." "Verbal charges," he complained, are the only basis for public allegations by human rights groups. Within the Guatemalan universe of heightened fear, non-existent prosecution and/or protection and few survivors of human rights violations, the absence of "hard" evidence is, to say the least, unremarkable. President Serrano's comments are hardly consistent with his oft-stated commitment to human rights.
Labor unions and their members suffer not simply from individualized attacks and ineffective bureaucracies and courts. The hostility to exercise of these rights is more fundamental, more dangerous and more widespread than the report suggests.
124
Guatemala
Standing alone, Guatemala's Labor Code -- "a procedural and legal nightmare" - embodies violations of worker rights, according to the AFL-CIO, which petitioned the United States Trade Representative in 1991 to remove Guatemala's trading preferences due to rights violations. For example, the ridiculously low fines for illegal retaliations against unionists -- typically under $20.00 ~ are an economic incentive to violate the law rather than comply. In September, the AFL-CIO charged that movement toward a revised code was hampered by government inaction.
Increased use by employers (including government agencies) of "solidarity" associations - actually a means of supplanting collective bargaining initiatives and retaliating against pro-union employees - is cause for concern. The report appears to ratify, without assessing, hollow government responses to criticisms of these groups: "The Government made clear these associations exist as civic organizations and, as such, need not limit the ability of legal trade unions to function." The report should have discussed how the government rebutted evideilce that their formation process includes virulent anti-union indoctrination, or that once the association is formed, recalcitrant or pro-union workers must choose between membership in the association and unemployment. Since the government classifies them as civic associations, "solidarity" groups can obtain legal recognition in days, not the years required for labor unions. In addition, there is an effort underway to allow these management-controlled associations to bargain collectively on behalf of workers.
As noted above, the report improperly minimizes the degree of intimidation and violence against trade unionists. It also fails to justify its conclusion that such violence is primarily the work of employers' "thugs." Nor does it explain its apparent distinction between these "thugs" and those who claim Guatemala's other victims; the report concedes that the latter are generally linked to the security forces. In addition, it does not discuss the authorities' failure to mount a convincing effort to prevent and/or prosecute violations by any party.
125
