HONDURAS
The State Department's 1991 report effectively conveys the continuing human rights reality faced by the Honduran people. In addition to documenting violations perpetrated by the military and the police (which forms part of the military's security apparatus), the report also highlights the profound institutional failures of the prosecutors and courts which preclude effective human rights protection. With candor which would have been unthinkable only a few years ago, the recent report peels off the thin veneer of formal governmental order, exposing the military's propensity to violence and hapless institutional efforts to administer justice fairly. As the report acknowledges, whether through incompetence, lack of will or both, the justice system serves to preserve rank and privilege, not the rule of law.
The report correctly concludes that the "principal human rights problems are extrajudicial killings, arbitrary and incommunicado detention, and torture . . . and the impunity of members of the Armed Forces." Accountability for such abuses is virtually nonexistent because, as the report states, "the criminal Justice system is unable to protect the rights of ordinary citizens owing to the Government's failure to exercise the political will to insist on accountability for human rights violations, [and] to ensure the independence of judges and courts . . . ."
All law enforcement is in the hands of the military. When human rights violations occur, whether committed by the police or the regular military, the armed forces as an institution close ranks around the accused, insisting that jurisdiction for such crimes fall to military courts. As there can be no public scrutiny or oversight of opaque military judicial procedures, defendants are given preferential treatment and impunity is the inevitable result.
The report correctly points out the problems associated with the longstanding practice of referring all cases of military abuse to military courts. When crimes against civilians are committed by uniformed personnel {when unrelated to official duties), the military justice system claims jurisdiction. Despite the large number of violations where
134
Honduras
overwhelming evidence exists of military culpability, the report flatly states that "no one has yet been sentenced for these crimes." Moreover, the report points out, "no arrests or convictions were made in the cases of possible political killings from previous years."
While acknowledging the dominant role played by the military in security matters, and the weaknesses of Honduras' civilian institutions, the report overreaches to conclude that the "military now plays a less intrusive role in the country's civilian government." Without supporting evidence that the military's political and economic power is eroding, this judgment is not only unwarranted, but also misleading.
The report makes only passing reference to the government's adoption of a sweeping amnesty, which further insulates the military from juridical scrutiny for past abuses. In discussing the "full and unconditional" amnesty for "political and related crimes" committed before June 1991, the report focuses exclusively on its application to "some 13 persons incarcerated for crimes against the State and ¿n unspecified number of persons jailed on charges involving land invasion." Completely omitted from the discussion is an analysis of the amnesty's relevance for the military. An amnesty which effectively exempts the military from criminal investigation and prosecution for crimes against civilians, including torture, assault and summary execution, represents not only a miscarriage of justice, but also a serious impediment to civilian efforts to hold the military accountable for human rights violations. It legitimizes and legalizes the impunity the military routinely enjoys.
The amnesty also dealt a fatal blow to efforts by nongovernmental human rights organizations and families of victims to investigate the widespread "disappearances" and state-sponsored killings during the 1980s. Current nongovernmental efforts to challenge the military's impunity are severely handicapped by closing off continued investigations into past human rights crimes. By failing to mention celebrated past cases of torture and murder, the report misses an opportunity to insist that justice denied weakens efforts to hold the military accountable. For example, despite efforts by the Honduran
135
Honduras
Commission on Human Rights (CODEH) and family members, there has been no progress in the investigation of the January 1988 assassination of Miguel Angel Pavón, a prominent human rights activist. Greater attention in the report to the consequence of the government's inability to prosecute perpetrators of past violations of human rights would have strengthened the discussion of the military's impunity, a central theme in any analysis of human rights in Honduras.
The report correctly points out that in contrast to the past, many of the continuing violations are committed by members of the Armed Forces for "personal motives." Particularly commendable is the discussion of the murder of Riccy Mabel Martinez, who was apparently raped and murdered by two high-ranking military officers. The military predictably sought to cover up the entire sordid affair by assigning jurisdiction to a military court. The report mentions the U.S. embassy's energetic public protest and declaration that an open judicial process was the sine qua non for the just resolution of the crime. The military reluctantly decommissioned the officers, expelling them from the military, thus subjecting them to the jurisdiction of civilian courts. This case is an excellent example of how a commitment to human rights on the part of the embassy can make a crucial difference.
For the most part, ideological epithets aimed at opposition groups, which would have been the norm a few short years ago, have virtually disappeared from the report. One notable exception is the State Department's description of the National Central of Farm Workers (CNTC), a peasant union which has been in the forefront of struggles over land tenure. In a throwback to the past, the report prefaces its discussion of violent reprisals against CNTC organizers by labeling the organization "Marxist-led." The report then mentions the death of Manuel de Jesus Guerra, a popular CNTC leader who was organizing land invasions and support for striking electrical workers when he was murdered on December 11 in northern Honduras. The report states that "although the CNTC blamed the Government for the crime, Guerra could also have been targeted by landowners for his advocacy of squatters' rights or killed as a result of internal CNTC power struggles." While the CNTC has demanded a full investigation, little has been
136
Honduras
resolved. By hypothesizing that Guerra may have been killed by other CNTC members, the report unwisely legitimizes assertions of the military which sought to impede efforts for a full inquiry. Shortly after the murder, General Luis Alonso Discua Elvir stated that "sometimes martyrs are sacrificed [within an] organization to achieve national sympathy and support for their cause."
Trade unions as well as peasant organizations continue to bear the brunt of human rights violations. Worker rights, while protected by the Constitution, are often violated in practice. While acknowledging company-led intimidation and harassment of workers seeking to exercise their rights, the report unfortunately fails to communicate adequately the government's hostility toward union organizing efforts and legal strikes. According to CODEH, the government "used violent eviction and the militarization of the work place as its main strategies to solve labor conflicts." For example, the report fails to mention several examples of unjustified military intrusion in labor management conflicts, including the temporary detention of 60 striking members of the brewery union (STIBYS), who, according to the authorities, "were taken to the police station to warn them against disturbing the public order."
These shortcomings are mentioned simply because they stand out in an otherwise laudable report. As was discussed above, the report generally eschews ideology in favor of a straightforward analysis of Honduras' human rights record. Last year, the State Department resisted the temptation to criticize the political preferences of nongovernmental human rights organizations. This year the report goes even further and affirms the work of CODEH, Honduras' well-known human rights monitor. Citing the failure of the government to establish an effective human rights agency, the report states that "CODEH, with its network of offices throughout Honduras, is often the only recourse available to victims of human rights violations, particularly those living in rural areas."
The report gives the current administration headed by President Leonardo Callejas the benefit of the doubt by signalling its intention to improve the country's human rights situation. President Callejas'
137
Honduras
decision to create an Office of Professional Responsibility was characterized as "promising . . . [although] unproven." Until the problem of impunity is remedied, the Office of Professional Responsibility will remain just another unfulfilled promise, and justice will remain conspicuously absent.
138
