HAITI
December 1990 and January 1991 marked the first time in Haiti's history that its citizens voted in free and fair democratic elections. With support from over 67% of the population, Father Jean-Bertrand Aristide was sworn in as Haiti's first democratically elected president on February 7, 1991. However, on September 29, a violent military coup d'etat overthrew President Aristide, circumventing the democratic will of the Haitian electorate and violating their fundamental right to elect their own leaders.
The State Department's 1991 report on the human rights situation in Haiti in most cases accurately reflects the human rights record of President Aristide and that of the military regime installed following the September coup. In some instances, however, the report casts the human rights violations attributed to the Aristide administration in the most negative light while, in comparison, it understates or fails to convey the full import of the brutality and disregard for human rights shown by the military regime.
The report accurately notes that "Haitians suffered frequent human rights abuses throughout 1991, including extrajudicial killings by security forces and partisan mobs, disappearances, torture and other mistreatment of detainees and prisoners, arbitrary arrest and detention, and executive interference with the judicial process." Although it acknowledges that there were "fewer instances of abuse during the Aristide administration," the report criticizes President Aristide for being "unwilling or unable to restrain popular justice through mob violence and ensure the rule of law for all citizens irrespective of partisan interests." Though President Aristide has been criticized for failing to condemn popular violence as a substitute for reforming the criminal justice system, the State Department fails to note that human rights violations during Aristide's government were committed overwhelmingly by the Haitian armed forces who remained largely outside the government's control.
The government of Jean-Bertrand Aristide tried to reform the army, firing several senior military officers and abolishing the position
126
Haiti
of rural section chiefs; these section chiefs were notorious rights violators who tortured, executed, arrested and detained as they pleased. Attempts were also made to reform prison administration and wrest control of the prisons from the military. These efforts resulted in a decrease in violence by the military and repressive forces such as members of the former Duvalierist.militia, the Tontons Macoutes.
President Aristide also created a commission to investigate major human rights crimes of the past and named a group of distinguished citizens to lead it. The report omits mentioning that soon after his election, he also closed Fort Dimanche, a notorious military facility where opponents of the former dictatorship were frequently tortured and murdered.
The report states that "credible estimates placed the dead nationwide at between 300 and 500" for the period following the coup. Although the report does not identify the sources of these estimates, other credible estimates of those killed are much higher, some ranging as high as 2,000. The report does not specify why it has been so difficult to come up with an accurate figure; those who have attempted to investigate reports of mass graves or even to visit the government-owned and controlled morgue have been threatened and in some instances attacked. The Haitian armed forces have prohibited journalists, human rights monitors and medical personnel from doing their jobs. In one instance, in early October, soldiers threatened two U.S. journalists investigating an alleged massacre of civilians by the army, destroyed their notes and said they would kill the journalists' interpreter.
The report mischaracterizes the assassination of Haitian Parliamentarian Astrel Charles, saying a section chief killed him "in what is believed to have been a personal dispute." The report should have mentioned that Mr. Charles was killed during a period of intense repression and fear as rumors swirled that President Aristide would return before Christmas, that Mr. Charles was an outspoken supporter of President Aristide and that he and most of the inhabitants of his district in Pignon opposed the return of the section chief, who had established a particularly brutal record during his previous reign. The
127
Haiti
Haitian military reinstated the position of section chief only weeks after the coup. The report also should have noted that in addition to a clandestine radio's broadcast of a death list of Aristide supporters, the list was also read on Radio Nationale, the government-owned and operated radio station.
Though the report accurately describes the indiscriminate shooting of 30 to 40 people in Lamentin, it underestimates the numbers of civilians killed on October 2 in Cité Soleil, a slum near Port-au-Prince and an Aristide stronghold. In contrast to the State Department's report that "several" civilians were killed, human rights reports place the number at 50 to 100 Aristide supporters killed by the army.
The report's description of the repression following the coup illustrates the State Department's improved reporting of human rights violations in Haiti. It details the army's resort to "brutality and massacre to control the population." It also acknowledges that on several occasions the military intimidated "opposition political supporters, popular organizations, the urban poor and the media . . . and arrested numerous active supporters of the President, raided and looted the homes of many of his ministers . . . and violently closed almost all of the country's media for several weeks" following the coup. This statement is largely accurate; however, the army arrested not only "active supporters of the President" but also anyone suspected of being a supporter of President Aristide and even people who had done nothing more than belong to groups, often grass-roots, self-help development organizations, whom the army identified as "enemies." The State Department's continuing refusal to recognize the persecution suffered by "non-active" Aristide supporters reinforces the Bush administration's restrictive policy on determining refugee status for Haitian asylum-seekers.
In comparing reports of torture and other abuses of detainees and prisoners before and after the coup d'etat, the report accurately notes that there was "substantially less common cruel treatment under the Aristide presidency than in previous years." In addition, it states that following the September coup, the army "resorted to torture and violence on
128
!
Haiti
several occasions to intimidate and discourage perceived opponents and anti-regime activity." The report details arbitrary arrests and beatings perpetrated by the military including the arrest of popular musician, Manno Charlemagne, businessman Antoine Izmery and the beating of 100 to 150 students attending a pro-Aristide press conference at the State University of Haiti. The report should have stated that journalist Paul-Jean Mario was tortured by soldiers in the Petit-Goave army barracks, in addition to being illegally arrested.
The report correctly asserts that prison conditions remained abysmal in Haiti during 1991, including the lack of basic hygienic facilities as well as adequate food and health care. It correctly notes that persons are detained in Haiti for weeks and sometimes months with no judicial action being taken on their cases, in violation of the Haitian Constitution and international law. However, the report does not mention the efforts of the Aristide administration to improve food availability and health conditions for inmates in the National Penitentiary. It fails to note that, for the first time in Haiti's history and despite resistance from the military, the Aristide administration made it government policy to permit journalists and international human rights delegations access to study the conditions in Haitian prisons. In addition, under President Aristide, the Justice Ministry made commitments to improve conditions for detainees and to study the cases of those detained prior to being charged with a crime.
The State Department is unduly generous when it states that "[t]he de facto regime was less inclined to leave uncharged prisoners in prison; the police under the de facto Government tended to arrest and sometimes beat prisoners, then release them if a judge so ordered." The Lawyers Committee has consistently received highly reliable reports of prolonged pre-charge detention since the military's coup, well beyond the constitutionally mandated limit of 48 hours. Moreover, the report should have mentioned that military officers in charge of prisons have refused to enforce judicial orders allowing lawyers access to their clients in prison. The report also fails to describe the existence of secret prisons in the countryside under the control of section chiefs and their assistants where horrendous conditions and human rights violations are the rule.
129
Haiti
The report observes that one of the reasons the prisons are less full since the September coup is that there was "a general pardon of political prisoners ... by year's end." Among the "political prisoners" pardoned by the de facto government were one man who had been convicted of torture, who reportedly quoted from the Bible while conducting torture sessions, and another who had murdered seven young men because he suspected they were Aristide supporters. Such criminal acts in no way fall within the State Department's own definition of "political prisoner" and the report is wrong to mimic the de facto government's characterization of those pardoned.
The report highlights the Aristide administration's alleged refusal to obey judicial authority and criticizes it for "repeatedly attempting to interfere with the judicial process or usurp it through 'mob justice'." For example, the report notes with disapproval Aristide's appointment of five new justices to the Supreme Court. Yet it only briefly mentions, without assessing the applicability of, the constitutional provision which provided the newly-elected President a six-month period to invoke onetime, special powers of appointment, including to the judiciary.
The report stresses President Aristide's "continued ambiguity about mob violence" and underscores the fear allegedly experienced by lawyers and human rights groups who represented unpopular, politically controversial cases. It emphasizes that "these fears were compounded by Aristide's own public criticism and thinly veiled threat in early February (for which he subsequently apologized) against a reporter from Haiti Observateur, an expatriate newspaper widely distributed in Haiti." The report details mob attacks by Aristide supporters to intimidate their political opponents, the media, the Catholic Church and several Protestant missions following the failed coup attempt by Roger Lafontant one month before Aristide was inaugurated by Parliament. It fails to mention the resolute refusal of President Ertha Pascal-Trouillot's government, in power at the time of the Lafontant coup attempt, even to begin investigations or make any arrests, and popular frustrations with the Pascal Trouillot government's apparent protection of the coup plotters.
130
Haiti
The section on arbitrary arrest, detention or exile is severely unbalanced. The comparably few cases of arbitrary arrest and detention during President Aristide's administration are described in admirable detail. Yet the report devotes precious little space to the thousands of arbitrary arrests and illegal detentions that occurred after the coup, stating there "were numerous arbitrary arrests of prominent supporters of President Aristide." This assessment once again ignores the mass arrests of "non-prominent" Aristide supporters or those people who were merely suspected of being Aristide supporters. The report should also have mentioned that popular singer Manno Charlemagne was rearrested immediately following his release from the National Penitentiary and his lawyer was threatened by soldiers when he asked to see an arrest warrant that they did not have.
The State Department is inexplicably silent on the number of people, prominent or otherwise, who have been driven into exile by gross and systematic human rights violations, and the approximately 250,000 people internally displaced as a result of the violence and repression since the coup.
The report notes that freedom of speech and of the press had been often abridged in Haiti by violence and intimidation. Particularly following the September coup, it recognizes that many pro-Aristide journalists were attacked by the military and that radio programs were forced off the air. However, the report minimizes the brutality waged against pro-Aristide journalists by comparing it to the intimidation of anti-Aristide journalists who feared mob action if they openly criticized Aristide.
The report's treatment of the government's attitudes toward international and nongovernmental organizations' investigationsof human rights violations is also unbalanced. The report accurately describes the freedom enjoyed by such groups during Aristide's eight-month tenure and notes there were no efforts "to interfere overtly" with human rights investigations. The Lawyers Committee is unaware of any "covert" efforts to interfere. Yet no mention is made of the intense repression directed against human rights organizations since the September coup.
131
Haiti
The report notes in the preceding section on respect for political rights that "pro-Aristide human rights groups were forced underground. " Not only is this assessment in the wrong section of the report, it is also wrong factually. The only human rights organization able to function normally since the coup is CHADEL, which was headed by Jean Jacques Honorât, whose wife took over CHADEL after Mr. Honorât became de facto Prime Minister in mid-October. Labelling groups "pro-Aristide" also unfairly calls into question the integrity and neutrality of Haitian human rights organizations. Most Haitian human rights organizations have had to suspend operations and their leaders have gone into hiding or exile. Many have received death threats over the telephone. After sending by facsimile transmission information on human rights violations to a visiting OAS delegation, Reynand Pierre, executive director of the Lafontant Joseph Center for Human Rights, was forced into hiding and ultimately had to flee the country when soldiers came to the Center's office looking for him. Mr. Pierre sent the fax in the first place because he was afraid to go to the hotel where the OAS delegation was staying because it was surrounded by soldiers and supporters of the de facto government.
Lawyers Camille Leblanc, René Julien and Paul Yves Joseph have all received death threats because of their advocacy of human rights and their attempts to represent opponents of the de facto regime.
The State Department's report must be evaluated alongside the Bush administration's policy toward Haitian asylum-seekers. Prior to the military coup on September 29, approximately 1,000 people had left Haiti by boat during President Aristide's eight-month tenure. In the eight months since the coup, at least 40,000 people have fled the political violence in Haiti. This fact belies the Bush administration's assertion that those taking to the high seas are merely economic reftigees. The U.S. policy of forced repatriation violates international legal obligations of the United States under Article 33 of the Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees and undermines the credibility of the U.S. commitment to international law in the eyes of the rest of the world. The United States correctly condemned the forced repatriation of Vietnamese asylum-seekers from Hong Kong following flawed screening
132
Haiti
procedures and also criticized the Malaysian government for pushing back boats filled with Vietnamese asylum-seekers. This report's findings on human rights violations since the September coup also undermine justification for forcibly repatriating Haitians to conditions where they are likely to face persecution.
133
