HUNGARY
The report on Hungary is once again a generally fair, accurate and comprehensive survey of developments in the legal protections accorded human rights in the new constitutional democracy. The developments themselves, although in places halting, are almost entirely positive. The report fails to capture fully, however, recent constitutional power struggles among the government's branches. Nor does it give an adequate sense of the sometimes contentious political atmosphere which has served to slow progress in the area of human rights and to inject a measure of uncertainty into Hungary's laudable accomplishments to date. That said, there should be no doubt that the changes in Hungary since 1989, while still the subject of struggles and debate, are a far cry from the repression of the preceding period.
The report's attention to the difficult transition to a market economy continues to expand and improve. It correctly emphasizes that high inflation and unemployment represent significant burdens. It might have put these figures in perspective, however. Inflation, while very high in absolute terms at about 30% annually, is lower than in any of the former Warsaw Pact countries with the exception of Czechoslovakia.
The unemployment rate, too, might have been put in better perspective. Although it is an enormous political liability after decades of essentially guaranteed full employment under socialism, the 6.1% unemployment rate (as of September 1991) is at a level thought tolerable in the West. The crime rate is also rising, having doubled in the past two years, but the report ignores this phenomenon.
The failure to reappoint Gyorgy Sur^nyi as president of Hungary's central bank, might also have been noted. While the reappointment was not required under a new bank law that went into effect on December 1, the Prime Minister had criticized Mr. Surinyi for signing an opposition statement called "Democratic Charter," which called for more openness in government. Opposition members of Parliament attacked the Prime Minister for his decision; The Economist
139
Hungary
noted that "[t]he sacking shocked foreign bankers as much as Hungarian civil-rights campaigners."
The report is in some details incorrect in its description of the judiciary. There are three, not four, levels of courts in Hungary. Local courts have original jurisdiction over most matters; appeals may be taken in the first instance to either the county court or the Budapest Municipal Court (all of which also have original jurisdiction over some cases); and the Supreme Court is the final arbiter of non-constitutional issues. The report is thus mistaken in suggesting that the Budapest court constitutes an additional intermediate appellate court superior to the county courts.
The report correctly notes that the new Constitutional Court, an entity separate from the rest of the court system, has original jurisdiction to review the constitutionality of laws brought before it. As in last year's report, the enormous influence of the court is given insufficient attention. For instance, the court's jurisdiction extends to passing on the constitutionality of draft legislation prior to enactment. The court has lately exercised this latter power sparingly, apparently recognizing that judicial interference in the legislative process poses serious separation of powers problems and can only serve further to disrupt an already divided Parliament.
The Constitutional Court nevertheless has taken an extremely active role. In April, it ruled that the "collection and processing of personal data in the absence of a definite purpose and for arbitrary future use are unconstitutional. " It also ruled as unconstitutional the "unlimited use" of personal identification numbers, including their use with identity cards. The decision, apparently based on a constitutional right to privacy, is not mentioned in the report. The report also fails to mention the court's role in what the report termed a "major milestone" ~ the passage of a law compensating in part individuals whose property was nationalized by earlier regimes. The court repeatedly ruled portions of the law unconstitutional, both in its draft and final stages, most significantly on the ground of unequal treatment of owners of land and owners of other forms of property.
140
Hungary
The report is incorrect in stating that the nine year terms of the Constitutional Court's members are "nonrenewable." In fact, they may be re-elected once by Parliament.
The report states that the "center-right coalition government . . . effectively exercises power." Ongoing political struggles during the year are not discussed. The government's President and head of state is a member of the opposition Alliance of Free Democrats as a result of an early political compromise, while its Prime Minister and head of governmeht is a member of the dominant coalition, the Hungarian Democratic Forum. Clashes between these individuals, who are attempting to strengthen the power of their offices, have led to a chaotic atmosphere and to recurring constitutional crises. The two officials have differed on who may represent Hungary at summit meetings, the powers of the President as commander-in-chief of the armed forces and who may make significant appointments.
Here again, the Constitutional Court has played a determinative role. The court ruled that a constitutional provision stating that the President is commander-in-chief did not invest the President with real authority and that, while he was free to offer guidance, it was the Prime Minister's government that would control the armed services. The court also ruled that the President was in almost all cases obliged to appoint the nominees submitted to him by the Prime Minister to the posts in question. The ruling was precipitated by the President's refusal to appoint six candidates for positions at Hungarian Television and Radio, an indication of the continuing politicization of the broadcast media.
More generally, the report correctly notes that the status of the press has been the subject of "intense political dispute." This has been caused in part by the continued domination of the media by journalists trained under the old regime, by the generally uncivil tone of much of the press and by suspicion of foreign investment in Hungarian media. These factors, in turn, have fostered a lamentable lack of real commitment to a free press.
141
Hungary
The report's extensive attention to discrimination against Hungary's significant Gypsy minority is laudable. Popular prejudice against Gypsies is widespread and overt, and the government's efforts to improve their lot have been minimal. In contrast, the official response to express anti-Semitism has been vocal condemnation. Indeed, in the case of the government's indictment of the publication Szent Korona for the incitement of anti-Semitic feelings, some would argue that the government has infringed on free speech rights in its zeal to combat deplorable opinions. The case is pending before the Constitutional Court. The report's treatment of the Szent Korona matter is particularly thorough and thoughtful.
The report accurately notes that Hungary now has more than 70,000 refugees seeking political asylum. Hungary has acceded to the major international agreements on refugee protection, including the 1951 United Nations Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol, but with a territorial reservation to accept refugees only from Europe. Hungary has received some international financial assistance from the United Nations, the European Community, the United States, and other Western European nations to aid refugees from Yugoslavia. Hungary has taken an active and constructive role in assisting both ethnic Hungarians and others escaping mistreatment in Romania and the war in Yugoslavia.
The leading trade union, the National Council of Hungarian Trade Unions (MSZOSZ), is, as the report notes, "the successor to the former monolithic Communist union." The report should have gone on to criticize MSZOSZ for resisting efforts to establish other trade unions and for refusing to comply with a law passed in 1991 by Parliament meant to divest it of the enormous assets accumulated under the old regime. The active hostility of MSZOSZ to the rule of law and to democratic institutions warrants comment.
142
