INDONESIA
The State Department report contains accurate and often substantive criticisms of the human rights record of Indonesia's "New Order" government in 1991. The analysis is more incisive than in previous years and, in a few sections, the report admirably goes beyond enumeration of the most blatant and publicized violations to point out less easily identified abuses resulting from government coercion and intimidation.
The 1991 report nevertheless has major shortcomings. Its treatment of the November 12 massacre in East Timor is inadequate and omits entirely coverage of violations of the human rights of East Timorese citizens both before and after the massacre. The report also fails to describe the full extent of government repression of the nascent worker rights movement. Furthermore, the report gives unwarranted praise to human rights developments that are at best ambiguous, provides insufficient detail of egregious cases of abuse, and fails again to address the anti-communist animus generated by the government.
On the positive side, the report conscientiously addresses a number of the points raised in last year's critique. The account of human rights violations in Aceh is markedly improved. The report explicitly recognizes that hundreds if not thousands of people have died in the conflict between government forces and separatists in the region. It acknowledges for the first time "credible reports of a pattern of abuse against the civilian population of Aceh by security forces" and notes that "no charges have been brought against members of the security forces" in connection with even the most flagrant of these abuses. The report also notes the government's release of hundreds of people who had been held for up to several months without trial, and the government's refusal to allow Indonesian Legal Aid Institute lawyers to represent many of the Acehnese who were brought to trial under Indonesia's loosely interpreted subversion laws. The report thus strongly suggests that the government has systematically abused the judicial system in its effort to destroy the opposition in Aceh.
149
Indonesia
The report does not, however, address the grave potential for human rights violations made possible by the military's endorsement of civilian vigilantes in Aceh. Further, although it notes that the International Committee of the Red Cross was denied a follow-up visit to Aceh in 1991, it does not emphasize that the government has ignored calls for a thorough and impartial investigation of the situation in Aceh, and thus has not made a serious effort to curb violations in the region.
Rather than speaking of "dwindling insurgency movements" in Irian Jaya and East Timor as it did last year, with the implication that local opposition to Indonesian rule in those provinces is subsiding, the report speaks more cautiously of military operations against "separatist groups," properly avoiding speculation as to the extent of support for the independence movements. The report gives a number of specific examples of government censorship of freedom of expression, giving some sense of the pervasiveness and vehemence of government repression of dissenting viewpoints. Finally, although flawed in other ways (see below), the section on worker rights for the first time recognizes that many labor settlements ostensibly arrived at through negotiation and compromise actually reflect capitulation by workers due to "fear of police and employer retaliation," and it correctly notes that because workers feel that administrative tribunals side with employers, many of them avoid the dispute resolution process altogether.
In a number of areas, however, the report gives a misleading impression of the Suharto government's human rights record in 1991. Although it acknowledges that the violence employed by the military in the November 12 massacre of East Timorese citizens and demonstrators attending a funeral for a slain pro-independence youth was "clearly disproportionate to the situation," the report seriously understates the extent of human rights violations in East Timor. Its description of the October 28 killing that led to the November 12 massacre as occurring during a "clash between Timorese for and against integration with Indonesia . . . ." leaves a misimpression that the death was caused by Timorese. In fact, the "anti-integration youth" was killed by Indonesian security forces. The report makes no mention of credible reports of an accelerating pattern of short-term detention and torture of alleged
150
Indonesia
political opponents prior to the massacre; of open threats by government officials against individuals planning demonstrations; allegations that many of the demonstrators may have died after the massacre as a result of poor medical treatment while in military custody; or of the hundreds of arrests and military detention of East Timorese subsequent to the massacre. On November 19, for example, 70 East Timorese students were arrested in Jakarta after a demonstration protesting the killings and expressing support for independence for East Timor; at the end of the year, many remained in detention. Nor is mention made of the official harassment of human rights advocates H.J.C. Princen and Indro Sukmadji Tjahjono, who for three weeks were interrogated daily by the intelligence service about their activities in connection with the situation in East Timor.
The report also provides an inadequate analysis of the government's formal investigation of the massacre. It does not mention that the National Commission of Inquiry which investigated the November 12 incident was composed exclusively of people with direct ties to the government, including several former military officials. The report also fails to analyze critically the content of the Commission report for its almost exclusive reliance on military sources for the reconstruction of the incident, and for its seeming endorsement of the view that the killings were triggered by the spontaneous response of a few overzealous soldiers to an unruly crowd. Nor does the report mention several credible first-hand accounts alleging that government troops opened fire in coordinated fashion against a defenseless and nonviolent gathering of demonstrators and mourners. Although the report notes that the Commission concluded that "about 50" Timorese had been killed, thus admitting to 31 more deaths than the initial government-reported figure of 19, it does not mention that the Commission only exhumed one gravesite, did not adequately search for alleged mass burial sites, and did not adequately respond to allegations by East Timor's governor that paramilitary units with links to Indonesian military intelligence were deployed at the cemetery and were responsible for some of the shootings and other human rights violations. Some of these inadequacies may be due to the fact that the Commission report was issued on December 26, leaving the State Department insufficient
151
Indonesia
time to critically analyze it. By uncritically repeating the Commission's findings, however, the State Department report provides a skewed description of the November 12 massacre and its aftermath.
The report understates the extent of government intimidation of workers and labor rights advocates. The report properly notes that "Indonesian workers were less hesitant about exercising their right to strike" in 1991, but does not detail the often catastrophic consequences of having done so. In June, nine workers at P.T. Evershinetex, a textile factory, were reportedly tortured by District Military Command 061 in Bogor, and five workers at a factory called P.T. DWA were reported to have been intimidated and beaten at subdistrict military units in West Jakarta. In August, after the government sent 200 soldiers to suppress a strike at the tiremaker P.T. Gadjah Tunggal near Jakarta, nine workers were reported to have been detained and harassed by security forces and one was held for three days.
Although officially recognizing the right of workers to strike. Admiral Sudomo and Manpower Minister Batubara continue openly to assert that strikes are unnecessary and to rationalize the use of force in ending strikes as a precaution against threats to public order. The report acknowledges the intimidating effect of military presence at strikes, but does not explain that strikers are often labeled political subversives. The report thus fails to give a concrete sense of the extent of the intimidation.
The report correctly notes that "government and employers have considerable influence over SPSI [the All-Indonesia Workers Union]," but it does not accurately portray the insurmountable legal hurdles placed before individuals seeking to organize meaningful representation of worker interests in Indonesia. The report points out that in order to register and thus bargain on behalf of workers, a union must be represented in at least 20 of Indonesia's 27 provinces, have branch offices in at least 100 districts and have at least 1,000 plant-level units, but it nonetheless uncritically echoes the government contention that private sector workers are "free to form or join unions." This freedom exists on paper only. For the foreseeable future, unless government policies change drastically, SPSI will be the only organization allowed
152
Indonesia
to bargain on beiialf of private-sector woricers, and the report should have noted this fact explicitly.
The report also fails to analyze adequately the government's response to the formation of the independent union Solidarity {Setia Kawan). In 1990, the government initially declared the independent union illegal. Although the government subsequently backed down from this claim, it declared instead, as indicated by the State Department, that it would tolerate the union as long as it did nothing illegal. It is important to emphasize that any attempt by Solidarity to bargain on behalf of workers would be illegal because the union does not yet meet the onerous union registration requirements described above.
The report mentions the mysterious abduction of Solidarity's leader Saut Aritonang just two days before he was scheduled to make a plea for international recognition of Solidarity and to criticize the condition of workers in Indonesia at the annual International Labor Organization Conference in Geneva. However, it does not mention reports that a military intelligence source said privately that Aritonang was being held by the regional military command. The report also fails to note that Solidarity officials have been subjected to "preventive questioning" at police headquarters and to other forms of harassment, suggesting that the government is actively preventing the organization from expanding to the extent necessary for official recognition.
In one instance the report appears to praise developments which are at best of ambiguous significance for an understanding of the human rights situation in Indonesia. After describing the significant restrictions on freedom of movement of thousands of individuals, many of whose freedom is restricted simply because they have criticized government policies, the report notes that some critics can travel abroad, and that "a person prohibited at one time may be permitted to travel subsequently." Although this fact is presented as if it were an indication of government leniency, it could equally be viewed as an indication of both the arbitrariness of the government's restrictions, and the power of government to coerce critics into quieting their criticisms in the hope of being allowed freedoms which should be theirs unconditionally.
153
Indonesia
The report does not give sufficiently detailed accounts of "egregious examples" of human rights abuses as called for in the State Department's instructions for the preparation of the reports. Thus, while the report acknowledges frequent credible reports of torture and mistreatment of criminal suspects and witnesses, it fails to relate that such mistreatment is so severe that in some cases it results in death. Further, the report does not give concrete examples of the kind of torture used by military authorities in attempting to obtain confessions. One account from Aceh describes three days of torture, including one continuous eight-hour stretch. The suspect reported that his nose and hair were burned with cigarettes, that electric shocks were applied repeatedly to his feet, genitals and ears, and that a length of wood repeatedly was jabbed up against his buttocks, while the torturer used a second length of wood laid across his knees for leverage.
Finally, although noting the criticisms of the government's announcement that it will screen candidate lists for the upcoming 1992 elections to determine whether any of the candidates adhere to banned ideologies or were involved in the 1965 coup attempt, the report again fails to address the pervasive manipulations of the communist bogey in Indonesia. As we have noted in prior critiques, the ban on communist ideology in Indonesia together with the concentration of power in the hands of government officials creates a situation in which unscrupulous officials can and do use the threat of labeling opponents and dissidents as communist-sympathizers for purposes of intimidation or retaliation.
154
