INDIA
The 1991 report on India is a significant improvement on its predecessor. It gives a reasonably fair and balanced account of the major human rights concerns and is comprehensive in its coverage. It does, however, contain some glaring inaccuracies and omissions. And while the report is strong in providing examples of violence by armed militants, it provides only a few examples of violations by security forces.
Its description of human rights violations in Assam and the northeastern states, for instance, is rather sketchy and far too general. This is likely to give the reader an inadequate sense of the large scale and seriousness of the violations which took place in that part of India. The report could have usefully included details of some of the scores of cases of torture, rape and extrajudicial killing by security force personnel which were highlighted either in the local and national press or by civil liberties groups. The Bombay-based Committee for Protection of Democratic Rights (CPDR), for instance, described some 49 cases of torture and 13 of rape (many of which had been committed in 1991) in a report published in March 1991 following a fact-finding visit by the CPDR to Assam. Another group, the People's Union for Democratic Rights, documented several cases of torture, rape and custodial deaths in Assam in its report published in May.
A typical example of such cases which finds no mention in the report is the rape, in June, of 14 tribal women from Gachipara village in Tripura who were dragged from their huts by police officers after their men were herded together into a corner of the village. Another prominent case from Assam was the rape and murder in October of Raju Baruah, a girl from Sutaragaon, by four soldiers who subsequently dumped her body in a pond. Although the girl's family was granted compensation by the state, it is not known whether the soldiers responsible were prosecuted.
The report should have also referred to the dozens of habeas corpus petitions filed in the Guhawati High Court on behalf of people
143
India
illegally detained and tortured by the army during "Operation Bajrang," many of which were upheld by the court. It could have highlighted the blatant defiance by the security forces of court orders as illustrated by the case of Rajumoni Bezbarooah, a student who had been acquitted by the High Court in January 1991 after being taken into custody. Despite the court's order that Bezbarooah should not be taken into custody again without the permission of his university hostel warden, he was detained and severely tortured at an army camp at Golaghat two months later.
In its description of the special laws under which the security forces have been acting in Assam — as well as in other strife-torn states like Punjab and Kashmir ~ the report rightly draws attention to the wide discretion given to these forces for the use of lethal force and to the immunity they enjoy from prosecution for action taken under those laws. It fails, however, to note a May 1991 amendment to the Code of Criminal Procedure that conferred even wider protection to all public servants (including the security forces) in states under "President's Rule" from prosecution for acts committed while discharging their official duties. Any such prosecution can now only be undertaken after obtaining the prior permission of the central government. This amendment was strongly criticized by civil liberties groups throughout the country.
In several instances, the report downplays government violations. The discussion of the assassination of former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi fails to note that one of the suspects in the case died of unknown causes while in detention. In its discussion of the official inquiries into the mass rape in Kunan Poshpora in Kashmir, the report provides the findings of the Press Council of India team without noting the serious shortcomings of the investigation, such as the three month delay between the incident and the inquiry. The government's response to the mass rape was at best apathetic.
While the section on torture is generally comprehensive, the State Department at no point attempts an overall assessment of the extent of torture in India. Nor does it try to evaluate the claims of torture reported by the press or human rights groups. The report is wrong in
144
India
stating that citizens wishing to lodge complaints for assault, wrongful confmement and custodial deaths require the permission of the "police hierarchy." Such permission is actually to be sought from the state government.
The report inaccurately states that the Indian constitution "permits the enactment of preventive detention laws in the event of threats to public welfare and national security." In fact, such laws can only be passed for reasons connected with either "defence, foreign affairs, or the security of India" or "the security of a state, the maintenance of public order or the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community."
The report is also wrong to state that detainees under the National Security Act (NSA) must be brought before a "Defence Ministry advisory board within 7 days of arrest." In fact, all NSA detentions are reviewed by a civilian Advisory Board chaired by a high court judge. Although detainees have the right to make representations to this board (and to appear before it if they so desire), it may be seven weeks from the date of arrest before the representations are heard. The NSA dispenses with the normal requirement of Indian criminal law that every detainee should be produced before a magistrate within 24 hours of arrest.
The report's discussion of the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities Act (TADA) is far from satisfactory. As well as erroneously stating that TADA permits maximum detention of two years (it actually allows indefinite detention -- before trial - for those charged with specific offenses, and detention for up to one year for those arrested merely on suspicion), the report does not sufficiently highlight some of the rigors of the act, such as: TADA permits detainees to be produced before executive magistrates (who are under direct executive control from the state's Home Ministry) instead of before judicial magistrates as required under normal criminal law; it imposes unduly onerous burdens on defendants seeking bail; it suspends, under certain circumstances, the traditional safeguard available to a defendant that confessions made to the
145
India
police are not admissible in evidence; and it imposes serious limitations on the right to appeal.
The report should also have noted that trials under TADA, often held in high-security prisons, have violated fair trial rights of defendants because witnesses have, in the words of Amnesty International, "felt over-awed and inhibited from giving evidence freely against the police in the intimidating atmosphere inside a prison and that few lawyers were therefore prepared to defend people standing trial inside a jail." The report notes that civil rights groups charge that the Terrorist Affected Areas (Special Courts) Act contains provisions "contrary to the presumption of innocence." The State Department should have provided its own evaluation of these charges.
While correctly drawing attention to the exceedingly slow pace at which the legal system has functioned in violence-prone states like Kashmir and Punjab, the report fails to note that in Kashmir the problem has been compounded by the fact that one of the two Designated Courts set up under TADA, in Srinagar, was abolished by the government in 1990. This has also resulted in considerable hardship to the relatives of hundreds of TADA detainees in Kashmir who now have to travel to Jammu.
The report erroneously states that under ordinary criminal law in India, police officers conducting searches without a warrant have to justify such searches in writing to the "senior police administration." In fact, they have to notify such searches to the nearest magistrate with jurisdiction over the offense being investigated. The report may also inadvertently mislead readers into believing that all judges in India are selected in consultation with the Chief Justice of the supreme court. In fact, it is only high court and supreme court judges who are selected in that manner; lower court judges are appointed after a routine selection process overseen by the high court having jurisdiction in a particular area.
The report wrongly cites two laws which have long been withdrawn: the Postal (Amendment) Bill, which would have empowered
146
India
the government to censor mail, was never brought into force; the Essential Services Maintenance Act, which aimed to limit strikes by certain public service employees, was allowed to lapse in September 1990. The report also fails to note the withdrawal in December 1991 of another controversial piece of legislation, the Press and Registration of Books (Amendment) Act, which sought to impose a wide range of unduly harsh burdens on publishers of newspapers.
While the report correctly describes attacks on the press by militants in Punjab and Kashmir, it fails to mention the frequent imposition of censorship measures by the government in Punjab. A particularly disturbing aspect of such measures was the use of blanket orders banning all "objectionable material," often by low-ranking officials such as sub-divisional magistrates. Editors disobeying these orders were threatened with forfeiture of copies of their newspapers.
The report also fails to convey adequately the effect of government attempts to censor private sector video newsmagazines for political reasons. There were several such instances in 1991 and the report could have usefully cited some. In November, for example, an edition of the Delhi-based Eyewitness newsmagazine which contained first-hand testimonies of torture by Indian troops in Kashmir was effectively banned when it was denied clearance by the Central Board of Film Certification (which the report refers to as the Censorship Board).
The report's description of the detention in New Delhi of Tibetan activists protesting the visit of the Chinese Prime Minister Li Peng correctly refers to the alleged molestation of some of the female protestors by the police. It fails, however, to note that several people, including journalists, who had gathered peacefully for the protest were injured as a result of an unprovoked baton charge and tear gas firing by the police who, according to an eye-witness, "went berserk."
In its treatment of freedom of religion, the report should have referred to the Indian government's continuing policy of expelling long-settled Christian missionaries from the country on vague and unsubstantiated grounds of their alleged proselytization activities. Three
147
India
such cases of imminent expulsion from the Bharatiya Janata Party-ruled state of Madhya Pradesh were highlighted in the national press in September, but none are in the report.
The report also fails to note the arrest in July of some 2,000 Sri Lankan refugees in the southern Indian state of Tamil Nadu after they had failed to comply with a registration requirement imposed by the government less than two weeks previously. These refugees were under an imminent threat of deportation to Sri Lanka. Another significant omission in the report is the decision of the Tamil Nadu government, announced in September, to close all refugee camps in the coastal areas of the state. There were widespread complaints throughout the year that Sri Lankan refugees were being subjected to unfair treatment in Tamil Nadu.
The report is not entirely accurate in stating that President's rule or a state of emergency can be imposed in any state "in the event of war, external aggression, internal disruption, or collapse of the constitutional machinery." The power to declare a state of emergency on grounds of "internal disturbances" was deliberately taken away by a constitutional amendment passed in 1978. President's Rule (which is treated separately in the Constitution) can be declared only in the event of the failure of the constitutional machinery in a state.
In the section on discrimination, while referring to the Dowry Prohibition Act, the report does not take notice of the non-compliance of the provision for carrying out the provisions of the Act which require central and state governments to appoint Dowry Prohibition Officers and establish advisory bodies of social workers to check the increasing dowry crime. Only three state governments have so far appointed such officers and formed relevant bodies.
148
