IRAN
The State Department's report for 1991 improves on its reports for earlier years because it is, on the whole, careful to report only those violations which have some basis in the available evidence about the human rights situation. The report sensibly points out that it is working "within the confmes of the Government's efforts to obfuscate its record on human rights." Generally speaking, the report is candid in stating when information about a specific violation is not available. It is right to accord the government's resistance to independent human rights monitoring a prominent place in the report.
One such obfliscation was the government's delay in granting access to the Special Representative of the UN Commission on Human Rights until mid-December 1991 — the last possible moment if the Special Representative was to be able to prepare his report in time for the 48th Session of the Commission in Geneva in February and March 1992. Consequently, the authors of the report did not have the benefit of the most comprehensive survey of the human rights situation durfng 1991, the Special Representative's January 1992 account of his findings.
Faced with these difficulties, the report makes a reasonable argument for its correct assertion that Iran "continues to be a major abuser of human rights." This assertion is in harmony with the Special Representative's own conclusion that "in 1991 the Islamic Republic of Iran made no appreciable progress towards improved compliance with human rights in accordance with the current international instruments."
Nevertheless, errors remain in the report, often in sections carried over verbatim from previous years. For example, in the section on political and other extrajudicial killing, the report states, "there continued to be credible reports that political prisoners are among those executed for criminal offenses." The Lawyers Committee knows of no such credible reports. The execution of political prisoners on the pretext that they are drug traffickers would be described more accurately as speculation. In fact, the Special Representative recorded 25 executions for "political reasons" during 1991, and a further 131 for reasons
155
Iran
unknown from his monitoring of the Iranian press. This should be regarded as only a small part of the total number of political executions for which, as the report correctly points out, there is no reliable estimate.
The report is to be praised for noting that lack of basic procedural safeguards in political trials make executions carried out in such cases equivalent to summary executions. The report should have made the same comment with respect to all trials before revolutionary courts, including drug trafficking cases which resulted in hundreds of summary executions.
The improved section on fair and public trial underestimates the gravity of the problem of denial of access to legal counsel in trials before revolutionary courts. The report states that "many" defendants do not have access to a lawyer, whereas the Iranian authorities are unable to produce evidence that any political prisoners tried by such courts have benefitted from the right to legal counsel, despite repeated requests for such information by the Special Representative and Amnesty International, among others.
The report is out of date when it states that a new law upholding the right to legal representation has not come into force because of opposition from the Council of Guardians. In September 1991, the law was passed by the Council for the Determination of Exigencies, a legislative body created in 1989 to override legislative logjams arising out of disputes between the Islamic Consultative Assembly and the Council of Guardians. Despite the new law, which provides that cases in which defendants are denied legal counsel should be declared null and void, political prisoners have continued to be tried and convicted without access to legal counsel. Iranian officials have explained this discrepancy to the Lawyers Committee by saying that legal representation is "voluntary."
The report is right to point to the lack of independence of the Iranian judiciary, selected on the basis of a government-approved definition of Islamic correctness, and to the prevalence of official interference and harassment of lawyers, who have no independent
156
Iran
professional organization to defend their interests, as fundamental problems in the Iranian legal system.
The section of the report on respect for political rights contains errors which display a lack of basic knowledge about the component parts of the Iranian system of government. Specifically, the description of the judicial and legislative institutions given in the report fails to reflect changes implemented after the referendum on constitutional amendments, which took place in 1989. In describing the Council of Guardians, the report states that its six lay members are nominated by the head of the Judicial Council. The Judicial Council was abolished in 1989. The lay members of the Council of Guardians are now appointed by the Head of the Judiciary, Ayatollah Yazdi. The section fails to describe the role of the Council for the Determination of Exigencies, a body appointed by the Leader of the Islamic Republic with powers to implement legislation that has not received the consent of the parliament and the Council of Guardians.
The report's more favorable account of the government's attitude toward international and nongovernmental investigation of alleged violations of human rights was probably justified in the light of available information at the time of writing. During 1991 Iran was more open to international nongovernmental human rights organizations than at any time in the last decade. One major reason for this, as the report correctly notes, was the readiness of the authorities to accept international missions of inquiry into the situation of hundreds of thousands of Iraqi refugees who crossed into Iran in the aftermath of the Gulf War. However, the relative openness was also attributable to a concerted attempt by the government to persuade the international community that the mandate of the Special Representative should be discontinued, and possibly also to a genuine desire among at least part of the Iranian leadership to see improved relations with western governments, for whom Iran's poor human rights record represents an obstacle.
In the aftermath of the publication of the UN Special Representative's latest report, which was substantive and critical, the
157
Iran
government's attitude to international human rights monitoring has, temporarily at least, become more hostile. The Special Representative has been condemned by government figures for succumbing to "U.S. pressure," and, in a negative development, the International Committee of the Red Cross has been ordered out of Iran, apparently because of official suspicions that the organization may have provided information to the Special Representative. It is to be hoped that this hostility may prove to be a short-lived phenomenon associated with the run up to the April 1992 parliamentary elections.
The government remains intolerant of domestic criticism of its human rights record, and indeed of any criticism of government policy from outside the closed circle of the clerical leadership. The report makes only a passing reference to the mid-1991 trial and sentencing to prison terms of nine prominent members of the Association for the Defense of the Freedom and Sovereignty of the Iranian Nation who had originally been arrested in 1990 in connection with a critical open letter addressed to President Rafsanjani describing the government's failure to uphold rights provided for in the Iranian Constitution. This case, referred to by the Special Representative in his February 1991 report as "a test case for the application of the rules of due process" was replete with violations of international fair trial standards including: denial of access to counsel, prolonged incommunicado detention, failure to respect the right to be presumed innocent, alleged use of torture and ill-treatment to obtain confessions, and summary court proceedings, of which the report neglected to inform the reader. In failing to give a full account of this illuminating case, the report missed an opportunity to add a much-needed example to its discussion of Iranian governmental abuses.
The report is also at fault in failing to make any mention of the continuing unrest in remote parts of the country, such as Kurdistan and Baluchistan where ethnically distinct groups are seeking greater autonomy from central government control. Low level fighting between nationalist movements and government forces with associated human rights violations suffered by the civilian population has continued for several years.
158
Iran
Official reporting of the fighting in Baluchistan is clouded by reference to the "war against drugs." Iran is a major transit country for drugs from Afghanistan and Pakistan, and Eastern Iran is where much of the government's "war" has been fought. This policy has led to thousands of summary executions since an upturn in the campaign was announced by the government in September 1990. The prevalence of illicit drug-trafficking shows no signs of diminishing. This disastrous policy does not attract a word of criticism in the report, reflecting a frequent U.S. government blind-spot in human rights reporting. For the State Department, it would seem, human rights violations perpetrated in the name of the "war against drugs" are not violations. Iran announced the execution of over 884 people in 1991. The true figure for executions is probably considerably higher. The majority of these were for drug-trafficking offenses after summary trials before revolutionary courts. Failure to condemn this gross violation of human rights is a serious omission from the report.
Another serious omission is a discussion of Iran's generally praiseworthy role in accepting hundreds of thousands of refugees displaced from Iraq in the aftermath of the Gulf War. This contrasts with the treatment of this issue in the country report on Turkey which credits the Turkish government with having provided "haven" for Iraqi refugees, and with having cooperated with the coalition forces' "Operation Provide Comfort." Iran accepted approximately twice as many refugees as Turkey, provided better physical conditions for them, and better protection from forcible return. According to independent nongovernmental observers, Iran received less than one seventh of the international aid received by Turkey for each refugee to alleviate acute social needs. Iran's efforts are completely overlooked by the State Department, demonstrating an unfortunate double standard.
These omissions mar an otherwise much improved report which gives a fair account of the continuing human rights malaise in Iran.
159
