IRAQ
The State Department's 1991 report on Iraq is a welcome improvement on previous reports in its acknowledgement of government-sponsored human rights violations in Iraq. However, substantive and stylistic defects plague the report, diminishing the significance and undermining the credibility of the reported information. These defects include: the appearance that political convenience influences both the severity of tone and the breadth of the State Department's coverage; the absence of any coherent discussion of the context in which the violations have occurred; the lack of meaningful organization and presentation of the information; and inconsistent and poorly documented information.
Like the 1990 report, the most notable feature of the 1991 report on Iraq is its willingness to acknowledge and strongly condemn human rights violations. The State Department's sharp criticisms of Iraq's violations represent a marked shift from its prior reports on the human rights situation there, in line with the dramatic deterioration in relations between the United States and Iraq. Prior to 1990, the State Department softened similar violations in Iraq by emphasizing the government's denial of violations and by casting doubt on the credibility of the human rights organizations documenting the violations. For example, the 1989 report informed the reader that: "The [Iraqi] Government denied charges that it violates human rights, and claims that the information on which [Amnesty International] and other human rights groups base their charges comes from pro-Iranian and Kurdish Iraqi exile groups in London and Paris." This year's report, however, reverses course and states that "U.N. authorities and human rights organizations sharply denounced the Government's flagrant record of human rights abuses," without mentioning that the Iraqi government reiterated in 1991 the same defenses and claims that it made in 1989. One irony of this discrepancy is that the less critical reports in 1988 and 1989 occurred at a time when Iraqi human rights violations reached a peak in the "Anfal Campaign" that may have killed over 100,000 Kurds.
Although the report mentions a significant number of violations in Iraq, it fails to contextual ize the information with coherent discussions
160
Iran
on the background of the violations committed by the Iraqi government. For example, the report omits discussion of the most important event in Iraq in 1991: the Persian Gulf War and its aftermath. While the Ba'ath regime has historically engaged in repression and brutality against its own population, the chaotic conditions created by the war facilitated human rights violations, affecting a far broader proportion of the Iraqi population than in the past. This context is crucial to a complete discussion of Iraq's 1991 human rights record.
Despite the overwhelming impact of the war on Iraqi society and government, the report scarcely acknowledges its occurrence. It mentions the war only in a passing reference, in the third paragraph of the report's introduction: "Owing to severe economic dislocation in the aftermath of the Persian Gulf War, unemployment and inflation rose dramatically." It is astounding to note Iraq's economic dislocation without reference to the Allied bombing of Iraq's infrastructure and the UN's ongoing sanctions, both of which brought the Iraqi economy to an almost complete standstill. Such an omission underscores the political slant of the report.
In similar fashion, the report fails to supply the context for the brutal repression of the Kurdish north and Shi'a south after their failed attempts at civil uprisings. The report scatters mention of the uprisings in at least nine different places in reference to a particular instance of abuse without discussing the ethnic and geographic divisions in Iraq which provided the catalysts for the civil wars, or how or why the uprisings began. Instead, it assumes the reader's familiarity with the events, and focuses only on the Iraqi government's response to the uprisings. The report thus leaves the reader with a sketchy understanding of why thousands of Kurdish and Shi'a civilians were killed or arbitrarily arrested in March, why several hundred thousand Kurds fled to the Turkish border or why Shi'a rebels escaped to marsh islands in the south.
The report also fails to address the impact of the war in opening up Iraqi society to Western examination and inspection. UN resolutions and the Memorandum of Understanding signed between the United
161
Iran
Nations and the government of Iraq granted the UN and other humanitarian organizations unparalleled access to Iraqi records and government offices. In addition, in order to encourage Kurdish refugees to return to Iraq, allied forces created a "safe haven" for Kurds above the 36th parallel in northern Iraq, effectively evicting Iraqi military control from the region. Followed by the withdrawal of the Iraqi administration in October, this power vacuum allowed human rights organizations unfettered access to tremendous amounts of data stored in government offices, and afforded opportunities to interview the population without fear of discovery or reprisal by the central government. Amnesty International, for example, noted that:
The restoration of sovereignty of Kuwait in February 1991 and the subsequent access by journalists and others to parts of Iraq afforded the international community an opportunity to examine at close quarters the atrocities committed in the name of the Iraqi Government.
As a result, several groups had access to information about the human rights situation in Iraq never before available, and subsequently published reports revealing the true dimensions of the Iraqi government's brutality.
The State Department report, however, focuses solely on the lack of access provided human rights monitors below the 36th parallel. In its section on freedom of speech and the press, it states, "[s]ome foreign journalists were allowed to operate in Iraq for brief periods during the year, but government censors strictly limited travel and contact with the Iraqi people." This statement fails to convey the unprecedented degree of access afforded the UN Special Rapporteur, the UN Mission led by the Aga Khan, the Harvard Study Team, Amnesty International, Middle East Watch and others in their various human rights investigations. The statement is correct, however, in its observation that ordinary Iraqis continued to have reason to be fearful if they spoke frankly to foreign observers, as the Special Rapporteur, among others, makes clear.
The report notes that the central government "interfere[d] with food and fuel shipments in the latter part of 1991" to Kurdish-held
162
Iran
territories in northern Iraq, with no discussion of the circumstances surrounding the interference. Following the creation of the "safe haven" in northern Iraq and the failure of negotiations between the Iraqi government and the Kurdish leadership, the Iraqi government withdrew its administrative and judicial apparatus from the area in October. In addition, it imposed an internal economic blockade against the area, forbidding the transport of any goods and supplies. Coupled with the UN sanctions against all of Iraq, the blockade has left the Kurdish-controlled regions almost entirely dependent on foreign relief diat enters those regions from Turkey.
Despite the availability of a large body of evidence documenting human rights violations in Iraq, the report's disorganization dissipates the severity of Iraqi abuses and the true plight of the Shi'a and Kurdish populations. The report uses a formulaic outline: it categorizes specific instances of a violation under general subjects of human rights or human rights violations; it then scatters repeated references to the same event under multiple headings, wherever they may be relevant. In addition^it varies its tone and manner of describing the repression directed against a single group, leaving the reader with an inconsistent understanding of the situation. As we noted in our 1990 critique with reference to the Kurds, "... [this] scattering throughout the report of information on abuses makes it difficult to obtain a coherent picture of the plight of [a] chronically persecuted ethnic and linguistic group."
The report mentions violations against the Kurds in several different sections, including political and other extrajudicial killing, "disappearance," arbitrary arrest, detention or exile and use of excessive force and violations of humanitarian law in internal conflicts. Taken together, these scattered discussions do not convey the level of human rights violations directed against the Kurdish population on the basis of their ethnicity. In the discussion of discrimination based on race, sex, religion, language or social status, the report is particularly incomplete. It states:
Iraq's 17-percent Kurdish population has traditionally
suffered extreme political and economic discrimination.
163
Iran
despite the presence of a small number as figureheads in the Iraqi Government. Kurds serve in the Iraqi military, including the officer corps, but are excluded from senior command positions.
Comparing this description to the UN Special Rapporteur's view illustrates the shortcomings in the State Department's reporting:
With respect to the Kurdish minority, there is reason for special alarm because there have been human rights violations directed against the Kurdish people as such, . . . . [A]lleged mass executions and other atrocities committed by the Government against the Kurds ... go beyond the cruelty and brutality directed against the population at large. (Emphasis in original.)
The report discusses human rights violations against the Shi'a community in a similarly cursory manner in its section on freedom of religion, with little note of the fact that the Shi'a population has consistently faced persecution as a result of its religious affiliation. The section begins by noting that: "While the [Arab Ba'ath Socialist Party] has traditionally sought to submerge religious differences through the promotion of secular nationalism, affiliation with a religious community remains important for most Iraqis." Later in the section, when dealing specifically with treatment of Shi'as, the report notes:
International Shi'a organizations view the Iraqi regime's physical assault on ancient Shi'a holy sites, despoliation of religious libraries and archives, and detention of religious leaders as a serious threat to religious freedom and to the cultural institutions of Islam.
By mentioning that only international Shi'a organizations view Iraqi violations as a threat, and not speaking in its own voice, the report diminishes the significance of the violations.
164
Iran
The report's treatment of refugees who fled Iraq in 1991 is inadequate. Concerning freedom of movement, the report states mildly that "[o]verall travel controls were eased in mid-May, and thousands began leaving Iraq," without noting the fact that most of these people leaving Iraq were fleeing persecution. Only in a subsequent paragraph, buried in the section, does it state that "[t]he largest population movement during the year was the exodus of more than a million refugees from northern and southern Iraq due to the suppression of the popular rebellion in March and April." Given the extent of this human rights crisis, this information should have been highlighted at the beginning of the report.
In contrast, the UN Special Rapporteur provided more informative coverage:
Of the over two million people who fled to the Kurdish hills and southern deserts to escape the indiscriminate attacks in March 1991 and the subsequent repression in April 1991, several hundreds of thousands of whom found temporary refuge in neighboring countries, some 83,000 persons in Iran and another 33,000 in Saudi Arabia still remained in refugee camps ... in mid-January 1992.
In assessing the causes of this flight of refugees, the Special Rapporteur observes that the arrival of refugees across frontiers corresponds directly with expulsions (forced eviction, confiscation of properties and the stripping of all rights and legal status), the use of chemical weapons against Kurds in 1987 and 1988, and the use of weapons of indiscriminate and mass destruction during the March 1991 uprisings.
In a few instances, the report asserts facts and figures on which complete documentation does not yet exist. For example, in the disappearances section, it states that the Iraqi government has failed to account for "two thousand Kuwaiti citizens transported to Iraq by
165
Iran
occupation forces," an egregious violation of international laws protecting civilians in times of war. However, at the end of 1991 the independent Kuwaiti Association to Defend War Victims (KADWV) estimated the number of missing persons at 1,053, 300 of whom were Kuwaiti soldiers. The State Department should have taken more care to provide the best available information on this contentious issue which has been exploited for propaganda purposes by the Iraqi and the Kuwaiti governments.
The report asserts that human rights groups are currently "investigating reports that the Iraqi government executed between 100,000 and 300,000 Kurds in a 1988 military campaign know[n] as Operation Anfal." However, Middle East Watch, the human rights organization principally in charge of the investigation, cautiously asserts that "tens of thousands" of Kurds may have been killed by tJie Iraqi government in this campaign. The UN Special Rapporteur declined to give any estimates of the numbers of Kurds who may have been killed, referring only to "mass executions" and "mass graves."
The report further asserts that the Iraqi government "diverted food stocks from disadvantaged civilians as a tactic to increase its control." This is an arguable assertion. The most comprehensive survey of food distribution in post-war Iraq, carried out by the Harvard Study Team, found that the government food rationing program distributed its meager supplies fairly and equitably throughout the country, with no evidence of diversion to preferred areas.
In line with this assertion, the report fails to mention that the shortages of food, medicine and necessary supplies in the region are largely a result of the UN sanctions against the country. In response to shortages of food and medical care in some areas, the UN Security Council adopted Resolutions 706 and 712, authorizing a limited sale of Iraqi petroleum to finance the import of food, medicine and essential relief supplies under strict international supervision to ensure equitable distribution to disadvantaged and vulnerable civilian populations and guard against diversion to the military. At the end of the year, Iraqi
166
Iran
authorities had not yet accepted Resolutions 706 and 712, a decision which ensured continued deterioration of living conditions.
However, the continued application of sanctions and the aforementioned UN resolutions are contentious, politically charged issues. The Iraqi government insists that the resolutions violate their sovereignty and constitute only a stop-gap measure to their current public health crisis. Many human rights groups have argued that both the UN Security Council and the Iraqi government bear responsibility for the deadlock in negotiations that has led to the persistence of sanctions. Some relief agencies and Kurdish political groups have urged the UN to lift sanctions on the basis that they appear to be harming only the civilian population, in violation of their human rights. A more balanced presentation would have included a discussion of these competing views.
The report glosses over a discussion of Kurdish violations, which appears designed to be ignored by the reader. Immediately following several paragraphs on violations committed by Iraqi forces in jhe discussion of political and extrajudicial killing, the report notes:
In early October, a Western journalist in Sulaymaniyah witnessed the summary execution of at least 60 unarmed Iraqi soldiers by unidentified Kurdish elements during violent clashes in the area between Kurdish guerrilla fighters and the Iraqi military.
The reference to the incident emphasizes that it took place during violent clashes between Kurdish guerrilla fighters and Iraqi forces, but notes that the perpetrators were "unidentified Kurdish elements." Middle East Watch described the same incident as follows:
Both sides shared responsibility for the continuing unrest. Insurgents openly took credit during the uprising and its aftermath for the capture and execution of Iraqi security force, intelligence and Baath Party personnel. The most highly publicized abuse by ant i-government forces during the year was the October 7 summary
167
Iran
execution by Kurdish rebels in Suleimariiyya of at least sixty captured, unarmed Iraqi soldiers.
The incident would more appropriately have been discussed in the section on use of excessive force and violations of humanitarian law in internal conflicts.
In general, the report gives only a formulaic overview of the human rights situation in Iraq while ignoring the international dimension to the picture, in which the U.S. government is a major player. In his report, the Special Rapporteur stated:
Having studied the situation of human rights in Iraq, after having been to Iraq and after having met numerous persons inside and outside the country (at least such persons as would dare to speak), the Special Rapporteur concludes that the violations of human rights which have occurred are so grave and are of such massive nature that since the Second World War few parallels can be found.
The Special Rapporteur then went on to recommend, ". . .the sending to Iraq of a team of human rights monitors who would remain in Iraq until the human rights situation had drastically improved. ..."
While the 1991 State Department report on Iraq is stronger in its criticism of the government's human rights performance than past reports, the report does not convey the severity of the human rights situation that the Special Rapporteur described and which led him to recommend exceptional measures.
168
