Israeli-occupied territories ISRAELI-OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
The State Department's report on the human rights situation in the Israeli-occupied territories of Gaza, the West Bank, the Golan Heights and East Jerusalem is reluctant to criticize Israeli government violations in its own voice. The pattern in almost all sections is to give the official Israeli position and then to give a contrary description attributed to "Palestinians" or "rights groups" or, in some cases, specific international organizations. The State Department very rarely gives its own view on the reported human rights violations. This manner of reporting leaves the reader with the impression that the State Department is unable or unwilling to criticize violations and identify violators. Even when criticizing the human rights practices of the Israeli authorities, as the report manages to do more frequently than it did last year, this criticism is often presented in the context of bald assertions of official Israeli policy which precede descriptions of violations. This tends to detract from the impact of the criticism.
In a departure from the style found in most other country reports, there is no listing of government practices identified as human rights violations at the beginning of the report. In an improvement over last year's report, the State Department does express its concern "about human rights abuses resulting from Israeli occupation practices," but it does not say what these are, and equates these abuses with "Palestinian violence," suggesting that the former are somehow justified by the latter.
Comparison between the illegal and abusive behavior of the Israeli state apparatus and the criminal acts of some Palestinians occurs frequently in the report. This is a false premise which gives a pro-government bias to the report. As the report recognizes, Israel is the occupying power in the territories and its occupation is governed by the Hague Regulations and the Fourth Geneva Convention. As such, Israel is obliged to ensure public order and safety for the civilian population of the territories. While Palestinian criminality or violence may not be Israel's fault, the erosion of law and order in the territories has occurred under Israeli rule. As a state party to international legal instruments, such as the Geneva Conventions, Israel has an explicit legal obligation
169
Israeli-occupied territories
to comply with their provisions, irrespective of the conduct of the Palestinian civilian population.
The introductory section of the report should have listed among notable human rights violations current during 1991 : numerous credible reports of torture and ill-treatment, particularly compelling evidence presented by the Israeli human rights group B'Tselem in its March 1991 report, "The Interrogation of Palestinians During the Intifada," and the growing evidence that clandestine plainclothes army units are carrying out a shoot-to-kill policy against targeted Palestinians. These grave violations should have been given prominence in the report.
The report's predisposition to emphasize Palestinian violence is clear in the introductory section, which refers to the Intifada as "civilian massive unrest characterized by violence." At best this is a gross oversimplification of the mass popular uprising in which the participation of most Palestinians is characterized by non-violence through such activities as observing strike days, seeking to boycott Israeli-produced agricultural and manufactured goods, and non-compliance with Israeli administrative orders. Violent activities, beyond the widespread rock throwing practiced by children and young men, have been practiced by a very small minority of the Palestinian population.
One of the many examples of the report failing to give an opinion occurs in the second paragraph when the reader is informed of the Israeli position that "Israel does not consider the [Fourth Geneva] Convention applicable but states that it observes its humanitarian provisions . . . ." The report should have commented on the inadequacy of this position. States are not at liberty to pick and choose which parts of binding international instruments they will apply. The term "humanitarian provisions" is so loosely defined as to be meaningless.
The report's discussion of political and other extrajudicial killing exemplifies the way in which its presentation of information tends to minimize the government's violations. The section begins with the assertion that "[p]olitical and extrajudicial killing are not condoned by Israel." The report then informs us that in fact in 1991 plainclothes
170
Israeli-occupied territories
members of the security forces are known to have killed 27 Palestinians, "many of whom were unarmed." The existence of armed undercover units at work in the territories is openly acknowledged by the Israeli authorities, and a pattern of targeting wanted activists has emerged, as the report makes clear when it states that many of the victims of undercover units were unarmed, "but were generally either wanted, masked, or fleeing from authorities after writing graffiti." The reader is left wondering what a government would have to do to persuade the State Department that it has condoned extrajudicial killing.
Disturbing credible reports continue to emerge of Palestinians being shot without warning by undercover units, of immobilized Palestinians being "finished-off" by soldiers, and of wanted men being beaten to death after being taken into custody by soldiers. For example, on August 5 in Shati refugee camp in Gaza, witnesses claim to have observed soldiers in civilian clothes shoot a masked man who was running away after writing graffiti on a wall. The wounded man was then reportedly shot and killed by another soldier despite being unarmed and incapacitated. Rather than rendering an opinion on this pattern of abuse, the report presents information without analysis. The State Department's instructions to the writers of the human rights reports state:
It is not sufficient to say "human rights activists claim that security forces have been involved in political killings____"
This is exactly what the reporter has done here, stating:
Palestinians and human rights groups claim that many of these individuals were killed without warning or after surrendering or having been subdued.
By not giving its own view on these incidents, the State Department lays itself open to the charge that it takes no position on extrajudicial killing in the territories. It should assert its own view of these claims and if it finds them credible, it should condemn this practice categorically.
171
Israeli-occupied territories
A similar problem is evident in the report's coverage of torture. Again, the section begins with a denial of the existence of any problem: "Torture is forbidden by Israeli law, and Israeli authorities say that torture is not authorized or condoned in the occupied territories." However strong the discussion of the issue which follows, it is inevitably colored by the prominent position accorded to the assertion that torture is forbidden in Israeli law. This is in itself a questionable statement because of the existence of the Landau Commission recommendations permitting an undisclosed amount of "moderate physical and psychological pressure" during the interrogation of security suspects. The report reproduces uncritically the dubious distinction made by the Israeli authorities between the "use of force" and of "moderate physical pressure." The report should have pointed out that all forms of torture or cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment of detainees are absolutely prohibited in international law, and that current Israeli official guidelines as established by the Landau Commission are too permissive and in violation of international standards.
The report gives a good summary of ill-treatment commonly suffered by detainees such as hooding, slaps, blows and beatings and rightly calls attention to the period of incommunicado detention immediately after arrest when the detainee is particularly at risk. More serious forms of torture, including use of electric shock torture, are also described in what is overall a much stronger section than last year's. Given the wealth of credible information on the subject of torture available to the report's authors, it is disappointing that the report did not introduce the section with a straightforward statement of its concern about the torture and ill-treatment of Palestinian security detainees.
The report is candid in its criticism of administrative detention, deportations and the holding of Palestinian detainees and prisoners outside the occupied territories, as measures which violate the Fourth Geneva Convention. However, the report's lengthy description of detention procedures, which gives disproportionate emphasis to a description of the system in theory rather than describing the practice, contains several errors. For example, the report states that after 18 days a detainee has to be brought before a military judge, "where he is
172
Israeli-occupied territories
entitled to defense counsel" (the so-called "extension hearings"). The report should have informed us that since the beginning of the Intifada at the end of 1987, it has become common practice not to notify lawyers when extension hearings are due to take place. It is now very much the exception for detainees to have access to attorneys at extension hearings.
The report seriously understates the interval between arrest or detention and first contact with legal counsel. It states that this interval is seven to 15 days. The Lawyers Committee's own research in the territories during 1991 found a usual interval of at least 20 days and widespread disregard for statutory requirements that lawyers be shown written orders signed by a senior military officer if a lawyer is denied access to a client. The report's discussion of the problem of access to legal counsel is superficial. It should have made clear the authorities* failure to make adequate provision for the notification of families and lawyers of the whereabouts of detainees. The language of the report is not informative. We are told that the Israelis claim that they post notification within 48 hours but that Palestinians assert that families and lawyers do not receive notification until much later. We need to know how the system works in practice. During 1991, the report should have informed us, the breakdown in the established systems for notifying families and lawyers was one of the major contributory factors to the unconscionable delays in access to legal counsel.
The report should also have been more critical of the military justice system. Although the section on military courts contains much detail about military court procedures, it does not tell us whether, in the view of the State Department, trials in military courts are fair. Missing from the discussion of the high proportion of convictions based on confessions is the important information that detainees in security cases are, almost without exception, denied access to an attorney until after they have confessed, during a period in which torture and mistreatment are most likely to happen. The report should have pointed out that the military justice system falls short of standards required in international human rights law, most notably in the routine denial of lawyers' access to their clients for three to four weeks after detention. For example, this is a violation of Article 14 (3)(b) of the International Covenant on Civil
173
Israeli-occupied territories
and Political Rights, ratified by Israel in October 1991, which provides that detainees have the right to adequate time and facilities to prepare their defense and to consult with legal counsel.
The report's description of the functioning of the Military Court of Appeal is misleading. It tells us that this court has heard 563 appeals, about three-fifths of which were accepted. It does not tell us how many of these appeals were from the prosecution and how many from the defense. Defense lawyeits complain that the military appeals court has been disproportionately favorable to the prosecution, enabling the authorities to impose higher sentences in a more uniform manner. In the relatively rare occasions when they have won an appeal, defense lawyers state that their client has only obtained a short reduction in sentence.
The report notes correctly that security measures adopted by the Israeli government seriously hindered Palestinian travel within the territories. Appropriate space is given to the discussion of the hardship caused to Palestinians by the requirement that those wishing to travel to or through Jerusalem obtain a special permit. The report is also to be commended for its description of the extremely widespread use of curfews. The damaging consequences of these collective measures on the lives of Palestinians is rightly given prominence in the introductory section of the report.
On the whole, the report does not lack for information, and as such it fulfills part of its purpose. However, it fails repeatedly to identify violations of human rights and humanitarian law and attribute blame. This lack of candor is the chief failing of the report.
174
