JAMAICA
The State Department's 1991 report provides an accurate description of the human rights situation in Jamaica. The report recognizes Jamaica's status as a stable parliamentary democracy whose constitution provides for the protection of the civil and political rights of its citizens. Freedom of expression, assembly, association and religion are protected under the constitution and are respected in practice. The government has been cooperative with international human rights monitoring organizations and with the Jamaica Human Rights Council (JHRC), which independently monitors and reports on violations.
The 1991 report correctly recognizes that despite the extensive constitutional provisions protecting the rights of its citizens, "[ejxtrajudicial killings and other abuses by police and prison guards, frequently committed with impunity, remain Jamaica's principal human rights problem."
The report appropriately includes its discussion of police violence in the section on political and extrajudicial killing. It notes that the "number of fatal shootings by police increased from 89 during the first 9 months of 1990 to 116 during the same period in 1991." The report describes as "credible" reports that the police shootings amount to the summary execution of suspects and acknowledges that JCHR figures are even higher than the statistics supplied by the police.
In the most well-publicized incidence of official violence, members of the Jamaica Constabulary Force (JCF), the police force, opened fire into a crowd attending a July rally for African National Congress leader Nelson Mandela. One man was killed and one woman seriously wounded as a result of the shooting. The report notes that two policemen were charged in September with murder and wounding with intent to kill, but that trial was postponed until early 1992. Government and police officials continue to publicly condemn the use of excessive force by police, but actual punishment for extrajudicial killings is rare.
175
Jamaica
The use of violence has not been the only response to crime in Jamaica. In its section of arbitrary arrest, detention, or exile, the report discusses the continued operation of the Suppression of Crime Act (SOCA), which was adopted in 1974, and which remains in force in high-crime areas such as Kingston, the capital city, and in the nearby parishes of St. Catherine and St. Andrew. According to the report, the SOCA "allows police to make arrests and conduct warrantless searches of persons 'reasonably' suspected of having committed a crime." Although the SOCA was briefly revoked in May 1990, it was reimposed after two months in response to a rapid rise in crime. The report states that many suspects from poor neighborhoods are detained without a warrant, and those unable to post bail are held "for long periods" prior to obtaining a judicial hearing. The report repeats the police claim that SOCA "is useful, primarily for its deterrent effect on prospective criminals," but fails to state its own opinion on the validity of this claim.
The abuse of prisoners and detainees by the JCF and by prison warders continues to be reported. The State Department report notes that only two officers were charged with abuse in 1991 and that neither case has come to trial. It also states that government has averaged $265,000 annually in damage payments for police brutality. The report cites a JHRC report indicating that even off-duty officers who attempt to intervene on behalf of victims of abuse have been beaten by other members of the JCF. Legislation authorizing a police Public Complaints Authority has been submitted to the Jamaican parliament. The report notes that approval was expected in early 1992.
Once tried and sentenced, prisoners can expect to live under prison conditions that this year's report, like last year's, describes as unsanitary, overcrowded and generally "abysmal." Official violence continues behind bars, and the report cites as an example a riot in June in which five prisoners were killed under suspicious circumstances. It cites allegations that the riot was used as a cover by prison warders for the murder of the prisoners. The prisoners who died were said to have witnessed the escape, allegedly aided by warders, of two prisoners.
176
Jamaica
While generally accurate in describing the scope of official violence in Jamaica, the report fails to analyze the underlying causes of police violence and the inadequate prison conditions. Incidents of violent crime, particularly in urban areas, are on the increase in Jamaica. The government and representatives of the JCF have expressed great concern about the problem. Still, Jamaican officials reacted angrily to the issuance in August of a U.S. State Department traveller's advisory warning tourists of the rise in crime. Although tourists in the resort areas are generally insulated from violent crime, the extraordinary incidence of extrajudicial killings and police abuse appears to be directly linked to efforts to protect the $740 million per year tourist industry. Because Jamaica's economy is highly dependent on tourism, the failure of the government to punish or prevent police violence and to improve prison conditions may be due in part to efforts to appear "tough on crime."
Further, the report does not address the underlying socioeconomic conditions associated with an increase in crime. High unemployment rates, overcrowding in urban areas due to migration from agricultural areas, devalued currency, and skyrocketing prices for even basic food items, all contribute to crime. Finally, the influx of guns into Jamaica has contributed to gang violence at least since the election-related violence of the late 1970s and early 1980s in which hundreds of Jamaicans were killed. The report does note that violence directly related to elections appears to have dramatically subsided since that time, but there is some indication that rival drug gangs consider themselves loosely aligned with either of the two major political parties.
The report's section on discrimination based on race, sex, religion, language, or social status makes brief reference to the fact that women suffer de facto economic and social discrimination, but it does not provide further information on the severity of the problem. The report also recognizes the frequency of domestic and other forms of violence against Jamaican women, but states that useful statistics are unavailable. It does note the existence of a center, staffed by women police officers, for the reporting and investigation of rapes. However, the JCF continues to be ineffective in assisting victims of domestic
177
Jamaica
violence to take legal action against abuse. The report states that the Jamaican government is planning to explore noncustodial sentencing as an option for those victims who fear the use of prison terms as punishment for their partners.
On the whole, although it omits discussion and analysis of the underlying causes of official violence, the 1991 report presents an accurate description of the human rights situation in Jamaica.
178
