KENYA
Although the 1991 report on Kenya discusses most of the issues of concern to local and international rights advocates, it obscures the systemic nature of human rights problems in Kenya. The most deep-seated human rights problems in Kenya have been due to the deliberate erosion of independent institutions within and outside the government. While the State Department has carefully and accurately documented individual cases of human rights violations, the report once again suffers from a failure to describe adequately the larger context into which these violations fit. The failure to highlight the institutionalization of rights violations by the Kenyan government is a major flaw in an otherwise solid report.
In particular, the section on the denial of a fair public trial most glaringly fails to place the violations which it mentions into the wider context of a pliant judicial system that has been intentionally and systematically weakened by the government. While the State Department does a thorough and detailed job of documenting individual cases oi politically motivated charges against government critics, it fails to point out that this is merely the latest manifestation of a trend that has been growing during the past few years where criminal charges, such as sedition, treason and contempt, have been used to silence, weaken and intimidate critics.
The report should have also pointed out that the government's propensity for bringing political charges against government critics has been facilitated by this very judiciary. Over the past decade, the executive branch has deliberately interfered with and undermined judicial independence. To its credit, the report includes mention of the 1988 constitutional amendment which allowed the President to fire judges at whim and accurately points out that even though this amendment was repealed after intense domestic and international pressure in 1990, many in the Kenyan legal community felt repeal of this pernicious amendment alone was inadequate to restore judicial independence. Severe damage to the tradition of judicial independence will require a long time to heal.
179
Kenya
While the report mentions that "Justice Dugdale decided that the courts have no power to enforce the Kenyan Bill of Rights," it fails to include key background information that would have conveyed the full import of the decision. The report should have pointed out that the Kenyan government has relied heavily on British expatriate judges, in particular, Chief Justice Alan Hancox and Justice Norbury Dugdale, to convict perceived government critics. These British expatriate judges are short-term contract judges who have come under significant criticism from individual lawyers and the Law Society of Kenya for their lack of independence. It is doubtful whether a system of justice that uses judges working on short-term contracts can ever be truly independent.
The report's discussion on the contempt of court case against the Law Society of Kenya is comprehensive. However, it should have pointed out not only that the case dramatizes the limits of free speech in Kenya, but it also was a clear example of the government's complicity in dismantling the independent bar association. One essential safeguard of an independent judiciary is a strong and independent bar. The report should have noted the court's ostensible hostility towards the bar in this case. In its judgment, the court issued the astonishing statement that the Law Society had no right to put forward any viewpoint contrary to the government's. The court also threatened that the Law Society Act could be repealed and the Law Society of Kenya dissolved if it continued to be critical of the government. Both these comments underscore the government's intolerance of independent institutions, especially the bar. Any discussion of the human rights situation in Kenya must address this government hostility towards those seeking to defend rights and enforce the law.
The report should have mentioned the ongoing harassment against Law Society Council member Martha Njoka. Ms. Njoka continued to be targeted by the government even after the contempt of court findings against the Law Society Council. In addition to her activities in the Law Society, Ms. Njoka has been representing the treason trial defendants and has been a vocal proponent of political change. On October 31, Justice Gideon Mbito upheld an objection by a lawyer who argued that Ms. Njoka should not be allowed to appear
180
Kenya
before any court because of her contempt offense. Despite the fact that Ms. Njoka had already been fined for the contempt charges and that the contempt case had been decided in a completely different court, Ms. Njoka was prohibited by Justice Mbito from practicing law for one month. In November, the Court of Appeal granted a stay pending appeal. The action of Justice Mbito, once again, illustrates the manner in which the judiciary bends to executive branch policy.
The report's discussion of the murder of Foreign Minister Robert Ouko is detailed and, for the most part, accurate. However, the report should have added not only that the government dissolved in November 1991 a judicial commission of inquiry it had formed to investigate the 1990 murder but that the dissolution came at a time when the commission's findings seemed to implicate top government officials. Moreover, the report should have added that the two highly placed government officials, Nicholas Biwott and Hezekiah Oyugi, who were arrested and then released, had been named as "principal suspects" by the Scotland Yard investigation team. The report should have also added that murder charges were then filed against Jonah Anguka, a former' District Commissioner, who is believed to have had only a minor role in the killing according to Scotland Yard experts. The government's release of Biwott and Oyugi, as well as the dissolution of the commission, provoked intense criticism.
The report includes a detailed section on the use of torture against government critics. In describing the torture faced by the treason trial defendants, the report only mentions allegations by defendant Rumba Kinuthia. It should have mentioned that in the pretrial hearing in 1991, all eight defendants alleged that they had been badly beaten and initially denied food and legal counsel. In particular, one of the accused, Geoffrey Kuga Kariuki, has alleged that he was tortured with electric shock treatment and that pins were stuck under his fingernails. An independent medical report by a doctor who examined four of the accused found evidence supporting these claims.
The report rightly states that free speech won a notable victory in Kenya when sedition charges were dropped against editor Gitobu
181
Kenya
Imanyara and the ban on the Nairobi Law Monthly was lifted. However, no mention was made of the fact that three other magazines remained banned -- Beyond (a publication of the National Council of Churches), Finance and Development Agenda. Moreover, other instances of harassment against the press were omitted. In March, Njehu Gatabaki, editor of Finance, was harassed and temporarily forced into hiding. Paul Amina, a freelance journalist and former political detainee, was arrested on August 16 and detained for two days after he publicly identified a plainclothes security official.
Last year, our critique lamented that the State Department had dropped its discussion of prison conditions in Kenya. This year, the State Department has restored the discussion of prison conditions accurately noting that "[c]orruption and sexual abuse occur" and concluding that conditions are "harsh due to overcrowding and insufficient funding."
The report does not convey the government's intense hostility to the plight of refugees in Kenya. Kenya's record for refugee protection is poor, particularly near the Kenya-Somalia border. A more thorough analysis and discussion of the hardships faced by Kenya's refugee population would improve next year's report. In addition to the incidents of refoulement and police harassment cited, the report should have included the following violations of Kenya's obligations under international law:
•	Kenyan authorities often refused to permit Somali refugees who arrived by sea to disembark; sometimes only refugees with visas to a third country were permitted to enter. In a number of other cases, refugees were held for days on airport landing strips or in boats offshore without food or water.
•	At a press conference, the Coast Provincial Commissioner, Simon Mung'ala, said that the Kenyan authorities' view was that "these people are just travellers from Somalia who are on transit to a destination we do not know." The Ministry of Foreign Affairs stated that they would not allow 700 Somali refugees
182
Kenya
who were off-shore to disembark because there were already
"very many Somalis in the country."
In the section on the goverrmient's attitude towards international and nongovernmental investigation of alleged violations, the report accurately notes the restrictions facing local activists. However, it makes no reference at all to international human rights groups. The State Department should have noted that a delegation from the Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Center for Human Rights was allowed into the country in July and met with a wide cross-section of people, including government officials. The delegation was not harassed during its trip, and the government did not criticize them on their departure as it did when a similar delegation visited in 1989. The report should have also pointed out that while Africa Watch sent a representative in February, despite repeated attempts since 1990, its Executive Director has been denied a visa. In July Africa Watch published a comprehensive report on human rights conditions in Kenya, which the Kenyan government responded to angrily with an 85-page rejoinder.
Despite these omissions, the report on Kenya represents a generally accurate picture of human rights conditions, touching on most issues of importance for 1991. In stating that "[w]hile there were signs of improvement in human rights in late 1991, human rights were circumscribed for most of the year, and significant restrictions remained at year's end," the State Department succinctly captures the overall situation. The inclusion of various threatening quotes by Kenyan government officials to illustrate the atmosphere of repression that inhibits free speech and those struggling to create independent institutions, such as the judiciary and bar associations, is very well done.
183
