SOUTH KOREA
This year's report on the Republic of Korea is uneven, providing detailed accounts of some issues, while ignoring others. Also, some important topics are presented in a manner that blunts their significance. As in last year's report, Korean government rhetoric and justifications for certain policies are often insufficiently evaluated or uncritically accepted. This includes the use of inflammatory terms - such as "radical organizations," "illegal labor practices," and "dangerous" views ~ used by the Korean government to characterize issues or its opponents.
The report repeats an assertion made in past reports that, "[ajlthough progress toward democracy has been made, elements of [South Korea's] authoritarian past survive." Human rights violations in South Korea are more deeply rooted than the State Department suggests. In particular, the government continued to uphold the institutional cornerstones of the national security system, which is the source of many human rights violations.
The report correctly identifies "the use of broad security laws . . . to punish the nonviolent expression of opinion or the exercise of freedom of association" as a principal human rights problem. While noting that the National Security Law (NSL) was amended in May, the report does not mention that the amendments were pushed through the National Assembly by government supporters over the protests of opposition lawmakers who demanded more thorough revisions. As the report notes, the amendment to Article 7 of the NSL restricts the law's application to acts committed "with knowledge that it will endanger the existence or security of the state or basic order of liberal democracy." But arrests under the amended law indicate that the authorities are defining this provision very broadly.
The report cites the arrests of more than 50 political activists in mid-1991 under the NSL, including Moon Ik-hwan and Park Soon-kyung. Those arrests indicate that despite the amendments to the NSL, it is still used to restrict freedom of speech, especially with regard to public discourse regarding North Korea and unification. In addition to
341
South Korea
Moon and Park, at least 10 people, including Rev. Hong Keun-soo, Kwon Hyong-taek and Lee Chang-bok, were arrested and charged under the NSL for their alleged involvement with Pomminnyon, an international organization formed to promote Korean unification.
The report does not indicate the wide range of activity considered actionable under the NSL. Fourteen artists who are members of Somiryon, an artists' group that supports Korean unification, were arrested in June and September for allegedly engaging in activities that benefit North Korea. Three of them were sentenced to prison terms ranging from 18 months to two years; the rest received shorter terms and were released by the end of the year. In July, Yu Sang-dok of the banned teachers union, Chonkyojo, was arrested and charged under the NSL for publishing an article advocating the establishment of a democratic government, revision of the educational system and abolition of anti-communist education.
In the section on torture, the report gives a good account of "continuing instances of police abuse of detainees." More attention needs to be given in future reports to the role of the police leadership and the government generally in creating an atmosphere where human rights violations are tolerated, if not encouraged. The report cites several incidents of officers who were tried for acts of brutality, but given suspended or light sentences. Such actions send a message from the judiciary and the government that such brutality by the police is not considered serious. However, the report does not give the reader a sense of the frequency of such prosecutions given the magnitude of the problem.
The report's discussion of the police understates the extent of the excessive use of force and its consequences. Numerous beatings, the indiscriminate firing of tear gas shells and the lethal use of firearms, accidental or not, belie the report's description that "[i]n general, the police have shown restraint and discipline. " For instance, in September, a policeman who was shooting into the air to disperse student demonstrators, shot and killed Han Kuk-won. While the shooting was ruled an accident, it was the result of an official policy to use live
342
South Korea
ammunition to break up some demonstrations. Numerous serious injuries were caused by police tear-gas canisters fired directly into crowds of demonstrators: in April, Chong Jin-tae was struck in the head and had to undergo brain surgery, Yu Chol-kun suffered a fractured skull and required surgery, and Choi Kang-il was struck in the face and lost his left eye. In May, the skull of a 55-year-old woman was fractured by a tear-gas shell, and at least three other people were injured when hit by shells or shrapnel. Human rights groups in South Korea also published information on several people injured after being beaten with pipes by police.
This year again, the report does not mention the activities of the paekgoldan ("white skeleton squads"), the special police units used to break up demonstrations and strikes. Members of these squads, totalling 4,200, were implicated in the April beating death of student Kang Kyung-dae. Opposition parties and dissidents have called for the squads to be disbanded. An article on the squads in Chugan Choson stated: "When these squads catch demonstrators, they customarily beat them, a tactic their superiors allow in order to break the spirit of other demonstrators."
The report downplays police brutality by repeatedly referring to student violence during demonstrations as if the two were comparable. The introduction notes student violence against police during demonstrations without even mentioning similar, more severe violence by the police, implying that the police response is somehow either justified or understandable. Similarly, a paragraph on student demonstrators throwing firebombs does not belong in the section on political killings. To state that Kang Kyung-dae was participating in "a violent demonstration" when he was beaten to death is a gratuitous effort to blunt responsibility for his death. According to Korean human rights monitors, Kang was climbing over a wall to get back on campus when he was pulled off and hit with metal pipes. The report makes a causal misrepresentation by stating that the heavy security presence in city centers is "because of violent student demonstrations." In fact, riot policemen have been assigned to city centers for years, even before students began to move their demonstrations off campus.
343
South Korea
Another area of concern neglected by the report is the abuse of military conscripts and policemen by their superiors. In August, 34 soldiers who went absent-without-leave claimed they were repeatedly beaten by their commanding officers. That same month, two riot policeman died after allegedly being beaten by their superiors.
The report also should have noted that the Defense Ministry arrested 34 military conscripts between January and August for distributing "revolutionary literature" to fellow draftees. Many of those arrested were charged with violating the National Security Law.
The report's introduction should have included among the country's most serious human rights problems the continued detention of political prisoners. In November, the Human Rights Committee of the National Council of Churches in Korea identified 1,103 political prisoners in South Korea. Last year's State Department report referred to the number of political prisoners cited by human rights groups; this year's report does not. Instead, the report repeats the sentence used in each of the past several years: "[I]t appeared that the number of political prisoners and detainees as defined by international human rights standards remained in the hundreds."
The section on worker rights does not mention that in July, the Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC), a U.S. government agency that provides political risk insurance to U.S. companies overseas, suspended South Korea from its program because of inadequate protection of worker rights. The OPIC decision was based on the existence and enforcement of restrictive labor laws, the arrests of labor activists, and inadequate enforcement of health and safety measures.
The report mentions, but pays insufficient attention to, the provision of the Labor Dispute Mediation Act that restricts "third party" intervention in labor disputes. Many labor activists arrested during 1991 were charged with violating this law. Among the activities proscribed by this law are the distribution of leaflets and other documents giving advice to union members about their rights and wage negotiations. Among those arrested and charged under this act were Hyon Ju-ok,
344
South Korea
acting chairman of Chonnohyop (National Council of Labor Unions), Choi Jae-ho, president of the National Bankers Union, and Lee Kwang-soo, an official of the Kyonggi Province Labor Federation. Park Chang-soo, one of seven labor leaders arrested in February, later died under mysterious circumstances while under detention in a hospital.
The section on acceptable conditions of work gives only cursory discussion of health and safety standards. The State Department's instructions for preparing this section of the report state: "Note if industrial accident rates are unusually high and what preventative measures, if any, the government has taken." The report should have noted a South Korean Labor Ministry report that in the first half of 1991, there were 1,045 industrial deaths and 14,973 industrial injuries, a 10% increase over the same period in 1990. Although South Korea has one of the worst industrial safety records in the world, the report makes no mention of this situation except to say that health and safety standards "are not effectively enforced."
Several areas of the report could have been strengthened by providing more detail or alternative views that conflict with the official position. For example, the report states that 12 long-term prisoners were released in 1991, most of whom did not sign "conversion" statements recanting their alleged leftist political beliefs. The report should have added that nearly 40 "non-converted" long-term prisoners remain behind bars because they are unwilling to sign a statement recanting the views attributed to them. Some have been incarcerated for more than 30 years.
According to the report, "conditions in Korean prisons have reportedly improved somewhat in the last few years." No source, however, is given for this claim, which was also made in the 1990 report. The National Council of Churches in Korea (NCCK) asserts that conditions remain poor and that medical treatment is still inadequate. The report cites an official denial that prisoners have died due to insufficient medical attention, but does not mention the claim by the NCCK that an average of 20 prisoners die each year due to a lack of care.
345
South Korea
The report uncritically cites the South Korean government's assertion that "unauthorized attempts to contact North Korea threaten the Government's efforts to ensure peacefiil reunification on the basis of democracy and respect for human rights." In a report which identifies serious human rights violations and gaps between democratic ideals and practices, that assertion cries out for the response firom opponents of the government's policy. The report offers this kind of balance when discussing a claim by labor activists that government repression has caused a decline in union membership, by citing critics who say membership has declined because workers are disenchanted with "a leftist political agenda." The impression is that only opposition claims are challenged.
The section on freedom of speech and press omits a phrase included in last year's report. The 1990 report stated: "Restrictions on the expression of ideas which the Government considers Communist or pro-North Korea remain severe, despite provisions in the Constitution guaranteeing freedom of speech." In this year's report, the final clause, which accurately illustrates the gap between law and practice, is omitted.
The Social Surveillance Law, enacted in 1989, continues to be used to restrict the freedoms of expression and association of former political prisoners, such as Suh Jun-shik. The government uses the law, which requires former political prisoners to report to authorities about all their activities, to harass political opponents. Suh, who served 17 years as a political prisoner, was arrested and given a suspended sentence for his continuing political activity.
346
