KUWAIT
Given the peculiar political background of the 1991 report on Kuwait, a reader would anticipate that it would seek to justify the Gulf War by painting the Iraqi rights record during the occupation in the blackest possible colors while muting its critique of the Kuwaiti government's actions after the U.S.-led liberation. The report generally does follow this entirely predictable pattern, and in subtle and less subtle ways, the dimensions of the human rights problems in post-liberation Kuwait have been minimized. In particular, the report is weak on the mistreatment and expulsions of non-Kuwaitis, the degree of government involvement in such mistreatment, discrimination against women, the roy-al family's demonstrated hostility toward democracy and constitutionalism, deficiencies in the legal system, the lack of independence of the judiciary from the executive branch, the inadequacies of criminal justice proceedings, and the difficulties facing local human rights organizations.
In general, the report fails to indicate the relationship between patterns of disregard for rights and the undemocrafic character of the regime, which in turn deserves to be linked to the royal family's hostility toward institutions that could hold it accountable to those they rule. The report obftiscates the legal reality that the Amir's government has been operating in flagrant violation of the principles of the 1962 Kuwaiti Constitution; indeed, the uncritical reference in the first paragraph to the Amir's commitment to adhere to the Constitution after liberation might lead casual readers to presume that the Sabahs are respectftil of constitutionalism - which has hardly been the case. In practice, as the report notes, "the Amir may suspend any or all provisions of the Constitution by decree." However, such suspension of the Constitution by a unilateral Amiri decree is not provided for in the Constitution. Furthermore, the report fails to indicate that the Amir's protracted dissolutions of the National Assembly, from 1976 to 1981 and from 1986 continuing to the present, have been in direct conflict with the fundamental scheme of the Constitution, which calls for the separation of powers of the executive, legislative, and judicial branches (Article 50) and makes a functioning legislative branch a central component of the
184
Kuwait
whole scheme of government (see Articles 4, 60, 63, 65, 66, 69, 70, 71, 51, 79-122, 140, 141, 145, 149, 150, 151, 174, 179). Even under martial law, which was in force February 26 to June 26, the assembly is presumed to continue functioning. Article 181 provides: "No provision of this Constitution may be suspended except when Martial law is in force and within the limits specified by the law. Under no circumstances shall the meetings of the National Assembly be suspended . . . during such period." Article 69 provides that a decree of martial law "shall be referred to the National Assembly within the fifteen days following its issue for a decision on the future of martial law." In the absence of the National Assembly, the Amir's declaration of martial law and the measures taken pursuant to the declaration did not comport with constitutional requirements. In this connection, it seems noteworthy that the report mentions opposition meetings in June and July to demand "the reinstitution of the National Council." Of course, they were not directed at reinstating the Council, a puppet organization, but at reinstating the National Assembly.
The report does not draw out the connection between the Sabahs' disregard for the system of checks and balances built into the Kuwaiti Constitution and the undermining of the protections for rights and freedoms. For example, the government's failure to investigate and prosecute the cases of the March 7 killing of Hussein al-Bannay, a government critic, and the attempted assassination on March 3 of the prominent opposition figure Hamid al-Jaw'an (whose 1985 questioning of a Sabah then serving as Minister of Justice led to the latter's resignation under a cloud) should be viewed in relation to the Sabahs' intolerance of a democratic opposition. However, in a commendable instance of candor, the report does acknowledge that well-informed Kuwaitis believed that the attempt on Mr. al-Jaw'an's life may have been politically motivated.
The report is also misleading in its treatment of the executive power, implying through vague wording that there is a constitutional basis for the Crown Prince's occupation of the post of Prime Minister. There is no such basis, and the democratic opposition has demanded that there be an end to the practice.
185
Kuwait
The inadequacies of the Kuwaiti legal system are consistently downplayed. The judicial system is characterized as independent, whereas in reality Kuwaiti law provides for extensive executive branch control over the judiciary, the power of the constitutional court is weak, and the executive branch suspends constitutional provisions whenever it finds it expedient to do so. This is not a recipe for a truly independent judiciary. Although correctly claiming that a 1991 post-liberation law created a right of appeal from the State Security Court, the report does not mention that this "appeal" provides for only a limited and formalistic review by the Court of Cassation; it is not the more meaningful review that would be made if such cases could be taken to the High Court of Appeal, which reviews ordinary criminal convictions. The report speaks of the criminal code requirement that the public prosecutor's office "approve" detentions lasting for more than 24 hours, not recording that this requirement does not apply when the detaining agency is the State Security Police, a group with a major role in detentions in 1991.
With regard to the rights violations perpetrated by the martial law courts convened to try expatriate "collaborators" in the immediate aftermath of the occupation, the report understates the unfairness of the proceedings. The report speaks of accused who "claimed to have made confessions under duress." Many of the accused spoke in court of having been tortured, and trial observers could see the evidence of torture ("torture" being certainly a more accurate term than mere "duress") on their persons. One would not learn from the report that such coerced confessions were the bases for most of the convictions. The report does not record that the accused were tried under a vague and sweeping statute proscribing acts endangering the independence or integrity of Kuwait. This statute gave no notice that it would constitute a criminal offense to repair Iraqi vehicles, to wear a shirt with Saddam Hussein's picture on it, to maintain an Iraqi-run newspaper's printing machine, or to keep a girl's school open - samples of the "crimes" for which the accused were standing trial. The report ignores a basic problem with these martial law proceedings: international standards only permit civilians to be tried by martial law courts in exceptional circumstances, as when there is a threat to the life of the nation ~ a threat hardly posed in post-liberation Kuwait by the kinds of "crimes" for
186
Kuwait
which the accused were being tried. The Crown Prince's commutation of the martial law courts' 29 death sentences (out of which only one had been for a Kuwaiti defendant) is mentioned, without any indication that the commutation only occurred after forceful expressions of condemnation of the outrageous unfairness of the martial law proceedings by influential Western countries and protests by international human rights organizations ~ or that the latter have called for new trials consonant with due process standards to redress the serious miscarriages of justice resulting from the martial law proceedings.
An area where one finds consistent deficiencies in the report lies in its discussions of aspects of the plight of non-Kuwaitis since liberation, which has involved more severe disregard for international human rights law and humanitarian standards than is acknowledged and in which the Kuwaiti government is more directly implicated than the report suggests. The report does not clearly indicate that the hardships and sufferings of non-Kuwaitis in the aftermath of liberation were largely a product of collective punishment meted out to persons of disfavored nationalities. There is a failure to highlight what lay behind the pattern of mistreatment and killings of non-Kuwaitis, a determined policy of "Kuwait for the Kuwaitis" on the part of the post-liberation government, which employed a variety of tactics to intimidate non-Kuwaitis of disfavored nationalities and to drive them out. In this connection, it is misleading for the report to mention the Crown Prince's May 26 warning that those responsible for human rights abuses would be punished severely, without referring to his pronouncement of July 9 that the country had to be purified of "evil elements that constitute a danger to its security," or similar pronouncements by other high-ranking Kuwaiti officials to the effect that purges were needed to cleanse Kuwait of disloyal persons constituting a potential fifth column. In context, such signals constituted an official green light for the abuses directed at non-Kuwaitis.
Terms like "suspected collaborators" keep'recurring when the report covers cases of non-Kuwaitis arrested, detained, tortured and killed " as if their mistreatment had only ensued after the uncovering of evidence that had focused suspicions on the accused. The use of such terms is misleading: in reality, members of disfavored nationalities were
187
Kuwait
often abused by vigilantes and the Kuwaiti security and military forces solely on the basis of their nationality. The reference in the introduction to the report to rights violations affecting "foreign nationals from governments or groups that had supported the Iraqi invasion" is confusing — it implies that foreign nationals are agents "from" their governments — and is objectionable for its implication that the collective punishment of non-Kuwaitis had some justification. Examples of lenient treatment of Kuwaitis which establish how foreigners have been scapegoated as collaborators are omitted, such as the revealing fact that known Kuwaiti collaborators with powerful connections, including a member of the royal family who publicized his support for the Iraqi occupation on television, have been pardoned and exempted from punishment.
Similarly, in the section on travel, emigration and repatriation, the pressures to expel foreigners are not described as retaliatory measures directed against people solely on the basis of their nationality; as the report would have it, "the Kuwaiti Government moved to reduce the presence of these groups" due to the collaboration of some. The report fails to condemn such acts, as it should have, as egregious examples of collective punishment. Although the report gives deserved praise to the government for cooperating with international non-governmental organizations, which had extensive responsibilities for dealing with the non-Kuwaiti population and their departures, it does not note that the government resorted to administrative deportation orders, which meant that, notwithstanding the roles played by organizations like the International Committee of the Red Cross, deportation orders could be issued in an arbitrary, unfair manner, without legal recourse for those served with such orders.
Palestinians were prime targets of collective vengeance after liberation, being treated in a way that evidenced flagrant disregard for human rights and the standards of humanitarian law. The hardships and abuses that led to the migration of all but about 50,000 of the approximately 150,000 to 200,000 Palestinians who remained in Kuwait after liberation ~ a number which the report estimates as 120,000 — are downplayed. The report fails to note the particular hardships of stateless
188
Kuwait
Palestinians, largely Gazans with only Egyptian travel documents, who were subject to the same pressures as other Palestinians, but, unlike them, had nowhere to go.
Contrary to the impression created by the report in the section on acceptable conditions of work, reports from Jordan indicate that Palestinians have faced difficulties in their attempts to reclaim the property and wealth that they had left behind in Kuwait. Palestinians also met obstacles in collecting severance pay, on which many were counting for their subsistence during retirement, and obtaining a fair division of assets from businesses that they had been forced under Kuwaiti law to own jointly with Kuwaiti partners.
The report states rather blandly that after liberation Kuwait "did stop providing free education to those expatriate children who continued to attend school during the Iraqi occupation." Non-Kuwaitis of disfavored nationalities were also excluded from the University of Kuwait, including non-Kuwaiti students who were already enrolled arid had been students in good standing. The report does not state the true purpose of these discriminatory measures which was to coerce non-Kuwaitis to leave the country. Rather, Kuwaiti authorities and the authors of the report would have it that these students were induced to leave the country "voluntarily."
The description of the discriminatory treatment meted out to members of the beleaguered bidoon community is inadequate. It follows the official Kuwaiti government line that the bidoon are basically foreigners without genuine ties to Kuwait. In reality, the bidoon, largely people of bedouin background who traditionally treated national frontiers as merely notional, may have genuine ties to Kuwait based on many decades of residence or being born on Kuwaiti soil -- but without having complied with the bureaucratic formalities necessary to acquire Kuwaiti citizenship. It is therefore misleading to state, as the report does, that the bidoon are "mainly of Iraqi, Syrian, Saudi, and Iranian origin;" even though many who claim to be bidoon may have such origins, so do many Kuwaiti nationals. By speaking of the bidoon as if their non-Kuwaiti nationality were an established fact, the report minimizes the unfairness
189
Kuwait
of the sudden decision by the Kuwaiti government after liberation to treat members of the bidoon community as aliens subject to summary expulsion and exclusion. In addition, the plight of the bidoon is not placed in context in the report, the proper context being the stringency and arbitrariness of the rules for qualifying as a Kuwaiti citizen - rules that limit full citizenship to direct descendants of families who happened to be registered as permanent residents between 1920 and 1959.
The report does acknowledge that the Kuwaiti military and security forces were implicated in at least some of the rights violations following liberation, but it mentions only two specific instances where the government was implicated in the killing of Palestinians, while noting that the estimates are that there may have been 45-50 such incidents. One might read this as meaning that the other cases were not fully documented, but independent human rights investigations have reported on a much wider range of specific cases of named individuals brutalized and/or "disappeared" by the military and security forces. While recognizing that the Kuwaiti government has "not yet charged or brought anyone to trial" for the wave of torture, "disappearances" and extrajudicial killings after liberation, the report neglects to mention that there has been no indication that the government has ever launched any investigations designed to bring the perpetrators of these abuses to justice.
No mention is made of the suffering of Kuwaiti women married to non-Kuwaitis of disfavored nationalities (including bidoon) — and especially those married to Iraqis, who were faced with the prospect of having their families split up and their "non-Kuwaiti" husbands and "non-Kuwaiti" children deported to Iraq. Under the existing discriminatory laws, a Kuwaiti man's marriage to a foreign woman enables her and her children by him to claim citizenship, whereas a Kuwaiti woman's non-Kuwaiti husband and any children she has by him have no claim to Kuwaiti citizenship. The report mentions that women's rights in Kuwait are limited by "cultural mores," but this discrimination against a Kuwaiti woman's non-Kuwaiti husband and children is not a product of local cultural mores, according to which such nationality-
190
Kuwait
based distinctions would be meaningless. The discrimination is imposed from above via national legislation.
There may be no i/e jure forced labor in Kuwait, as the report contends. However, the report neglects to point out that in practice both Kuwaiti law and the policies of an unsympathetic Kuwaiti officialdom combine to insure that expatriate workers become virtual hostages in the hands of their employers. Their employers may hold the workers' passports and other travel documents. Foreign workers cannot terminate their employment or seek other employment in Kuwait without permission from the authorities, which may also be needed for them to leave Kuwait to return to their home country. Their residency permits may be canceled if their employment is terminated. No organization exists to help workers who suffer abuses because of their acute vulnerability under this system, and any protests by foreign workers over their mistreatment may lead to police interrogation and detention. Thus, the system is one that reeks of coercion. It is a serious omission for the report to fail to acknowledge this at a time when it is notorious that^ large number of Philippine employees have sought refuge and are now squatting in their embassy in Kuwait, claiming that they have been abused, threatened and coerced.
The report misses the point when it mentions in passing that the government "did not recognize" the Kuwaiti Association to Defend War Victims (KADWV). In common with other countries of the region, Kuwait allows no place in its law for independent nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) such as the KADWV. Legal recognition under existing legislation would provide many opportunities for undesirable government interference in the work of such organizations. Non-recognition leaves the KADWV open to charges that it is operating illegally. A structural legislative change is necessary in Kuwait to afford independent NGOs freedom to operate under the law.
Fudging the status of the KADWV is of a piece with the report's listing of two governmental bodies alongside it, as if the latter were also genuine human rights organizations ~ which they were not in reality, being solely concerned with aspects of Kuwait's POW problem.
191
Kuwait
In the section on freedom of speech and press, the report does not record the government's censorship of a KADWV publication on Human Rights Day, December 10, 1991, commemorating the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The publication was censored on the grounds it implied criticism of the government. What does the censorship of a commemoration of the basic document for modern human rights imply but that the Kuwaiti government considered the mere invocation human rights principles by its citizens a sinister attack? And, what does this tell us about the attitude of the Sabahs toward human rights?
192
