LEBANON
The State Department's report on Lebanon asserts that "[t]he human rights situation improved significantly in 1991 as the Government reasserted its control over more of Lebanese territory and the level of violence was reduced." Yet despite a renewed U.S. presence in Lebanon which has enabled the State Department to monitor better the human rights situation, the report does not make a compelling case for the existence of this supposed improvement and is particularly patchy in its treatment of parts of Lebanon occupied by Israeli and Syrian military forces.
Euphemistic language referring to a "large part of Lebanon outside Government control," for example, masks the reality of the foreign occupation of Lebanon by Syrian and Israeli troops. While the 1989 and 1990 reports referred to "foreign occupying troops" to describe Syrian and Israeli intervention in Lebanon, this year's report refers to a more neutral "presence of non-Lebanese armed forces."
The report's treatment of one political faction in Lebanon, General Aoun's partisans, is particularly problematic. In the section on arbitrary arrest, detention or exile, the report only mentions that Lebanese officers seized in an operation against Aoun forces were released by Syria, and that General Aoun was offered amnesty on the condition that he remain outside Lebanon for five years. There is absolutely no mention ~ in the section on detention or elsewhere in the report -- of the fact that hundreds of Aoun supporters were arbitrarily detained in July, some of whom were still held at the end of 1991. The report similarly disregards credible allegations of torture of some Aoun supporters, asserting that "no allegations of torture were made against Lebanese security services." Some detainees claim to have been beaten and burned with cigarettes by military intelligence police.
The report's treatment of the Palestinian population in Lebanon is also flawed. While the report mentions in the introduction that in July "units of the Lebanese army wrested control over the southern towns of Sidon and Tyre from Palestinian groups," it fails to note that according
199
Lebanon
to official figures, 574 people suspected of opposing or fighting against the army were arrested, the majority of them Palestinians. According to Amnesty International, at least 213 had been released uncharged by late August, but an unknown number were still held at the end of the year.
In the section on arbitrary arrest, detention or exile, the report correctly notes that prisoners held by Israeli surrogate forces at the Al-Khiam detention center in South Lebanon "reportedly suffer torture and are denied contact with family members." Yet its discussion of abuses at Al-Khiam is weakened by another sentence in the section, where the report states that according to "human rights groups," the prisoners have "no legal procedures or due process guarantees." This failure to speak in its own voice tends to minimize any intended criticism by the State Department of abuses at the detention center.
The report's discussion of the general amnesty law is incomplete. It states:
In August Parliament passed an amnesty law to provide the framework for pardoning many crimes committed during the civil unrest, as an aspect of national reconciliation. Some groups criticized the law, however, for amnestying the most serious crimes but not the more routine. Others said the law could be used to discriminate against one or another political group.
The report should have noted the more serious offenses covered by the amnesty, including murder or attempted murder of political, diplomatic or religious personalities. It also should have included information as to the number of persons released; Amnesty International reports that by October, 317 untried detainees and sentenced prisoners had been released.
The report often correctly distinguishes between theory and practice, important in Lebanon, yet in some instances the distinction is muddled. The section on arbitrary arrest, detention or exile, for example, opens with theory: "Lebanese law requires that a suspect be
200
Lebanon
arraigned before an accusation committee (a panel of three judges) and a prosecutor within 48 hours of arrest . . . ." The report then continues with a qualification, "... but government prosecutors were said occasionally to hold suspects indefinitely for interrogation without reference to a court or judge." Similarly, regarding the disarming of militias, the report focuses on what should have happened after the government in March ordered all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias to disband and surrender their weapons, stating unequivocally in the introduction that "[mjilitias were disarmed throughout the greater Beirut and Mount Lebanon areas." The sentence which follows qualifies this statement, listing "militias which cooperated, at least nominally, with the central Government's efforts. . . ." Only in this second sentence does the report convey the reality of the disarmament, that it was only partial.
Yet the discussion of respect for political rights provides a lengthy description of the Lebanese political system in theory. It fails to mention, however, a critical political event ~ the de-facto self-appointment of 13 members of the Council of Ministers, which occurred in April when the Minister of Interior gave directives to mayor§ stipulating who should be included on municipal councils with power to nominate members of parliament.
The report also paints a misleading picture in the section on freedom of speech and press, which opens thus:
Lebanon has a strong heritage of freedom of opinion, speech and press. Governmental authorities traditionally have respected the rights of those who opposed government policies through peaceful means.
Although they were public knowledge, the report does not mention a number of significant violations, such as the confiscation of certain books, including the Chronique du Liban Rebelle by Philippe Rondot, or of numerous French magazines featuring interviews with or pictures of the exiled General Aoun. Attacks on journalists, denounced in a press conference jointly held by the heads of the Press Syndicate and the Union of Journalists in June, also go unreported. Furthermore, in November,
201
Lebanon
copies of the November 25 issue of Al-Shirawhich contained an article highly critical of President Eli as Hrawi, were confiscated by internal security forces on the order of the Beirut prosecutor-general. In December, a suspicious fire broke out in 'Ayn al-Muraysah, where the Al-Shira' printing press is located.
The report is further weakened by an important internal inconsistency between sections. It refers in the section on disappearances to "independent militias," while no militia can operate in territory held by the Syrian army (80% of Lebanon) or the Israeli army in the South (10% of Lebanon) without consent and logistical assistance from foreign occupying forces. The report talks of "occasional allegations of brutal treatment by Lebanese militias, Syrian and Israeli occupying forces." This mild language contrasts starkly with the introductory section to the report which states unequivocally that: "civilians [in areas of Lebanon outside government control] continued to be victims of artillery and aerial attacks, bombings, sniping, abductions, summary executions, and assassinations." These violations are something more than "occasional allegations," and the use of this language misleads the reader.
In a few cases, the report incorrectly describes legal issues. On the question of internally displaced persons, for example, it states that with respect to naturalization and acquisition of property in Lebanon, Palestinian refugees are discriminated against, while in actuality, the laws on nationality and acquisition of property apply to all aliens equally. Regarding women's property rights, while the report states that women may not be able to exercise full control over their property, Lebanese law guarantees women full enjoyment of this right. While the report states that property rights differ from one community to another, only inheritance laws differ from one community to another.
The report is also weakened by a reluctance to address certain key political issues. On the question of internally displaced people (approximately 800,000 persons) who have not been able to return to their homes for political reasons, the report only refers to a "problem of providing appropriate shelter," completely ignoring the political aspects of the situation. For example, the Christian community formerly
202
Lebanon
resident in the Shouf mountains remains displaced pending an agreement on political representation in the proposed Mount Lebanon electoral province.
Finally, the report does not mention several important human rights concerns. It does not address, for example, the question of approximately 180,000 stateless, undocumented persons in Lebanon, who suffer from discrimination in law and daily life because they do not enjoy any of the rights that the rest of the population enjoys, albeit theoretically. Regarding arrest and detention in Lebanon, the report does not discuss the fact that contrary to internationally recognized human rights standards, many juvenile offenders are held with adults, or the fact that prolonged pre-trial detention is a continuing problem.
Unfortunately, despite improved access to Lebanon, because of the deficiencies cited above, the 1991 report fails to provide a complete picture of the human rights situation in Lebanon.
203
