LIBERIA
1991 continued to be an uncertain year in Liberia as the civil war remained unresolved. However, the worst of the fighting ended and an uneasy ceasefire held through most of the year. This year's report on Liberia provides an accurate overall picture and captures the complexity of the situation well. However, in several instances, its account is too general and lacks available detail which would have strengthened the report. This is disappointing given the fact that the reports of the past few years have been detailed and thorough. The justifiable exception was last year at the height of the war, and the Lawyers Committee acknowledged the limits of human rights fact-finding at that time, stating that the 1990 report was a "detailed presentation of human rights conditions given the severe constraints in reporting due to the ongoing civil war." However, in 1991, many of those constraints were eased as the worst of the fighting ended and the West African peace-keeping forces (ECOMOG) took control of Monrovia. It is unfortunate that the State Department did not take greater advantage of the increased access to human rights information in Liberia, particularly in Monrovia, where the embassy staff is based.
In some instances, the State Department did not make any attempt to establish the facts for itself, even where this would have required little effort. For example, the report states that "Idjuring 1991 none of Liberia's prewar prisons were believed to be still functioning, although the IGNU [Interim Government] was reported to be refurbishing one in Monrovia" (emphasis added). In fact, the Interim Government has been renovating Monrovia Central Prison, the largest civilian prison, and reconstruction work was completed in mid-November. The main building has been rebuilt and each of the 48 cells contains two beds. An additional 15 cells have been reserved for women. Another wing has been built that will house another 50 to 60 prisoners. A Lawyers Committee delegation examined the site in August, and at that time work was also continuing on buildings that will house a kitchen, a medical clinic and living quarters for prison personnel. In December the prison was officially opened. This additional detail is included here to indicate that with little or no effort,
204
Liberia
the State Department could have established the status of the prison and examined the conditions within it, instead of merely stating that an unnamed prison was reportedly being refurbished.
Another example of this type of less than rigorous reporting and analysis is in the next paragraph where the report states that incidents of human rights violations by undisciplined Armed Forces of Liberia (AFL) soldiers decreased after "AFL commanders called for greater discipline and in July formed a board of inquiry to investigate civilians' complaints." While Commander-in-Chief Hezekiah Bo wen did announce to the press that the AFL had established a joint board of inquiry in cooperation with ECOMOG to investigate allegations of AFL harassment of citizens, in fact, neither the Interim Government nor ECOMOG was consulted and to date no such board has been created. The decrease in incidents of AFL harassment is attributable more to an increased presence of ECOMOG troops around the Barclay Training Center where the AFL are encamped. Once again, it would have been an easy task for the State Department to find out the precise situation instead of relying on a May 17 newspaper report in the Inquirer.
The report's coverage of violations committed by the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL) under Charles Taylor is understated, particularly in contrast with the thorough reporting about specific incidents of violence that took place in the camp of the Independent National Patriotic Front of Liberia (INPFL) under Prince Johnson. In the section on torture, it makes no mention of torture committed by NPFL forces. The report should have mentioned that NPFL forces continued to act with impunity; throughout 1991, civilians in the area under NPFL control were subjected to widespread and frequent physical attacks, mistreatment and confiscation of property and were restricted from exercising freedom of movement and expression. Many of these violations were carried out at the numerous checkpoints manned by armed NPFL fighters, often as young as age 10. The report should have discussed more thoroughly the torture method tabey which was used extensively against civilian non-combatants. This method involves tying the arms behind the back at the wrist and the elbow. It has been used by
205
Liberia
both NPFL and INPFL forces and has resulted in permanent paralysis of the arms of a number of civilians.
The report should have also mentioned that many of the worst violations have been committed by NPFL "Special Commandoes." A number of these Commandoes have acquired justifiably terrible reputations for committing violations of human rights and humanitarian law, particularly Isaac Musa, Paul Vaye and Oliver Varney. The one area in which the report does a commendable job is its description of abuses of NPFL forces in Grand Gedeh County. That type of detail was also warranted in regard to similar abuses that took place in other areas, such as Bomi Hills.
The brief description of how ethnic tensions were exacerbated by the Doe government is a welcome addition that clarifies the roots of the current conflict and explains the political dimensions and complexity of the conflict. To its credit, the State Department has taken care to note briefly the pre-war conditions in the relevant sections, which puts many of the incidents described into context and gives the reader a complete picture.
However, in one instance, the report does not follow through and note the current conditions. For example, in describing prison conditions, it rightly states: "Prior to the civil war, conditions in the nation's jails were inhuman and hazardous to life and health .... In 1991, none of Liberia's prewar prisons were believed to be still functioning." It should have continued to note that despite the fact that the official prisons had not reopened, there were illegal detention centers both in the NPFL and Interim Government areas, and described the conditions in these detention centers.
In the NPFL-controlled area, even after the release of the West African nationals, there were credible reports that up to 1,000 detainees were still being held in horrendous conditions in makeshift centers. In the Monrovia area, the Interim Government used the police holding cells in the Police Headquarters. During 1991, both non-convicted and convicted prisoners were held in nearby cells in the basement of the
206
Liberia
Police Headquarters. When the Lawyers Committee visited the holding cells in September, there were 54 convicted prisoners and 12 non-convicted prisoners. Sanitary conditions in the cells were inadequate and there was overcrowding. Prisoners complained of inadequate food, but not of mistreatment by the police. Some of the prisoners had been held for more than 48 hours before being brought before a magistrate because of delays.
In noting the emerging human rights groups in Liberia, the report should have mentioned the Catholic Church's efforts to create a Justice and Peace Commission at year's end.
207
