SRI LANKA
This year's State Department report contains many incisive observations on the disturbing human rights situation in Sri Lanka. While the report correctly points out that the number of human rights violations reported was markedly reduced from 1990, it recognizes that the violations committed by the government and by the separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelan (LTTE) were still massive. Thus, the report notes that political killing continued on a "reduced but still large scale"; that "disappearances" also continued "on a very large scale"; that "[bjeatings are routinely given during interrogations"; and that the civil war resulted in "indiscriminate killings on a large scale."
The report nevertheless contains many shortcomings. While the section on extrajudicial killings contains numerous informative examples, corresponding information in the sections on disappearances and torture are relatively weak. It ignores the human rights issues raised in the attempted impeachment of President Premadasa, the most important political event of the year. The section on freedom of the press omits some important incidents. In relating examples of human rights violations stemming from the insurgency, the report in some instances downplays the involvement of the security forces. Lastly, the report fails to address the efficacy of the various commissions established by the government to monitor or investigate alleged human rights violations.
The report's most significant omission is its failure to discuss the human rights component of the August impeachment bid against President Premadasa. There were clear political motivations behind the impeachment bid, which over 100 of the 225 members of Parliament signed, including 40 members of the President's own ruling United National Party (UNP). But included in the charges that the President had violated the Constitution were allegations of human rights violations, specifically, that he had
failed to protect and intentionally and knowingly prevented the investigations and conduct of inquiries and/or to punish those responsible for the . . . murder of
347
Sri Lanka
the well-known journalist Mr. Richard De Zoysa, the disappearance of Mr. Lakshman Perera, the disappearance of Mr. Krishna Hussain and thousands of others including youth who were arbitrarily abducted, tortured, killed and otherwise disposed of by hired killer groups.
The petition also charged the President with operating a "police state" to intimidate his political opponents and otherwise squelch dissent. More broadly, the dissidents argued that Premadasa's executive presidency was unresponsive to the Parliament and to the people.
The government's response to the impeachment attempt implicated important issues concerning the democratic political process in Sri Lanka, and should have also been discussed in the report. The motion calling for President Premadasa's impeachment was presented to the Speaker of the Parliament on August 28. The President immediately suspended Parliament until September 24. The eight UNP Members of Parliament who openly and vocally supported the impeachment from the outset were expelled from the party within days after the motion was submitted, despite their efforts for injunctive relief against their expulsion in the District Court of Colombo. The impeachment motion went no further after the Speaker informed the President on October 8 that he (the Speaker) had ceased to entertain the motion. Throughout this period, there was a great deal of political activity and, concomitantly, numerous complaints by UNP dissidents and opposition parties of intimidation and harassment of their supporters, including reports of attacks by unidentified persons and arrests and intimidation by the police.
The report misleadingly states that "during an impeachment challenge that began in August, there were no known cases of censorship of the print media beyond the sealing of [a] printing press . . . and the press generally seemed emboldened. " Between the date the impeachment motion was presented to the Speaker and the date he ceased to entertain that motion, rights of free speech and freedom of the press were severely tested. On October 4, the Navamago press, which publishes the Yukthiya newspaper of the Movement for Inter-Racial Justice and Equality, was
348
Sri Lanka
searched and thereafter shut down by the police. (This is the one incident related to the impeachment bid which is mentioned in the report.) The fundamental rights case filed by the owner of the press was still pending at the end of 1991. On October 20, the weekly Ravaya published a list of the 43 UNP Members of Parliament who were alleged to have signed the impeachment motion. The next day, the paper's editor, Victor Ivan, was detained and questioned for three hours by the Criminal Investigations Department and released only after extensive interrogation regarding his sources of information. Also in October, the correspondent for All India Radio (AIR) was deported after erroneously reporting that the Speaker of Parliament had resigned, despite the fact that AIR retracted the story and apologized within minutes after the incorrect report. As the report notes in the section on press freedom, the state-controlled media (which includes all of Sri Lanka's radio and television stations) remained silent on the impeachment motion.
The report understates the severity of government restrictions on civil liberties. For example, it states that "[d]uring the Persian Gulf War, the government disapproved pro-Iraq demonstration marches, although it allowed several small rallies to take place." In fact, the government banned outright anti-war demonstrations while purporting to allow "peaceful meetings to discuss the Gulf crisis." The report also states that constitutional provisions allowing freedom of movement are "generally honored" although curfews and checkpoints by the government and the LTTE have "had the effect of inhibiting travel in certain areas." In fact, extensive curfews, particularly in the north and east, appear to be the rule rather than the exception.
In several instances, the report leaves out crucial facts in the examples it describes that would provide useful insights into the behavior of the Sri Lankan security forces. The report cites an incident in which a bus was attacked and six Tamil civilians were killed in the northeast in February, and notes that responsibility lies either with a Muslim mob seeking revenge for an LTTE attack on Muslims or with the Muslim Home Guards, a paramilitary vigilante group armed by the government. The report fails to note significant facts reported by Amnesty International: the bus was part of a convoy that had a military escort
349
Sri Lanka
through part of the eastern province until it reached a Muslim Home Guard "checkpoint," at which the military escort turned back, leaving the convoy unprotected. The convoy was attacked soon after, reportedly by persons in uniform, suggesting the Home Guards. Moreover, the military failed to intervene, although the incident occurred within earshot of an army camp. Despite the apparent military complicity, Amnesty International reports that it knows of no government inquiry into the incident.
The section on violations of humanitarian law notes that the Air Force has dropped leaflets warning civilians of pending bombing operations. However, the report should have stated that in some cases leaflets were dropped only minutes before bombing commenced, precluding civilians from making a timely exodus from a targeted area. This section fails to discuss one of the most highly reported attacks on civilians of the year -- a military helicopter attack on a clearly marked vehicle carrying civilian medical staff of Médecins sans Frontières (MSF), four of whom were injured. The army provided conflicting explanations for the incident. After international protest, the government appointed a one-person commission to investigate the attack, which subsequently absolved the government of any liability. MSF officials called the inquiry a "whitewash."
The report's only mention of this matter is in the section on governmental attitude regarding international and nongovernmental investigation of alleged violations of human rights, where it is noted that the incident prompted nongovernmental organizations to negotiate new guidelines with the government to safeguard the movement of their vehicles in the northeast. In contrast to the State Department's view. Amnesty International read the MSF incident as providing "further credibility" to the repeated allegations that civilians are being indiscriminately targeted by military aircraft in the northeast.
The report notes that the government has established three commissions to look into human rights issues: the Officials' Committee on Human Rights, established in November 1990 to review and make recommendations with regard to human rights cases referred to it,
350
Sri Lanka
primarily from international sources; the Human Rights Task Force, set up in August 1991 to monitor the treatment of detainees; and the Presidential Commission of Inquiry into Involuntary Removal of Persons (the Disappearance Commission), established to inquire into disappearances after January 11, 1991 (the date the regulation establishing the Commission was promulgated). Beyond stating that "human rights activists claim [that the commissions] are mostly cosmetic," the report provides little analysis of their efficacy. The Officials' Committee on Human Rights, for instance, appears designed to allay the concerns of major donor countries, rather than improve the human rights situation in Sri Lanka. And while noting that the Disappearance Commission refused to broaden its investigatory mandate to disappearances prior to January 11, 1991, the report fails to point out that this temporal demarcation excludes tens of thousands of "disappearances" occurring between 1987 and 1991. In fact the Disappearance Commission rejected 535 of the 601 complaints it received through August 5, 1991 (the date the Commission began hearings), because they had occurred prior to January 11, 1991. It is reported that the Disappearance Commission has now refused over 2,000 cases from before 1991. The report also should have noted that claims must be filed with the commission in person in Colombo, on the country's western coast, which for safety and financial reasons is often prohibitive for persons living in the north and east, where the vast majority of "disappearances" since January 1991 have occurred.
The Human Rights Task Force was set up too late in the year to judge its effectiveness, but key structural defects should have been noted. Although the Task Force was created to monitor detainees, there are no provisions that require the police or the army to immediately report arrests, transfers and releases of detainees. Absent such a requirement, the Task Force's monitoring is necessarily incomplete and haphazard. (A January 8, 1992 report by the UN Working Group on Disappearances found that the Task Force has limited its monitoring to detention and rehabilitation camps run by the army and has not visited police stations, police detention centers or "outposts," temporary places of detention by the police or the army.)
351
Sri Lanka
The report's discussion of the commission established by the president in December 1990 to investigate the activities of nongovernmental organizations (the NGO Commission) should have been included in the section on freedom of assembly and not buried in the section on governmental attitudes towards NGOs. The report states simply that "NGO workers and human rights advocates have expressed concern" that the NGO Commission will be used to discredit the NGOs and restrict their freedom, and that the government denies this charge. However, the report fails to note the strong reasons for this concern. The NGO Commission has an extremely broad mandate to probe the activities and funding of NGOs. It has asked each NGO to provide it with a wide range of information, including the identities and visa status of all staff members; financial information; and affiliations with "citizens' committees," which are local nongovernmental advocacy groups. This last request is of concern because Sri Lanka's citizens' committees have been an integral part of the process of collecting and disseminating human rights information in the country. Moreover, a number of members of citizens committees and human rights NGOs have been harassed, killed or have "disappeared" in recent years.
Finally, the report fails to mention the expulsion of Britain's ambassador to Sri Lanka, British High Commissioner David Gladstone. He was expelled after complaining to police about allegations of voting irregularities related to actions by ruling party supporters in the May local elections. (The ruling UNP won these elections throughout the country except in the north and east.) Gladstone expressed concern about human rights in Sri Lanka upon his expulsion and the European Community issued a press release stating that the expulsion was inappropriate and would "not lead to any reduction in the emphasis which they give to human rights questions in their dealings with the Government of Sri Lanka."
352
