LITHUANIA
The 1991 State Department report on human rights conditions in the Republic of Lithuania records the revolutionary changes in that country over the course of the year. In addition, the report is comprehensive in scope, notwithstanding the fact that the United States had no diplomatic relations with Lithuania until September 2, 1991, when it recognized Lithuania as an independent nation and endorsed its membership in the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. The scope of the report is particularly commendable in light of the growing difficulty in monitoring human rights violations due to the splintering of the former Soviet Union.
As in the cases of the Baltic Republics of Estonia and Latvia, the report, however, is flawed in one fundamental respect. While accurately describing a pre-independence human right situation "characterized by severe Soviet repression," the report fails to completely and objectively describe the post-independence situation, including actions taken by the newly elected democratic government ~ in response to the longtime occupation of Lithuania by the Soviet Union ~ that disproportionately affect Russians and other non-Lithuanians. Instead, the report naively states that the government "put into effect a number of laws intended to protect the rights of citizens" without defining who those "citizens" are. Ironically, it is precisely those "protective" laws which threaten human rights in Lithuania today.
The report properly mentions that this irony is created, at least in part, by the ethnic composition of Lithuania, which includes an 80% majority of Lithuanians. Many of the remainder are Russians and Poles, comprising nine and seven percent of the population, respectively. Some migrated to Lithuania as part of the massive population transfers organized by the Soviet Union, transfers which contravened Article 49 of the Geneva Convention. Such transfers, however, affected the ethnic compositions of Estonia and Latvia more than they did that of Lithuania.
Because of its strong majority, ethnic Lithuanians did not fear extinction as did the smaller indigenous majority populations of Estonia
208
Lithuania
and Latvia. As a result, on November 3, 1989, the Lithuanian Supreme Council passed a citizenship law adopting a form of the "zero option." The law extended citizenship to all inhabitants who applied by November 3, 1991, and satisfied two requirements: first, 10 years of residency and second, legal employment. The law prohibited dual citizenship. Being Lithuanian, however, was not a requirement. Indeed, Jacek Czaputowicz of the Polish Ministry of Foreign Affairs has indicated that 87% of Poles living in Lithuania have accepted Lithuanian citizenship.
Yet, as the report correctly observes, on December 10, 1991, the Supreme Council passed a new citizenship law which provides conditions on, and exclusions from, eligibility for naturalization. All remaining or incoming applicants who seek citizenship may be naturalized only if they have resided for at least 10 years in Lithuania. Additional conditions on naturalization, however, are that the applicant must have legal employment, speak and read the Lithuanian language, know the basic provisions of the Lithuanian Constitution, and swear an oath of loyalty to the Republic, renouncing loyalty to and citizenship in all others.
In addition to diese conditions, certain restrictions apply, in that certain classes of persons are ineligible for naturalization. Those classes are: those who tried to interfere in the independence movement after March 11, 1990, the date independence was declared; those who participated in "criminal actions directed against the Lithuanian State"; those who sympathized with or assisted the Nazis during World War II; those sentenced to imprisonment for "a serious, deliberate crime"; and those addicted to alcohol or drugs, or infected with "especially dangerous infectious diseases."
Non-Lithuanians who were not eligible for, or refused, Lithuanian citizenship may apply for Russian citizenship. The potential availability of alternate citizenship, however, does not solve the problems created by Lithuania's naturalization law, a law which is not, as the report claims, "ostensibly nondiscriminatory in its precepts." In fact, it may seriously threaten human rights in several respects. And these threats are present even if one assumes that its broad terminology, such
209
Lithuania
as "especially dangerous infectious diseases," is capable of being interpreted, and enforced, in a nonarbitrary manner.
Its restrictions on eligibility for naturalization impermissibly exclude various classes of non-indigenous persons, the first class being those convicted of "serious, deliberate" crimes. By withholding citizenship from previously convicted criminals, Lithuania arguably is effectively adding an additional ex post facto punishment to that imposed by the criminal law, which would violate Article 15 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), to which Lithuania acceded in 1991. Second, by withholding citizenship from those addicted to alcohol or drugs, Lithuania may be administering what Helsinki Watch has called "an especially cruel, arbitrary, and utterly unjustifiable" punishment which would violate Article 7 of the ICCPR, one which discourages them from seeking needed treatment. And the same is true of those infected with "especially dangerous infectious diseases." The ramifications of this provision are clear: in Lithuania to be stricken with the AIDS virus, for example, could mean not only a loss of health and possibly life, but the deprivation of citizenship and its attendant civil and political rights as well.
Moreover, the naturalization requirements made of eligible persons place impermissible conditions on citizenship. Language requirements, for one, must be seen as inappropriate, particularly in republics containing a variety of ethnic groups, each with its own language. (Helsinki Watch suggests that a better way for Lithuania to revive its native language might be to offer free language instruction to its non-Lithuanian populations. By offering such instruction, Lithuania would avoid placing an economic burden on its citizenship.) The 10-year residency requirement also seems excessive and has been decried by human rights observers and commentators both inside and outside of Lithuania.
Finally, in an interesting twist, the new citizenship law harms Lithuanian émigrés who accepted citizenship in other countries, many of whom are interested in reclaiming their property that was expropriated by the Soviet Union in 1940. The law presently provides that only
210
Lithuania
citizens may file claims. To date, Lithuanian émigrés have been unsuccessful in challenging the ban on dual citizenship, unlike their counterparts in Latvia.
The impact of a relatively exclusive citizenship law is magnified by the constantly changing political landscape in Lithuania. Stiff naturalization requirements, for example, place those who were ineligible for, or refused, citizenship (principally ethnic minorities) on "second-class" footing with those who accepted citizenship (principally the ethnic majority) with respect to the most important political and economic events in the near future. For example, although the report claims that "suffrage is universal," the December 10 citizenship law excludes non-citizens from electing, and being elected as, representatives in the forthcoming elections. Non-citizens are excluded, in part, from privatization as well. For example, the Lithuanian government has created, for citizens only, bank accounts containing 5,000 rubles to be used toward purchasing privatized property. Furthermore, non-citizens are restricted in their right to acquire such property, even without government bank accounts.
A number of other problems bear noting. The first is that, as the report correctly states, on August 22, the Lithuanian Supreme Council officially banned the activities of the Soviet Communist Party and associated organizations which supported the failed coup. This action may impermissibly infringe upon rights of free association guaranteed by Article 22 of the ICCPR.
Second, there is a "Polish issue" as well, one which the report properly locates in the city of Vilnius and the southwest region of Lithuania, where the Polish community is sizeable. On September 4, the Lithuanian government disbanded popularly-elected city councils in the cities of Snieckus and Vilnius, and in the Salcininkai region. The report does not note, however, that the replacement councils were made up of Lithuanians ~ vowing "no more leniency" ~ causing 2,000 Poles to stage an indefinite protest outside the Supreme Council building.
211
Lithuania
Finally, the report insufficiently treats Lithuania's criminal rehabilitation procedure. Since passage of the rehabilitation law, the Lithuanian Supreme Court has issued more than 22,000 certificates rehabilitating persons convicted and deported by Soviet courts for political crimes. Applications were denied to 450 persons with "blood on their hands." Yet those convicted by Soviet tribunals, or "troikas," of crimes against humanity were among those rehabilitated because Lithuania does not recognize "troikas." The report optimistically states that "persons may not be rehabilitated until their cases have been fully reviewed." Yet the Lithuanian Supreme Court will not initiate such review, having said that it will review each case only after new evidence has been presented to it by third parties. The stated reason for this policy is a lack of resources to undertake investigations itself One third party, the Weisenthal Center, has presented new evidence of genocide against those seeking rehabilitation in five cases.
In sum, the State Department's report, while fairly inclusive as to the facts, fails to capture both the degree of tension which exists between Lithuania's indigenous and non-indigenous ethnic populations, and the extent to which Lithuania's democratic government has adopted measures which can be used to trample the rights of its non-indigenous population. The existence of "Russian" and "Polish" issues underlines the ethnic problems confronting Lithuania. Thus, one must weigh carefully the words of the Chairman of the Supreme Council, Vytautas Landsbergis:
There has been, and, to some extent there remains . . . a vicious political minority which is not very conscientious and does not wish to behave in a decent manner. . . . This political group, this party, is trying to save itself by . . . hiding behind the Poles and claiming that these measures are not against it as a political group, but against the Poles.
The State Department's 1992 report should look beyond politics to ethnicity, for in this instance at least, regardless of the motives, a
212
Lithuania
renewed democracy is endangering the human rights of ethnic minorities in its struggle to shake off the residue of Soviet occupation.
213
