LATVIA
The State Department's 1991 report on human rights conditions in Latvia reflects the dramatic changes to that country over the course of the year. In addition, the report is comprehensive in scope, notwithstanding the fact that the United States had no diplomatic relations with Latvia until September 2, 1991, when it recognized Latvia as a republic independent of the former Soviet Union, and endorsed its membership in the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. The scope of the report is particularly commendable in light of the growing difficulty in monitoring human rights violations due to the splintering of the former Soviet Union.
The report, however, is fundamentally flawed in one respect. While it accurately describes pro-Soviet attempts to forcibly overthrow the legitimately-elected Latvian government and provides a detailed account of human rights violations perpetrated by Soviet troops and communist party-backed groups in January 1991 and the attempted coup against former President Gorbachev on August 19, the report fails to describe in other than vague terms the repressive and discriminatory measures and policies subsequently adopted by the new independent Latvian government which threaten the human rights of the non-indigenous population of Latvia. Most significantly, while the report accurately describes the philosophical underpinnings and origins of the recently promulgated draft citizenship law, it dramatically understates the dangerous consequences of the draft law.
As the report properly notes, the ethnic composition of Latvia includes a bare 52% majority of Latvians. Many of the remainder are Russians, who migrated to Latvia as part of the massive population transfers organized by the Soviet Union, transfers which contravened Article 49 of the Geneva Convention. The city of Riga, for example, with a population of almost one million, is comprised of 70% Russians, many of whom settled in the homes of the thousands of Latvians who were deported to Siberia. As a result of this transfer, indigenous Latvians feared, and continue to fear, ethnic extinction.
193
Latvia
The response of the Latvian majority has been the adoption of laws designed to preserve the power of ethnic Latvians at the expense of large non-indigenous minority groups such as the Russians. Prior to the Latvian declaration of independence, for example, a new language law was passed which guaranteed all inhabitants the right to secondary instruction in their native languages, but made the mastery of Latvian compulsory at all educational establishments. One possible consequence of this law, and a troubling one, is that Russian schools may be forced to cut staffs or close down altogether, because principals and their deputies are now required to have a perfect command of Latvian. Only five to seven percent of them meet this requirement.
Since declaring independence, the government's response to the perceived threat of ethnic extinction has been to adopt a number of additional measures: first, to temporarily ban residence permits to "any persons arriving from the territory of other states"; and second, to draft a new citizenship law which seeks to "liquidate the consequences of the Soviet Union's occupation and annexation of Latvia."
Any such "liquidation" clearly threatens the political rights, including citizenship, of those persons deemed to be the "consequences" of Soviet occupation -- non-indigenous persons living in Latvia. The report correctly notes that "the issue of defining the requirements for citizenship is highly contentious," but its claim that by the end of the year, "[qjuestions about the ramifications of possible changes in the citizenship law . . . remain[ed] unresolved" is factually incorrect and vastly understates the current crisis in Latvia.
On October 15, the Supreme Council rejected the "zero option" initially favored by Chairman Anatolijs Gorbunovs, under which all those living in Latvia at the time of independence would automatically be extended citizenship. Instead, the Supreme Council drafted a new citizenship law, which provides that all Latvians who were citizens on the date of the Soviet invasion ~ June 17, 1940 ~ and their direct descendants are automatically extended Latvian citizenship should they register before July 1, 1992. All others wishing to be citizens may be naturalized only if they have resided for at least 16 years in Latvia.
194
Latvia
Nearly 80% of Russians meet this requirement. Under the draft law, an additional condition on naturalization, however, is that the applicant must have a command of spoken Latvian, which only one-fourth of non-indigenous persons, including Russians, possess. Applicants must also know the basic provisions of the 1922 Latvian Constitution, swear an oath of loyalty to the Republic, and renounce loyalty to and citizenship in all others.
In addition to these conditions, certain restrictions apply, in that certain classes of persons are ineligible for naturalization. Those classes are: people recognized by a court as having hindered Latvia's efforts to achieve statehood; former Soviet servicemen or Communist Party or Komsomol members; those who have committed premeditated crimes or crimes against humanity; drug addicts and chronic alcoholics; and those with no legal means of economic subsistence in Latvia. And finally, those classes of persons "spreading chauvinism, fascism, communism, or other totalitarian as well as social class dictatorial ideas, or [thosel inflaming national disorder and hatred" are likewise ineligible for naturalization in Latvia under the draft law.
Non-indigenous persons who do not qualify for, or who refuse, Latvian citizenship may be granted Russian citizenship, with which they would still be allowed to live in Latvia. Yet the potential availability of alternate citizenship and continued residence does not solve the problems created by Latvia's citizenship law, a law which seriously threatens human rights in several respects.
First, the requirement of 16 years' residence in Latvia as a prerequisite of citizenship has been harshly criticized by both human rights groups and a European Community commission as excessive and out-of-step with modern citizenship requirements. Even one of the architects of the draft law. Juris Bojars, has acknowledged that the 16-year term "is too long."
Second, its restrictions on eligibility for naturalization impermissibly exclude various classes of non-indigenous persons such as military personnel. By categorically excluding former Soviet servicemen
195
Latvia
and Communist Party or Komsomol members, Latvia may be collectively punishing individuals for their political associations, in violation of Article 22 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), to which Latvia acceded in 1992.
Third, by withholding citizenship from previously convicted criminals, Latvia arguably is effectively adding an additional ex post facto punishment to that meted out by the criminal law, which would violate Article 15 of the ICCPR. Similarly, by withholding citizenship from drug addicts and chronic alcoholics, Latvia metes out what Helsinki Watch has called "an especially cruel, arbitrary, and utterly unjustifiable" punishment which would be in violation of Article 7, one which both discourages them from seeking needed treatment and taints them with criminal status.
Finally, by withholding citizenship from those engaging in the undefined practice of "spreading chauvinism, fascism, communism," or other ideas deemed undesirable, Latvia may limit the freedoms of conscience and speech to an impermissible extent as defined by Articles 19 and 20 of the ICCPR, contrary to the report's assurances that during the year, "Latvia enjoyed wide freedom of speech." Such a limitation on these freedoms further risks defining arbitrary standards -- and inviting arbitrary enforcement -- with respect to terms such as "class-based ideology."
Further, the naturalization requirements for eligible persons place impermissible conditions on citizenship. Language requirements, for example, often serve as a means of excluding ethnic minorities, particularly in republics containing a variety of ethnic groups, each with its own language. (Helsinki Watch suggests that a better way for Latvia to revive the Latvian language might be to offer free language instruction to its non-indigenous populations. By offering such instruction, Latvia would avoid placing an economic burden on its citizenship.)
In a letter to the Chairman of the Human Rights and Nationality Issues Committee, Helsinki Watch urged the Supreme Council not to adopt the draft law on citizenship for the above reasons. In response, the
196
Latvia
Chairman's deputy emphasized the "complications created by the actual historical conditions and their consequences in Latvia" which justify the draft law. The deputy did promise, however, that certain provisions would be re-examined.
One such provision, the exclusion of drug addicts and chronic alcoholics from eligibility for naturalization, was designed to "prevent other nations from deporting their criminals to foreign territory," according to one of the drafters of the law. Juris Bojars. That those "criminals" may not have been deported but may have been longtime inhabitants seeking treatment may lead the Supreme Council to reconsider this exclusion. In addition, the ban on dual citizenship has reportedly been re-evaluated after a successful challenge by Latvian émigrés.
The impact of drafting a relatively exclusive citizenship law is clear in light of the fast-paced changes in Latvia. Stiff citizenship requirements place non-indigenous persons (principally ethnic minorities) on "second-class" footing with indigenous persons (principally the ethmc majority) with respect to the most important political and economic events in the Republic's immediate future. For example, on March 19, 1991, the Supreme Council passed a human rights law that guarantees cultural rights for all nationalities, but which distinguishes civil rights from other human rights. That distinction means that non-citizens are excluded from electing, and being elected as, deputies in the forthcoming parliamentary elections. It likely means that non-citizens will be excluded from the privatization process as well, including the overwhelming majority of Russians. A parliament member has recently expressed his hope that "if political processes proceed in a normal democratic way, ... it will lead to a liberalization of the citizenship law." But that liberalization may come too late.
The Supreme Council has not yet adopted the draft law on citizenship, but Chairman Gorbunovs has said that he favors a referendum to decide to whom citizenship should be extended. Such a referendum, however, would be conducted with only indigenous persons ~ those who were Latvian citizens on June 17, 1940 and their direct
197
Latvia
descendants - eligible to vote. Such a solution still disenfranchises the non-indigenous persons living in Latvia in contravention of Article 25 of the ICCPR.
Two other problems bear noting. The first is that, as the report correctly states, Latvian authorities officially banned the activities of the Communist Party and other organizations ~ such as Interfront — which supported the failed coup, in possible violation of Article 22 of the ICCPR. Second, and contrary to the assurances in the report, Latvian authorities may have arbitrarily arrested Alfred Rubiks, the much-disliked former Communist leader, for alleged participation in the attempted coup. He, along with six of his colleagues, has been held since his arrest in August, and his trial is scheduled for mid-1992. Although Rubiks may represent that tiny minority of the 48% non-Latvian population which participated in the attempted coup, many non-Latvians are nervous that further recriminations could take on an ethnic flavor. The Latvian Chief Prosecutor, Janis Skrastins, denies that Rubiks is being held solely for his Communist affiliations. Instead, Skrastins claims that Rubiks is being held for his links to the National Salvation Committee, which tried to seize power in January 1991, and to the Black Beret Interior Ministry, which is responsible for most of the deaths during Latvia's struggle for independence. Although the facts and motivation surrounding Rubiks' arrest are unclear, the arrest coupled with the official ban on the Communist Party raises human rights concerns not discussed in the report.
In sum, the State Department's report, while reasonably thorough as to the facts, fails to truly identify the dangers facing the non-indigenous population of Latvia. That the danger results from a well-intentioned democratic government struggling to shake off the trappings of occupation and to awaken a dormant democracy neither lessens the danger nor excuses wholesale violations of human rights. As the Soviet Press Digest correctly noted, Latvia has "attempt[ed] to respond to a past injustice with an even greater injustice which would affect people who had nothing to do with what had happened before." While the State Department's 1991 report hints at these serious problems, it does not give them the attention they deserve.
198
