MEXICO
The State Department's report on human rights practices in Mexico during 1991 represents a largely even-handed attempt to describe the perennially bleak human rights situation in this country. In most sections, the report is alert to the most significant events during the year, has few factual inaccuracies, presents factual evidence to support its findings and couches its conclusions in generally frank language. Most importantly, the State Department is not overly sanguine about the recent human rights reforms engineered by the administration of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari. Despite these positive elements, the report has several shortcomings. One major disappointment is its discussion of worker rights. Given the ongoing negotiations between Mexico and the United States on the proposed North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) in which worker rights concerns have been raised particularly by U.S. labor groups, it is unfortunate that the State Department did not provide a more straightforward presentation of these issues.
The report accurately observes that security forces continue to commit the majority of human rights violations in Mexico. Members of the Federal Judicial Police (MFJP), especially antinarcotics personnel, are specifically identified as responsible for such abuses as torture, unlawful arrest and "abuse of authority." In addition, the report correctly concludes that, despite the Salinas administration's serious efforts to promote human rights and implement the guarantees provided by the Constitution, serious abuses continue, and that much remains to be done to improve respect for human rights and to eliminate the "culture of impunity" that has traditionally surrounded human rights violators in Mexico. The report understates this latter problem, however. Although the long-standing immunity from prosecution enjoyed by security forces remains one of the most daunting obstacles to human rights improvement in Mexico, the report's only mention of it is buried in an oblique reference near the beginning of the text, with no meaningful subsequent discussion. A more thorough exposition of this basic problem should have been provided, and particular attention paid to the considerable number of investigations that have failed to identify perpetrators or to produce convictions.
217
Mexico
One example of the report's flawed treatment of the impunity problem is its failure to analyze the government's conduct regarding Federal Attorney General Alvarez del Castillo. Although Alvarez del Castillo was allegedly responsible for some of the most egregious recent human rights violations, and was removed from his job in May by President Salinas, the government has not attempted to investigate, charge or try him for human rights violations committed by agents under his command. Instead, he was publicly praised and awarded a position of trust as head of Mexico's rural development bank. Similarly, no action has been taken against a former deputy of Alvarez del Castillo, Javier Coello Trejo, who had been in charge of anti-narcotics investigations in the Attorney General's office. He was relieved of responsibility in October 1990 and given another high level post, even though there was considerable evidence of his direct participation in violations of human rights. And in a well publicized case ~ the January 1990 killings of brothers Héctor, Jaime and Erik Quijano Santoyo ~ despite recommendations of the governmental Comisión Nacional de Derechos Humanos (CNDH) calling for named MFJP officers allegedly responsible for the crime to be charged and suspended from official duties, none has been charged or suspended, and one, Roberto Velázquez Quiroz, has been promoted.
The section on political and extrajudicial killing presents a forthright account of the MFJP's activities in this sphere, and provides an adequate review of investigations by the CNDH that implicate members of the federal police. The report appropriately gives prominence to the July murder of Victor Manuel Oropeza Contreras, a journalist and human rights activist who had frequently criticized government human rights abuses. The information about the case in the report's discussion of freedom of the press, particularly regarding criticism within and outside government of the adequacy of the investigation, would have been more appropriately included in this section. The report should have also noted the charge that efforts to publicize Oropeza's murder and subsequent police abuses during the investigation were blocked. One group claims that local television and radio stations refused to air public service announcements about Oropeza's murder which were paid for by the Comisión de Solidaridad
218
Mexico
y Defensa de los Derechos Humanos (COSYDDHAC), a nongovernmental human rights group. COSYDDHAC attributes the refusal to government and police sensitivity to the attention to human rights violations at a time when the Mexican Senate was meeting in the border city of Ciudad Juárez to discuss the impact of the proposed NAFTA, an agreement much desired by both the Salinas and Bush administrations.
By including violence related to land disputes within the political and extrajudicial killing discussion, the report commendably abandons its previous insistence on explaining such violence as the product of purely local antipathies between peasants and landowners, and properly recognizes the involvement of police forces in these disputes. While briefly mentioning official links to the violence in the arbitrary arrest discussion, the report should have highlighted here the existence of violent groups of civilians unofficially recruited and working under the direction of the judicial police. These groups are known as soplones or informantes, terms used to describe police informers, and are allowed by the federal police to carry weapons. They are alleged to have been responsible for many arbitrary killings and extrajudicial executions, as well as other human rights abuses. They are also reported to enjoy the protection of the police that recruit them and to be immune from police disciplinary procedures.
The report's willingness to ascribe official responsibility in a number of land disputes in one section of the report is not carried over to its discussion of arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home or correspondence. In the latter section, it states only that "[p]easants and urban squatters involved in conflicts over land titles have charged that local landowners, accompanied by police, have entered their homes without appropriate judicial orders and sometimes resorted to violence, particularly in rural areas." This is not only inconsistent with other statements in the report, but it seriously understates the scope of the violations involved. Amnesty International reports that in April police using helicopters, in collaboration with local landowners, forcibly evicted hundreds of peasants from the communities of Paso Achiote and Emiliano Zapata II in Chiapas state. Men, women and children were ill-
219
Mexico
treated, some were briefly arrested, and seven community leaders were detained more than four months.
The section on disappearances accurately catalogues the CNDH's activity in investigating and concluding cases of missing persons. The report commends the CNDH's efforts in this regard, but fails to take adequate notice of the findings of other authorities. Thus, the far higher estimates of disappearances by Mexican human rights groups not affiliated with the CNDH are mentioned only parenthetically. In view of the findings of these groups, and the documented history of politically-related disappearances in Mexico, it is difficult to justify the report's unquestioning acceptance of the CNDH's conclusion that only one of the disappearances occurring between 1989 and 1991 shows any evidence of a political motive.
The report accurately acknowledges that Mexican police agents continue to use physical and psychological torture. It lists the number of torture-related complaints made to the CNDH, as well as the formal protests made by the United States regarding police abuse of U.S. citizens. No reference is made to the considerable body of work concerning torture produced by independent human rights groups, however. Once again, a more varied selection of sources and an analysis of discrepancies among them is required.
The report corrects a failing of the 1990 report by addressing the problem of forced confessions within the context of torture, rather than in the discussion of access to fair trials. As such, it rightly stresses that the easy acceptance of confessions as evidence of suspects' guilt is not simply a procedural flaw of the Mexican judicial system, but is a problem that is intimately related to a widespread and routine use of torture by the security forces.
The report notes that the Salinas administration has taken steps to remedy the problem of confessions obtained through torture by passing amendments to the federal rules of evidence. As a result of these reforms, confessions are now inadmissible in federal and some state courts unless made before a judge or a Public Ministry official and in the
220
Mexico
presence of defense counsel or a person in whom die accused has confidence. To the State Department's credit, the report contrasts the CNDH's claim that the amendments to the rules of evidence have resulted in a decline in the incidence of torture during the year with the dissenting views of nongovernmental human rights groups. The report recognizes, and appears to endorse, the arguments of such groups that only confessions before judges should be allowed (reflecting allegations that Public Ministry officials have engaged in or condoned torture themselves) and that continued investigation of complaints combined with vigorous prosecution and severe sentences are needed to eliminate die practice of torture and other abuse of detainees and prisoners. No mention is made, however, of concerns that even the requirement of confessions before a court may not prevent defendants from being coerced into making false confessions during the first stages of detention, when detainees rarely have access to a lawyer. Moreover, the Mexican Supreme Court has ruled that once a confession has been made, the burden is on the defendant to prove that it was illegally obtained if it is to be excluded from evidence. These legal obstacles, coupled with the fact, alleged by Amnesty International, that medical evidence produced by defendants in support of torture allegations is routinely dismissed by the courts, compel the conclusion that the problem of forced confessions is far from resolved.
A notable omission in the section on torture is the absence of any mention of the problem of obtaining accurate medical reports on deceased torture victims. In many cases of death in custody where torture was alleged, routine autopsies have failed adequately to diagnose and document human rights abuses. These autopsies are generally performed by forensic doctors working for the Public Ministry medical service. In contentious cases, their findings have tended to corroborate the police version of events.
The report accurately describes problems facing Mexico's prison system, and correctly emphasizes the overcrowding and lack of adequate facilities in most Mexican prisons. The report also mentions the entrenched corruption within this system, and observes that such corruption has undermined the authority of prison officers. The extent
221
Mexico
and severity of this latter problem is understated, however. The report fails to acknowledge the outright anarchy that prevails in many Mexican prisons, and admits only that prison corruption has led to unspecified "abuses." The report's account of the Matamoros prison riot in May is similarly incomplete and fails to mention any casualties resulting from the incident. Eighteen persons were killed and at least eight wounded during a two-week pitched battle in the prison. The report mentions, but pointedly fails to evaluate, the proposals subsequently made by the CNDH to combat the prison system's problems. These proposals are aimed at preventing an increase in prison populations by reducing the number of crimes that carry mandatory prison sentences and giving judges more discretion to impose punishments other than incarceration, rather than at the more urgent objective of improving existing conditions within these prisons. Forceful criticism of Mexico's failure to adopt serious measures to deal with these perennial problems would have been appropriate.
The section on arbitrary arrest is generally accurate. The State Department properly observes that, despite constitutional guarantees of access to judges within 24 hours of arrest, incidents of arbitrary arrest and unlawful imprisonment occur frequently. Concrete examples are given to illustrate this conclusion. The report also notes that local police and government officials are responsible for forced expulsions and illegal arrests of indigenous peoples who are engaged in disputes with landowners.
A practice not discussed in the report is the use of arrest warrants — unjustified and unexecuted — apparently to intimidate government critics and others. The warrants remain pending for long periods notwithstanding the fact that the person against whom they are issued is well known in the community. The extent of this practice is unknown. However, an April 1 article in El Universal cited the leader of the Emiliano Zapata Union of Comuneros, Efrén Capiz Vilieges, who called on authorities to revoke arrest warrants on 2,000 farm workers in Michoacan. He said, "there are even 30 arrest warrants against me, because they involve me in whatever cases the government wants."
222
Mexico
The report asserts, as it did last year, that the Mexican government "permits both domestic and international human rights groups to operate in Mexico without restrictions or harassment," and claims that high-level Mexican officials "routinely" meet with domestic and international human rights activists. This rosy picture does not depict the practical reality of monitoring human rights in Mexico, and belies the personal danger still faced by Mexican rights monitors. The cases of the killings of human rights law professor Norma Corona Sapién in 1990, president of the Commission in Defense of Human Rights in Sinaloa, and her predecessor Jesus Michel Jacobo in 1987, and journalist and human rights activist Victor Manuel Oropeza Contreras in 1991 serve as stark reminders of the dangers faced by human rights workers. While an arrest was made in 1991 in the Corona case (of an MFJP commander as noted in the report), there is concern that others involved have not been charged. No one has been charged in the Jacobo case and the irregularities in the investigation of the Oropeza murder raise serious doubts about the guilt of those who have been charged with the crime.
The greater part of the report's discussion is devoted to a carefuK exposition of the founding and activity of the governmental CNDH. In an apparent effort to establish the CNDH's legitimacy, the report observes that the Commission's advisory council is comprised of respected human rights leaders, and that constitutional reforms aimed at making the CNDH legally independent from the government are underway. However, the report fails to acknowledge the limitations on the Commission's freedom of action, powers and mandate. The Commission is not, for legal or practical purposes, independent of the ruling political party. While the report calls it "semiautonomous," the CNDH remains a government agency; its president, Dr. Jorge Carpizo McGregor, reports directly to President Salinas. The Commission's own rules of procedure further restrict its jurisdiction, taking labor and election matters out of its purview. These are both areas in which serious human rights violations have occurred. The CNDH has limited investigatory and no prosecutorial powers, and depends upon publicity and the influence of Dr. Carpizo to enforce its recommendations. Although President Salinas has ordered all prosecutors, police and government agencies to cooperate with the Commission, human rights
223
Mexico
groups charge that President Salinas has avoided public confrontation with state government officials or agencies of the federal executive branch that ignore or reject CNDH recommendations. It is also claimed that the CNDH discriminates between complaints, attending only to those that have significant political backing or have received widespread publicity. Since the report devotes considerable attention to the activities and findings of the CNDH, these issues and concerns should have been acknowledged.
The report highlights the continuing violence against the press, and recognizes that the Oropeza murder was only one in a series of attacks upon journalists during the year. More might have been done, however, to communicate the gravity of the situation and to acknowledge the dangers that any person wishing to comment upon human rights violations in Mexico must still hazard. Article 19 has noted that Mexico is second only to Colombia in numbers of murdered journalists in the Americas. The report pays particular attention to a special CNDH study of this problem. Although it accurately catalogues the results of this study (some dispute the accuracy of the report's claim that a total of 55 cases were investigated), its account does not reflect the position of some human rights groups that the study was a disappointment. This disappointment stems largely from the fact that in only three cases were those found responsible placed behind bars. The report also ignores the CNDH's own admissions that state governments often attempted to block the study, and that, even in cases where persons were imprisoned, the intellectual authors or others responsible for violence remain unidentified.
The report fails to discuss the legal framework regarding refugees in Mexico. Mexico has not ratified the UN Refugee Convention and Protocol and its law on refugees which was adopted in 1990 varies from the standard international definition by failing to make provision for persons seeking asylum on the basis of a well-founded fear of persecution. The U.S. Committee for Refugees (USCR) reported in early 1991 instances of mistreatment of Central American refugees (rape, extortion and beatings), often at the hands of the MFJP agents. A USCR suggestion that enforcement jurisdiction over refugees be removed from
224
Mexico
the MFJP and placed with the Mexican Directorate of Migration Services was said to be under serious consideration during the year.
The report's section on respect for political rights is candid about the stranglehold of the ruling Partido Revolucionario Institucional (PRI) on the Mexican electoral process. It recognizes that this process is heavily weighted in favor of the PRI, and that electoral "irregularities," "sophisticated manipulation," and intimidation have helped the PRI achieve election victories. Despite these observations, and the admission that hundreds of allegations of electoral wrongdoing were received, the report's account of the August midterm federal elections does not even mildly call into question the lopsided PRI victory. Rather, it is cynically concluded that an election free from fraud would not have led to a significantly different outcome. This conclusion is patently inadequate, and ignores the findings of respectable studies concluding that these elections were indeed tainted by fraud. The report's-description of state and local elections is less disingenuous, and reports in considerable detail convincing accounts of vote rigging. It is worth noting that nearly all formal election observations have been limited to activity on the day of the election. Given PRI's power and the nature of the system, significant "irregularities" likely occur prior to election day.
The report's discussion of worker rights accurately describes the quite extensive constitutional and statutory safeguards provided by Mexican law to protect workers. However, it fails to take sufficient notice of the disparity between these theoretical protections and the reality facing most workers in Mexico. The strict labor requirements, when combined with political and economic realities, often go against workers' interests. There are serious impediments in implementation and enforcement, many directly encouraged by the PRI, faced by ordinary workers seeking to exercise even the most basic rights.
For example, in its discussion of freedom of association and collective bargaining, the report carefully outlines the guarantees offered by the Federal Labor Law, but ignores the fact that this law often has the practical effect, not of promoting workers' interests, but of tightening government control over all worker activity. Similarly, the report
225
Mexico
correctly observes that the "symbiotic relationship" between trade unions and the PRI limits the freedom of action of these unions and frustrates the establishment of new unions that are not aligned with the PRI, but fails to present the full extent of the problems posed by trade union subservience to the government. No mention is made of the corruption among union leaders, nor of the frequently spurious nature of "negotiations" between trade unions and the PRI.
The report is attentive to the violent intimidation of labor activists, and accurately notes the abduction and beating of Braulio Aguilar Reyes in April. Aguilar Reyes was a recently dismissed oil worker involved in a labor dispute in Mexico City. The report's description of the incident studiously avoids assigning responsibility to the government, however. It does not acknowledge evidence that the individuals detained for Aguilar Reyes' abduction and beating were MFJP agents, but rather states only that the victim later identified them as such. The report also fails to mention the evidence of police attempts to cover up the incident, and to coerce individuals into confessing to the crime. Similarly, the report baldly concludes that no proof of an "alleged union link" has been established, and therefore fails to address both the evidence implicating federal agents, and the concerns of human rights monitors that this incident has not been fully investigated and that the persons who ordered the abduction and beating will go unpunished.
The report's discussion of child labor in Mexico is misleading and understates the scope of the problem. After noting that federal law sets age 14 as the minimum age for employment of children and that limits on employment are set for children between the ages of 14 and 16, it notes that there is "little incentive" for "responsible" employers to hire children under the age of 16. It goes on to state that in the formal sector, enforcement of the law is "reasonably adequate" for large and medium size companies and that child labor is largely found in the informal economy where "significant numbers" of children work.
Available facts paint a bleaker picture. The International Labor Organization reports that approximately 18% of Mexican children between 12 and 14 years of age are working. U.S. labor organizations
226
Mexico
have estimated that of children between ages 10 and 14, 11.5% are economically active in the formal sector and that an estimated 10 million of the 29 million children between ages six and 15 work in the informal sector. An April article in the Wall Street Journal describes a 50-worker factory in León, Guanajuato state, where about 12 boys, some as young as 10, produce shoes in hazardous and unhealthy conditions. Federal government jurisdiction covers only three percent of the businesses in the state; at the Guanajuato state labor ministry, five child labor inspectors oversee approximately 22,000 businesses. Mexico's Attorney General in Defense of Labor, Alfredo Far it Rodriguez, is quoted as stating: "Economic necessity is stronger than a theoretical prohibition." The problem of child labor in Mexico clearly warrants more attention from the State Department. One would hope that the ongoing trade negotiations between Mexico and the United States did not contribute to the superficial treatment of this important issue.
The report's treatment of worker rights within the burgeoning maquiladora industry near the U.S. border is also unsatisfactory. Mexico's protective labor legislation has been particularly ineffective in this area. No mention is made of the abject conditions which most maquiladora workers must endure — described by some as resembling the sweatshops of the late 19th and early 20th century — nor of the inadequate wages such workers receive, often as little at $2.90 per day. Secondly, the report relies on unconvincing evidence to explain the low rate of unionization in the maquiladoras. The report mentions "antiunion bias" by employers and "good" wage and benefit packages for maquiladora workers as probable explanations, and disregards clear evidence of government efforts to suppress unionization in this industry.
Last year's critique suggested that 1991 would be a crucial year for testing the Mexican government's commitment to human rights reform and the effectiveness of reforms implemented. It is undeniable that welcome steps have been taken and that the Salinas administration has shown an outward commitment to the protection of human rights. Nevertheless, none of the reforms implemented in the past year has radically altered the incidence of human rights violations, nor have the majority of persons responsible for past violations been brought to
227
Mexico
justice. The Salinas administration is moving in the right direction, but meaningful change in Mexico's human rights situation that was promised has not occurred. As the State Department points out, "much remains to be done."
228
