BURMA (MYANMAR)
The report on Burma is a very good summary of the serious and widespread violations of human rights taking place in that country. While generally forceful and insightful, the report unfortunately makes several statements that tend to downplay the extent of certain types of human rights violations.
The introduction notes that long-time leader General Ne Win resigned as a result of the 1988 demonstrations; it should have pointed out that there is general agreement among Burma watchers that Ne Win still plays a leading role in major policy decisions of the military government. The introduction refers to the leadership of the opposition National League for Democracy as having been the "leaders of the 1988 demonstrations." In fact, the 1988 demonstrations were student-driven and without clear leadership; only after the government crackdown towards the end of the year and into 1989 did persons such as Aung San Suu Kyi assume leadership roles.
The introduction notes, not with complete accuracy, that the ethnic insurgencies except for the Karen Nation Union are financed mostly through the narcotics trade. (For instance, the Kachin in 1991 began a major campaign to convince farmers in its areas not to grow poppy.) But if the report is to make such an assertion, it should also state that the Burmese government earns considerable hard currency as a result of the drug trade. The government's involvement in drug trafficking has increased enormously since the demise in 1989 of the Communist Party of Burma, which previously controlled the trade routes on the Burma-China border. Public "drug burnings," sponsored by the Burmese government and attended by U.S. drug enforcement officials, have sought to obscure official involvement in the drug trade and do not represent a genuine effort at curbing the narcotics problem.
The section on extrajudicial killings states that there were "no verifiable reports of government-directed" killings in 1991. The report should make it clear, as it does in other sections, that access to information in Burma is extremely limited as a direct result of
50
Burma
government action and that this may account for the absence of reports of extrajudicial killings.
The section on denial of a fair public trial notes that "appeals" of military tribunal convictions can be made to regional commanders. While translations of the relevant law refer to this process as an appeal, in reality this practice does not involve a formal review of the relevant facts or the law, but is merely a request for clemency. Nevertheless, as the report notes, there are no reports of any convictions being overturned on "appeal." The report states that credible sources suggest that as many as 2,000 political prisoners may be in jail. Figures reported by Amnesty International suggest this number may be much higher. The State Department should not put ceilings on prisoner statistics where the available information is so sparse.
The section on violations of humanitarian law dilutes its description by stating broadly that "[tjhese conflicts have resulted in numerous human rights violations on both sides." The report isAvrong to suggest that there were equal violations by the army and insurgent groups. While insurgents as well as the Burmese army have committed the abuses noted, all available evidence indicates that Burmese army rights violations far exceed in scale those committed by the various insurgent groups. Citing reports of ethnic insurgent violence by the government-controlled media without further comment is inexcusable given the state media's poor record as a reporter of fact. Government accounts of the demonstrations in Rangoon and other urban centers in 1988, for instance, often bore little resemblance to the truth ~ at least the same skepticism should be applied to the government's coverage of counter-insurgency campaigns in the border areas. The report that the opposition Democratic Alliance of Burma (DAB) executed two suspected government spies is more than "credible" — the DAB admitted carrying out the executions. The report states that violations along the border by either side are impossible to verify because the Burmese authorities have denied access to impartial observers. It should be noted that journalists and others have gained access to these areas with the assistance of the ethnic insurgent groups. As a result, there is often better information on events in the border areas then there is on central Burma.
51
Burma
The section on freedom of religion details the wide-ranging attacks and restrictions on the Buddhist and Muslim religious communities and their clergy by the military government. It seems strange that the section begins by stating that freedom of religion is "widely observed in practice" -- as if the practices of individual religious believers are somehow unrelated to the harsh treatment of religious organizations. The section should have pointed out that many Burma experts view the widespread violations of the rights of Muslims in Arakan state as an attempt by the government to generate popular support by playing off the prejudices of the majority Buddhist population.
On the section concerning respect for political rights, the report correctly states that the opposition National League for Democracy (NLD) took nearly 60% of the votes and over 80% of the parliamentary seats. But the opposition's victory was actually more lopsided than these figures suggest. The military-backed National Unity Party received only 10% of the vote and only two percent of the seats. The rest of the vote -- 30% " was divided up among local and ethnically-based parties which for the most part support the NLD.
The report states that the military government only selectively discusses human rights problems with nongovernmental organizations. In fact, the government has largely ignored the requests by a number of human rights organizations both to meet with government officials and to visit Burma. One Lawyers Committee request to visit Burma was refused by the government because "there is no need whatever to send a delegation to Myanmar." Several follow-up requests received no response.
52
