MALAYSIA
This year's report on Malaysia does not capture the full range of government repression that characterizes the human rights situation there. By describing events in 1991 without their historical context, the report downplays the significance of government actions that undermine human rights. And, in the few instances where the State Department reaches broader, generally positive, conclusions, they bear little relation to the report's own, more negative findings.
The introduction to the report provides an unwarranted defense of the government, finding that the Mahathir government had an "improved human rights record in 1991." Except for the long overdue granting of a license to a domestic human rights society, there were no significant improvements in Malaysia's record in 1991. Although for instance the number of political detainees is slightly down for the year, the legal structure that permits long-term detention without trial remains fully in force.
As we noted in last year's critique, the discussion of Malaysia's economy makes no mention of the ruling United Malay National Organization's (UMNO) control over large facets of the economy, which is closely intertwined with UMNO political domination. Without explanation, the report concludes that Malaysia's "[s]trong economic performance since 1988" has resulted in "lessening political tensions between the races." This is the ruling party's official line on its New Economic Policy ~ many non-Malays have argued that the government's economic policies have actually exacerbated ethnic tensions in the country. The report should have provided both perspectives.
Repeating last year's omission, the report makes no mention of the 1987 Operation Lallang arrests, in which more than 100 politicians and social and political activists were arrested and detained under the Internal Security Act (ISA). These events continue to have an important chilling effect on opposition political activity in the country.
214
Malaysia
The report discusses, without providing any political context, the three ISA arrests in the State of Sabah in 1991. It notes that one of the persons detained is the brother of Sabah's chief minister, but inexplicably does not mention that the Sabah state government is controlled by the opposition Parti Bersatu Sabah (PBS). Since the PBS took power after state elections in June 1990, Prime Minister Mahathir's government has sought to weaken Sabah Chief Minister Joseph Pair in Kitingan and his government by portraying it as inciting anti-Kuala Lumpur sentiments. The ISA detentions in Sabah are widely considered to be part of this effort. The report repeats the Mahathir government's allegation of a "secessionist plot," but does not point out that the government has presented no evidence to support its accusation or that it repeated allegations levied against ISA detainees in Sabah in past years.
The report states that the government considered proposals to give it greater control over the Malaysian Bar Council. While noting that the Bar Council had been critical of some government policies, the report does not make clear that the government proposals were a direct response to this criticism. It was not the "strong tone" of the" government statements that raised the concerns of local and international observers, but the fear that the proposed changes in the law would provide a legal basis for the government to restrict the activities of the bar. By omitting discussion of previous government attacks on the bar, specifically the contempt action brought against bar secretary Manjeet Singh in May 1989, the report does not convey adequately the seriousness of the government's recent actions.
The report discusses the approval by the Registrar of Societies in June of the application of the National Human Rights Association, after a delay of nearly two years. It states cautiously that "according to some observers" the government objected to the prospect of having a potentially powerful critic of certain official policies. This in fact is the only plausible explanation that has been put forward for the government's delay in approving the application from this prominent group of citizens, yet the State Department appears to be distancing itself from it. If the State Department does not accept this version, it should say so and suggest an alternative explanation.
215
Malaysia
The report responds half-way to our criticism last year that it cited the official explanation for the use of the ISA without evaluating these claims. This year the introduction notes that the government "applies these laws very broadly and admits that it uses them to detain persons when available evidence is insufficient to bring formal charges under the criminal code." It should have added pointedly that the government also uses the ISA as a means both to detain and threaten political opponents when there is no evidence of unlawful acts.
We repeat our contention from last year's critique that the report is apologetic of the 1990 government decision to formally make the Malaysian News Agency (Bernama) the sole distributor of foreign news in Malaysia. While noting some parliamentary opposition to the measure, the report states that the law to date "has not restricted foreign news coverage or availability." Laws that pose a serious threat to fundamental rights should not escape criticism simply because they have yet to be abused.
It is the State Department's general practice not to discuss use of the death penalty, apparently even in such countries as Malaysia where capital punishment is applied to a wide range of criminal offenses. In Malaysia the death penalty is mandatory under the ISA for unauthorized possession of firearms, ammunition or explosives and under the Dangerous Drugs Act for drug trafficking. Capital punishment for these offenses does not meet the standards set out in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which permits the death penalty only for the "most serious crimes." By not discussing the death penalty as a human rights issue, the State Department is allowing the report to be dictated by U.S. domestic political concerns.
216
