NIGER
While the State Department's report is correct in praising the Nigerien government's steps toward democracy, it fails to give sufficient attention to important human rights violations, especially discrimination against women. Moreover, given the country's history of human rights violations, the report's evaluation of Niger's progress in respect for human rights should have been more wary.
A National Conference was held from August to November 1991 to convert Niger from a one-party state into a democracy. The conference declared itself the nation's authoritative body, suspended the 1989 constitution and set out to discuss Niger's social, political and economic problems. The conference investigated past and present human rights violations and took the remarkable step of suspending some of the government officials who allegedly took part in such abuses. Elections were planned for late 1992 or early 1993. A prime minister was chosen to head the 15-month transitional government, and General Ali Saibou was retained as head of state. The High Council of the Republic was elected to assure execution of conference decisions. The State Department correctly assesses the significance of the National Conference, yet the report may be too hopeful with regard to its lasting effects.
While the report cites several examples of General AU Saibou's and the military's resistance to the conference, it fails to conclude that this resistance may be a sign of future danger. For example, as the report notes, the National Conference was held only after the repeated demonstrations of students and unions. Initially, the Ali Saibou government responded to those demonstrations with violence. Furthermore, the report fails to note that General Ali Saibou, the head of the military-civilian regime, in his opening speech to the National Conference, asked participants "not to dig up the dustbins of history." Although the National Conference did investigate some past human rights violations, the General was clearly warning the conference not to investigate his government's past violations or to threaten him personally. The National Conference's naming General Saibou as nominal head of
241
Niger
state may be evidence of his continuing ability to intimidate, and poses a continuing threat to democracy.
Moreover, the report fails to state that soldiers were kept from testifying on the killings of at least 63 Tuareg civilians at Tchintabaraden. This incident, however, was of major concern to members of the National Conference. The government repeatedly denied any wrongdoing on its part, and refused to investigate allegations of extrajudicial killings and torture. On one occasion, conference talks were suspended because of government reluctance to discuss the incident.
In addition, while the report states that the National Conference "involved a comprehensive array of nationally representative groups," it contradicts this statement later, pointing out that representation of minorities, especially women, was a contentious issue before the conference began. Women marched on the prime minister's office on May 13 demanding equal representation at the conference. After a heated debate among the 68-member committee preparing for the conference, the only female delegate resigned in solidarity with the protestors. Eventually, as the report points out, the conference seated five women.
Finally, the State Department reports that General Ali Saibou's government "peacefully turned over power to the National Conference." The report neglects to state, however, that there were subsequent rumors, denied by the government, of army preparations of a coup d'etat. In this vein, it is significant that the army at first refused to attend the National Conference and its Chief of Staff, Colonel Boudacar Toumba, stated that the army would not tolerate "chaos" because it was "duty-bound" to safeguard the material and moral interests of the population. The report's failure to describe such fears and statements prevents the reader from apprehending the fragility of Niger's transition to a rights respecting state.
In general, the report's discussion of discrimination against women is too vague and lacks conviction. In particular, it fails to criticize the Nigerien government for neglecting women's rights. Given
242
Niger
the report's description of the discrimination against women, the State Department should have condemned the Nigerien government for its refusal to recognize that discrimination against women in Niger is a major problem.
For example, the report states that some women are prohibited from leaving their homes without men and that many women are victims of domestic violence. While it states that women "often turn to both traditional and modern judicial authorities in cases of abuse," there is no information on effectiveness, accessibility, cost or the nature of relief or shelter given to victims of domestic violence. Furthermore, in a society where such violence is prevalent, the willingness and ability of "traditional" authorities to offer assistance is important. Given women's subordinate status in Nigerien society, as recognized by the State Department, there is reason to doubt whether such willingness exists.
While the report notes the government's recognition of newly formed human rights groups, as well as the fact that these groups have operated without hindrance for the first time in 1991, it is too optimistic with regard to the effectiveness of newly formed groups. There was no evidence of government cooperation with the new groups.
The report also fails to emphasize that Nigerien citizens appear to have no protection against unreasonable searches. While the report states that police are required to have a search warrant and conduct searches between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. (except when in hot pursuit of a criminal), it concedes that these requirements are routinely violated. In particular, the report states that "searches are conducted at all hours." The report, however, does not even discuss whether and to what degree the police conduct searches without a warrant. Given that the police routinely violate the requirement that they not conduct searches between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. even if they have a warrant, the report should have discussed overall police compliance with the warrant requirement.
Finally, the report should be faulted for failing to give sufficient consideration to workplace safety standards. These standards are particularly important in Niger because of the uranium mining industry.
243
Niger
Given the well-known health dangers in this industry, the State Department should not so readily accept the Nigerien government's claim that safety standards cannot be enforced because workers are not aware of, or refuse to comply with, such standards. Indeed, given the government's responsibility to protect workers in the uranium mining industry, the report should have criticized the government for failing to adequately inform the uranium workers of the health risks associated with their profession and emphasized the government's responsibility to enforce its own laws, regardless of workers' willingness or awareness of the dangers.
244
