NIGERIA
The State Department's report on Nigeria for 1991 is quite good and appears to reflect a stronger commitment to reporting human rights violations in the most populous country in sub-Saharan Africa. The report's accuracy also reflects, at least in part, the increased activity of Nigerian human rights organizations and a greater willingness on the part of the local press to report on human rights concerns.
A significant problem with reports from both human rights organizations and the press in Nigeria, however, is that they tend to focus only on Lagos, the country's largest city. Human rights violations outside of Lagos rarely receive attention unless they involve major riots or other similar large-scale occurrences. With the exception of a nationwide prison survey conducted by one local organization, there is little documented evidence of human rights problems outside Lagos, although by many accounts, such problems are at least as serious as they are in Lagos. The State Department report unfortunately is also heavily weighted to violations in urban areas. We hope that in the future the-U.S. embassy will devote greater resources to monitoring conditions in rural areas and that future reports will include this information.
Another general item of significance missing from the report is the role that segments of the armed forces and other uniformed government officials, other than the police and the State Security Service, play in human rights violations. These other forces frequently harass, unlawfully detain and mistreat members of the public. Armed forces officers often set up illegal roadblocks and use them as a means to extort money from drivers of cars and their passengers. There were even reported instances in 1991 of fights between members of the Nigerian Police Force and armed forces soldiers.
Finally, in many examples cited in the report, names are omitted. In the State Department's instructions for the preparation of the reports, the Department suggests that names should only be excluded from the report if their use might endanger those persons named. By not naming individuals, the Department thus implies that those individuals might be
245
Nigeria
in danger from the Nigerian government if identified. If this is the case, then it is in itself a serious subject of concern. However, several of the instances in the report where names were not used were reported widely in the Nigerian press, so these cases should not have been veiled in a cloak of secrecy. Confirming the accuracy of the report becomes much more difficult if names and sources are omitted.
The report does a commendable job in taking more seriously than it has in the past the persistent pattern of extrajudicial killings in Nigeria, noting that "use of excessive force by police officers was common," continuing a trend from previous years. However, the examples cited of the government's call for the prosecution of policemen tends to give an unrealistically favorable impression of the government's commitment to prosecuting such cases. Most cases of police killings are not even investigated, much less prosecuted. In fact, the police have been known to hinder investigations of their wrongdoing by various means, including arrest and detention. Furthermore, in a number of those instances in which the government has promised to prosecute policemen, these prosecutions have not been forthcoming.
Of the four instances of police killings cited in the report, including one that occurred in 1990, none had resulted in prosecution by the end of 1991. It is not at all clear that the government has even made a commitment to prosecute policemen for the May 15 murder of the Lagos businessman mentioned. Killings by police not mentioned in this section include the shootings of students at Yaba Tech and the deaths of at least six persons 1n Kwara State following a labor demonstration by workers at the Jebba paper mills (referred to in the worker rights section of the report as involving only three victims).
The report should have noted that the Inspector-General of Police announced in 1991 that police constables would no longer carry arms.
Although "disappearances" are uncommon in Nigeria, the police have shown a pattern of destroying evidence and preventing investigations of their own extrajudicial killings which, in many cases.
246
Nigeria
makes it extremely difficult to discover the whereabouts of missing persons.
The report properly addresses the extremely serious problem of prison conditions, one of Nigeria's most significant violations of human rights. In 1991, the government did little to alleviate the problems of overcrowding, disease and poor nutrition in the nation's prisons other than implement a small increase in the daily feeding allowance. Nevertheless, prisoners allege that prison officials rather than prisoners benefit from most of the daily feeding allowances. In May, a Lagos High Court judge ordered prison authorities to provide adequate nutrition and health care to the 11 condemned prisoners after their twelfth co-accused died in prison in December 1990.
In addition, the report correctly notes the numerous allegations by student leaders of torture following massive arrests of students in May. However, as noted in last year's critique, the report ignores the "wide use of confessions elicited by torture to obtain convictions." Thus, it appears that a substantial number of prisoners in Nigeria are. either "awaiting trial" or have been convicted on the basis of forced confessions.
The section dealing with arbitrary arrest and detention is well written particularly in its comprehensive analysis of Decree 2. The report does an excellent job of not only citing the provisions of the Decree 2 review process, but also of mentioning how these provisions are applied in practice.
Interestingly, the report completely ignores the highly publicized case of Jennifer Mad ike, a Lagos businesswoman, who was arrested for allegedly attempting to bribe the chairman of the Nigerian Drug Law Enforcement Agency. She was eventually convicted of forgery. Although Ms. Madike's case was not originally and should never have become a human rights issue, the Nigerian government made it so when it decided to detain Ms. Madike under Decree 2 after she sued the government for false arrest and unlawful detention. She had also implicated the President's wife in the criminal case. The government
247
Nigeria
twice refused in February to produce Ms. Madike in court, despite a court order from Ikeja High Court Justice Olu Obadina. Although Decree 2 is to be used exclusively against persons who are a "threat to state security," government spokespersons noted that Ms. Madike was being held under Decree 2 because she was a "name dropper" and also for "her own personal safety."
Ms. Madike's case involved not only detention, but also infringement of her right to a fair trial. Ms. Madike's lawyer, Femi Falana, protested frequently to the judge in her criminal trial that prison authorities were uncooperative in allowing him access to meet with his client. In May, police attempted to arrest Mr. Falana and questioned him about his representation of Ms. Madike. In sum, this case vividly illustrates the fact that fundamental civil liberties and compliance with important procedural rights are ignored when the government wants to insure immediate imprisonment and prolonged detention. This case also illustrates, as the report correctly notes, that "many Nigerians still consider Decree Two the main threat to their basic freedoms."
The report names several persons held in detention because they are related to others still wanted in connection with the April 1990 attempted coup d'état. The report blandly states that these arrests "appear" illegal under Decree 2 when their illegality under both Nigerian and international law could not be more blatant; the report should have so stated. In addition to those named by the report. Amnesty International indicated that several other family members of alleged coup plotters were also being held by the government. Christine Osamede Oziegbe, Pat Obahor and Mrs. Edojah, all wives of armed forces officers, were reportedly being detained in place of their husbands.
The problem of prolonged pre-trial detention is the most compelling example of denial of fair trials in Nigeria. The Nigerian criminal justice system fails most severely in its initial phases, when a large percentage of persons who are arrested are not brought to trial. Instead, these accused persons remain in prison "awaiting trial," often for several years. While there is a prevailing lack of resources in the court system, the report correctly notes the government's failure of will and its
248
Nigeria
intentional interference in cases. For example, in numerous cases brought by the Civil Liberties Organisation, a nongovernmental human rights organization, to secure the release of awaiting trial prisoners, the government has consistently sought postponements and failed to appear in court. For their part, members of the judiciary have generally been hesitant to order the release of any prisoners, even those who have been imprisoned for years without trial, unless the government approves of the release.
Another violation of fair trial rights came with the trial of 11 people, including two civilians, who had been arrested in connection with the April 1990 attempted coup. The 11 accused had apparently been acquitted during two previous secret trials before military tribunals, but they were tried for a third time before such a tribunal, and this time found guilty. Eight were sentenced to death. The trials were held in secret and the accused were denied the right to choose their own attorneys. The sentences of the eight condemned men were later commuted by the government to life imprisonment, and the other three had their sentences commuted from life imprisonment to 10 years. The eleven men were Paul Iguele, Sunday Tomoloju, Olajide Adelaku, Chris Aniebi, Pullen Blacky, Okam Enana, Lucky Iwiero, Jomo James, David Mukoro, Gatir Ortoo and Fakolade Taiwo.
The State Department accurately notes the weakening of the regular court system by "transferring jurisdiction over certain major criminal offenses from the courts to special tribunals." The report this year has included details of the procedures in these special courts, improving on last year's report. It should have mentioned in this connection, however, that following religious riots in Katsina State in May, the government set up a special tribunal to try those involved in the riots, rather than permit existing bodies hear the cases. The tribunal, which was chaired by a High Court judge, also consisted of at least two military officers. More than 140 people were expected to be brought before the tribunal. One news report indicated that 18 persons were sentenced to six to nine months in prison for involvement in the riots. The light sentences, according to the tribunal, were due to a lack of
249
Nigeria
evidence that the accused were personally responsible for fires or injuries.
Prior to the riots, Katsina Governor Colonel John Madaki threatened a leader of a local Muslim sect, Yakubu Yahaya, that the Muslim cleric would be executed, without a trial, if he caused any trouble. The federal government never criticized Governor Madaki for his comments that clearly advocated acts which he did not have the legal authority to order.
The report ignores what appears to be a continuing problem of the sentencing to death of minors. Although they were not executed in 1991, 11 persons convicted of armed robbery by the Special Robbery and Firearms Tribunal remained on death row despite the fact that many, if not all, of them were 17-years-old or younger at the time of the commission of the crime. Furthermore, Amnesty International reported at least one other case of a man sentenced to death who was 17 at the time of the crime.
This year the report specifically acknowledges that the "lively press" in Nigeria exists "despite considerable government intimidation." Last year's critique noted that the liveliness of the press was due more to the bravery of some journalists and less to the government's respect for freedom of the press. As recognized this year, the Nigerian government is particularly sensitive to allegations of official corruption and criticism of its transition program. The report omits to mention the government's sensitivity to criticism of its substantial role in sending troops to Liberia as part of Ecomog forces. It was this sensitivity that led, in part, to the ejection from the country of William Keeling of the Financial Times. Not surprisingly, the local press rarely estimates the costs of Nigeria's Ecomog forces, either in terms of casualties or financial expenditures.
The report also does not include the arrest and detention for one day of Evans Osi, a correspondent for the Vanguard Newspaper in Rivers State. On July 2, the Vanguard published an article written by Mr. Osi reporting that residents of Umuechem village disputed the
250
Nigeria
findings of a government white paper on an attack on the village by police in late 1990 that left at least 25 villagers dead. On July 3, Osi was picked up by state police officers and detained overnight. The State Police Commissioner ordered Osi's release the next day; however, police officers warned him not to publish "lopsided" stories.
Also in August, two employees of a state broadcasting service in Anambra state were detained for refusing to broadcast a pro-government statement concerning a labor action by state workers protesting the state's refusal to pay the federal government approved minimum wage of approximately US$25 per month.
To the extent that the report appears to suggest that planned demonstrations are generally permitted and acceptable to the government, it gives a false impression. Generally, the only planned demonstrations permitted by the government are those within the narrow confines of support for one of the two new political parties. Demonstrations critical of government policies, such as the structural adjustment program or the transition program itself, are unacceptable. The heavy police and. military presence in Nigeria mean that any spontaneous demonstrations are usually short-lived as a result of police intervention, which is often violent and even deadly.
In discussing governmental attitude regarding international and nongovernmental investigation of alleged violations, the report understates the ongoing pattern of intimidation and harassment that human rights lawyers in Nigeria face. Numerous lawyers who represent government critics or who call on the government to respect human rights have been targeted by the security forces. In addition to the two cases of Femi Falana and Alao Aka Bashorun, which the report mentions, Clement Nwankwo and Tayo Oyetibo, of the Constitutional Rights Project (CRP), a nongovernmental human rights organization, were interrogated for four hours by the Directorate of Military Intelligence in connection with the CRP's representation of a client Dorah Mukoro, the wife of an officer implicated in the unsuccessful 1990 coup. They were also questioned about the source of the CRP's funds.
251
Nigeria
The report should have also mentioned in this section that the government has proposed a government-licensing system which would require all Nigerian lawyers to register for permission to practice. The rationale is ostensibly to check misconduct. However, it is widely believed in the human rights community that the proposal is intended to suspend human rights lawyers who were critical of government policies.
The report also makes no reference at all to international human rights groups. It should have noted that in 1991, delegations from human rights groups Africa Watch and the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights were allowed in the country by the Nigerian government and faced no harassment.
With regard to domestic groups, the report should have noted the government's frequent failure to obey judicial decisions obtained by these groups. Despite court orders, the government has refused to release prisoners, to pay compensation for unlawful detention, to permit human rights lawyers access to their detained clients, and to exhume bodies for purposes of investigating allegations of police killings or prison deaths.
252
