YUGOSLAVIA
The 1991 State Department report on human rights in Yugoslavia describes a country which during the year saw the disintegration of federal authority and institutions, the virtual collapse of the economy and the outbreak of civil war in various parts of the country. The level of violence was unparalleled in Europe since World War II. The conflicts left an estimated 5,000 to 10,000 thousand persons dead and thousands more wounded or missing. In addition, an estimated 600,000 non-combatants were displaced after fleeing the violence or being forcibly evacuated. The primary catalyst for these events was nationalism, which emerged with a horrifying vengeance in 1991 following multiparty elections held in Yugoslavia's constituent republics throughout 1990.
Yugoslavia presented difficult challenges to human rights reporting in 1991, particularly during the second half of the year. During that time, many key events occurred in areas of armed conflict or were the subject of biased reporting. Under these circumstances, the State Department did a commendable job in not only documenting a host of violations, but also attempting to describe the often confusing legal situation where federal laws, while still in effect, were no longer operational in practice.
Ironically, the report's greatest weakness arises from one of its strengths. While it provides numerous facts and a catalog of events, the reader is ultimately lost in these details, without a context to provide understanding. The report only superficially describes the political situation in Yugoslavia, which is key to understanding the horrific events that have transpired. Moreover, in attempting to review the human rights situation in all areas of the former Yugoslavia, the report leaves the reader with a sense of an apparent "balance" among the various regions, without an accurate account of the relative magnitude of violations in one area versus another or the relative accountability for the violations. (For example, apart firom a number of problems at the time it declared independence, Slovenia did not present serious human rights concerns during most of the year, something that is not clear from the report.) The report neither draws its own conclusions on these issues,
428
Yugoslavia
nor does it present the information in such a way as to permit the reader to do so.
As noted earlier, nationalism, rabid and uncontrolled, produced the worst of the human rights violations during the year. TOile the origins of the current crisis derive from events and animosities that arose many years ago, the fuel which fired its violent outbreak in 1991 is of more recent origin. Primary responsibility must be laid squarely on Slobodan Milo§evi6, the democratically-elected leader of Serbia since 1987. During his tenure, a chief objective, which failed in 1991, was to make Serbia the preeminent "partner" in the federation that was Yugoslavia. Alternatively, he has pursued the concept of "Greater Serbia." By evoking strong Serbian nationalist feelings, the MiloSevid government hoped to fill the vacuum left by crumbling loyalty to its communist government. This effort initially manifested itself in Kosovo, until 1989 an autonomous province of Serbia with a 90% Albanian majority. President MiloSevid achieved popularity as a "defender" of Serbs by exaggerating problems faced by the Serbian minority, depicting it as the victim of a conspiracy by ethnic Albanians and other ethnic groups.
The Serbian government's nationalist campaign in Kosovo inspired fear (magnified by the fact that the federal army, the JNA, is Serb-dominated) and the growth of what could be called a defensive or separatist nationalism among the other major nationalities of the Yugoslav federation, including the Croats, Slovenes and Muslims. It also inspired the disintegration of the reformist federal government and conflict over republic borders. The republic governments that came into power as a result of the 1990 elections were for the most part headed by nationalist groups which played on ethnic tensions. For example, the Croatian government headed by Franjo Tudjman used extreme nationalist rhetoric, particularly during the 1990 election campaign, that barkened back to World War II and Croatia's Nazi past, during which thousands of Serbs were killed. The State Department's report provides only pieces of this picture and thus fails to provide the important context within which to evaluate the human rights events of 1991.
429
Yugoslavia
A key to understanding events in Yugoslavia during the year is the role of the media. While the report's discussion of freedom of speech and press commendably documents most key events and restrictions in all six republics, as well as the formerly autonomous provinces of Kosovo and Vojvodina, it fails to adequately convey the role played by the media, particularly television, in exacerbating nationalist tensions and the violence associated with the disintegration of the federal government. The move from verbal warfare, that characterized the beginning of the year, to armed conflict was facilitated by the government-controlled press, particularly in Serbia, Croatia and Montenegro, which intentionally fanned hysteria, hatred and ethnic division. The ensuing violent conflicts were then used as a pretext by new republic governments to bring the independent media under even more rigorous government control. Broadcast media, reaching the largest numbers of persons, was the primary target; major television stations in all parts of the country came under absolute control of nationalist governments during the year.
Government efforts to control the media prevailed in most areas of the country, but were perhaps most severe in Serbia. The daily newspaper Politika, the weekly NÌN and Belgrade Radio-Television are no longer independent of the government. In Croatia, the daily Vjesnik, the weekly Danas and Croatian Television either adopted the government line or, in the case of Danas, was forced to move its printing operations to Slovenia. The report accurately notes that the television station Yutel, which was founded in 1990 to provide a federal, pan-Yugoslav perspective, was severely hampered in that effort by a variety of actions by republic governments, nationalist extremists and vandals.
Despite these pressures, there was some growth in independent print media. The weekly magazine Vreme, for example, has become a leading independent voice in Serbia and throughout Yugoslavia. But alternative publications have been unable to effectively counter the heavily politicized republic television stations, each representing its respective leadership's political agenda. Not only was the reach of the non-broadcast media generally regional and for the most part urban, but
430
Yugoslavia
the economic crisis often meant many people could not afford to purchase independent newspapers and magazines even where available.
While the report describes many of the key events affecting the press during the year, there are a number of other occurrences that deserve mention and demonstrate the pervasive government control of the media:
•	In Serbia: in February, the goverrmient detained sellers of opposition newspapers and impounded their stock; the government also refused to license some sellers of opposition publications.
•	In Montenegro: in February, the government removed the director of TV Montenegro, M. Radulovic, and the directors of Radio Montenegro, C. Ljesevic and D. Burzan. According to the government, Radulovic had allegedly been "unlawfully elected to his post" and the radio directors had "conducted unprincipled, politically obvious, professionally incorrect editorial policy for a period of time."
•	In Croatia: in June, the Zagreb publishing house Vjesnik and its 12 affiliates throughout Croatia were put under government control; in July, Tugomir Pemper, an editor at the Zagreb daily Vecernji list was removed from his post, reportedly for his failure to use prescribed terminology when writing about the conflict with Serbia.
•	In Kosovo: in June, Jusuf Ferizaj, president of the Independent Society of Kosovo Journalists and editor of the Albanian language Dielli, was sentenced to three months' imprisonment on government charges that he "spread false rumors by asserting' that Serbian authorities took over the Albanian language program on RTV Pristina."
•	In Slovenia: in July, Milan Meden, editor of the independent Ljubljana daily Dnevnik was forced to resign after he wrote
431
Yugoslavia
articles critical of the Slovene government during the Slovenia-Serbia conflict and in particular, its use of the media for propaganda.
• In Vojvodina: in October, the Serb-controlled provincial government made personnel changes in the editorial boards of three minority language daily newspapers ~ Magyar Szo (which is mentioned in the report's section on discrimination but not in its discussion of freedom of the press), Hlas Rudu and Ruske Slovo ~ on the ground that the papers had breached editorial policies laid down by the provincial parliament by expressing "open support for the separatists" in Slovenia and Croatia.
Heavily politicized media and an absence of unbiased news will continue to hinder peaceful settlement of the various nationalist and ethnic conflicts. Government pressure and tough ' economic conditions engendered by the conflict will add additional burdens to those independent publications strong enough to survive.
The report could have dealt more coherently with government attempts to silence critics. The information presented on this issue is dispersed in several sections (torture; arbitrary arrest, detention or exile; arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home or correspondence; and governmental attitude regarding international and nongovernmental investigation of alleged violations of human rights); it more properly should have been combined or at least referenced in one section of the report, e.g., in the introduction or in the discussion of fireedom of speech.
Government attempts to silcnce critics took several forms. One tactic, used particularly in Serbia, was conscription. The report cites the case of anti-war activist Nenad Canak in Vojvodina (who was subsequently released) but does not state that mobilization was also used against others in Vojvodina, particularly ethnic Hungarians, and against journalists in Belgrade. Croatian Judge Emir Midiié issued a ruling against the government in a sensitive criminal case and later that same
432
Yugoslavia
day received a draft notice directing him to report for combat duty; he was released from military service three weeks later.
The report should have noted that several prominent intellectuals in Serbia - Bogdan Bogdanovié, Filip David, Mirko KovaC and Srdja Popovié — reportedly were threatened and otherwise harassed as a result of their opposition views or anti-war activities. In November, the headquarters of the Center for Anti-War Activities was vandalized, as were the offices of the Reformist Party of Serbia, an opposition group, and the Belgrade offices of the television network Yutel. In a number of cases, it appears that the Serbian authorities condoned or encouraged these attacks. The report notes that Croatian authorities detained politically active Serbs. Helsinki Watch reports that Croatian police have summoned Serbs, particularly those associated with the Serbian Democratic Forum, to local police stations for "informative discussions" (informativni razgovori), for the apparent purpose of harassment and intimidation.
There is abundant blame to be shared for the human rights tragedy in Yugoslavia in 1991. The report mentions the main groups, all organized along nationalist lines, that are accountable - the federal army (JNA), paramilitary units and local police and irregular forces. In addition to Serbia's instigatory role described above, Serbian forces simply had greater ability to inflict harm than other groups - largely due to JNA resources and backing ~ and they did. The report accurately notes the JNA's direct involvement in many separate reported incidents and cites "the aggressive role of the JNA in support" of Serbian irregulars in Croatia. It could have given more emphasis to the JNA role by citing its activities, from commanding operations and to providing support, including arms and intelligence, and coordination. For example, there were reports that Serbian police and irregulars in Serbian minority areas of Croatia acquired weapons in 1990 and 1991 that could only have come from JNA stockpiles. In May, Serbian police stations reportedly distributed weapons to local Serbs and Montenegrins in 10 Kosovo municipalities, including Peé, where the distribution is said to have taken place in full view of passers-by.
433
Yugoslavia
Armed torces under the control of Croatian authorities also bear responsibility for human rights violations during the year. The report cites a number of incidents — the killing of at least 12 Serbs from Sisak in August, the killing of at least 10 JNA reservists and officers (Amnesty International reports 13 dead in this case) attempting to surrender near Karlovac in September, and the abduction of 24 Serbs in Gospié in October. (Anmesty International and Helsinki Watch were able to confirm in early 1992 that the Gospié disappearances were in fact killings; charred bodies were found in a nearby village on December 24, which were subsequently identified as those abducted from Gospié.) It also could have cited the killings of 12 Serbs from Kip by members of the Croatian army in November. While most of those killed were members of the Serbian insurgency, they were reportedly unarmed at the time of their arrest. A survivor reported to Helsinki Watch that the men were held in a hotel in the village of Marino Selo, municipality of Pakrac, where they were beaten by Croatian guards, some of whom were drunk. The 12 Serbs who were killed were either shot or beaten to death. There were allegations early in 1991 that the Croatian government illegally imported weapons from Hungary, possibly for distribution to members of the Croatian police reserve.
While the State Department's report is not intended to be a catalog of all human rights violations, it should cite not only representative examples but also the most serious ones. The report's discussion of disappearances is accurate but fails to include Vukovar, where more than 3,000 (possibly as high as 4,800) Croats and other non-Serbs have been missing since the town fell on November 18 to JNA and Serbian paramilitary forces after a three-month siege. The report instead cites the 100 missing from the village of Hum after it fell to Serbian forces.
In some cases, the report provides too few facts to adequately convey the nature and extent of the violations. For instance, in its discussion of humanitarian violations, the report states that "[t]here were credible reports of Serbian irregular forces using civilian noncombatants as human shields." In fact, elderly persons and women were often taken as hostages for use as shields. For example, in an incident in July in
434
Yugoslavia
Croatia, Serbian forces from the village of Dvor captured 30-50 civilians, including women, elderly and handicapped persons, who were forced to provide a shield for the combatants for six hours. A 75-year-old hostage was killed.
The report states in the torture discussion that "[m]ost of those detained and abused in the context of the armed conflict were held in makeshift places of detainment which often did not meet minimum humanitarian standards for life and health as specified in the Geneva accords." In fact, prisoners included many who were sick, wounded, elderly and very young, and they were all held in buildings not intended for such a purpose {e.g., old barns) in crowded, dangerously unhygienic and sometimes bitterly cold conditions, with minimal food and generally rudimentary medical care. In early 1992, Helsinki Watch reported that there was evidence of at least 36 detention camps maintained by Serbian forces throughout Yugoslavia and at least nine by Croatian forces in Croatia. In the absence of at least some detail, the report cannot adequately convey these appalling conditions. In contrast to prior years* reports, the report does not review prison conditions, apart from the brief reference to makeshift places of detention noted above.
The report mentions the practice in areas under the control of Serbian forces, and in Croatia in particular, of seizing property formerly belonging to Croats and ethnic Hungarians. It likewise notes that refugees stated that they had been forced at gunpoint by Serbian forces to board buses leaving the country. The report could have provided greater detail to indicate the scope of these events. In the Serbian-controlled Croatian village of Dalj in August, non-Serbian residents were not permitted to leave the town until they had signed over their belongings and property to local Serbian authorities. The Washington Post reported in late November that Serbia declared plans to settle 20,000 Serbs into 17 villages in the Baranja region in eastern Croatia that Serbian insurgents had taken over. While it is difficult to determine the Serbian government's role in the "forced displacement" used by Serbian forces in Croatia, its failure to condemn or prosecute such criminal activity is telling.
435
Yugoslavia
The report's description of the treatment of asylum seekers in Yugoslavia is excellent, as it was last year, providing a description of the procedures, where they fail to meet international standards and the extent of the problem. The report could also have included information about the conditions of detention. The U.S. Committee for Refugees has reported that conditions at Padinska Skela, the federal detention center near Belgrade where asylum seekers are held, do not meet minimum standards. Former inmates reported overcrowding (with a capacity for 150, it generally holds about 400 detainees), inadequate food, a lack of communication and brutality by guards.
The report's discussion of discrimination on the basis of race, sex, religion, language or social status catalogs the effects of the ethnic divisions that continue to plague Yugoslavia. Its discussion of Kosovo in this section and elsewhere in the report is improved from last year. More emphasis could have been given, however, to the dismissal of members of the ethnic Albanian judiciary and legal profession, and its implications for the justice system. During 1990 and 1991, the Parliament of Serbia dismissed more than 200 ethnic Albanian judges and lawyers and 131 court officials from their jobs. Many were removed without explanation or notice and others were dismissed for alleged incompetence or legal infractions. All were illegally fired in a process lacking due process. The report mentions in its fair trial discussion the closure of provincial courts by Serbian authorities. Seven courts, including the Supreme Court of Kosovo and five public prosecutors' offices, were abolished by the Parliament. Given this state of affairs, the chances for a fair trial in Kosovo for ethnic Albanians are remote. The report's statement that "the judiciary is not free of political influence nor of ethnic bias" is a clear understatement. More generally, repression in Kosovo, as noted in the report, worsened during the year. Serbian authorities kept the province under heavily armed police control; effectively curtailed the Albanian-language media and educational system; and dismissed thousands of ethnic Albanians from their jobs, including medical personnel, teachers and ordinary workers.
The report states that "there were allegations of mass dismissals of Serbs in Croatia on ethnic grounds" but that Croatian authorities
436
Yugoslavia
claimed that these were prompted by the economic downturn rather than ethnic reasons. Loyalty oaths, while apparently a product of private rather than official action, were used in many places in Croatia in 1991, as noted in the report. To its credit, the Croatian government condemned the practice, but there is little evidence that its "requirement" for the reinstatement of Serbs dismissed for their refusal to sign such oaths has been observed or enforced. Harassment, dismissal of and discrimination against Serbs in Croatia continues to be a serious concern, fueled in part by nationalist rhetoric of government representatives.
In conclusion, prospects for respect of human rights in many areas of the former Yugoslavia are not bright. The nationalist fervor which produced monumental human tragedy in 1991 shows no signs of diminishing. And forces that might serve to moderate diese conflicts are either weak, such as the media, or share many of the nationalist and ethnic biases of those in power, such as a Serbian opposition party, the Serbian Renewal Movement. Responsibility for human rights protection is now in the hands of republics. While a number of these governments took steps during 1991 to enact constitutions and laws that articulate rights, there is little or no assurance that these rights will be respected. Respect for the rights of persons belonging to national minorities is clearly an immediate challenge for each republic. Without such respect, there is little realistic hope for an end to the violence or for the restoration of civil society.
437
