SOUTH AFRICA
This year's report on human rights practices in South Africa deals extensively with the continuing infringement of human and political rights and civil liberties which accompanied the South African government's halting process of reform. The report mentions the "frequent and widespread political violence" and it acknowledges that the 1991 levels of political violence constituted the highest yet in the entire history of the country.
Many independent observers agree that South Africans in the townships suffer more now than they ever did during the 1980s due to the political violence which is causing an average of 10 deaths a day or 215 deaths a month. Apartheid violence has taken almost 6,000 lives since Nelson Mandela was released from prison in February 1990.
In general, the report fails to properly distinguish the promises of political reform from continued discrimination, the lack of confidence in the government and the government's ineffectual response to the violence, as well as the alleged complicity of government officials in the violence. Government assurances of political reform have failed to yield peace, security and the right to vote to Black South Africans who remain subject to pervasive socio-economic and political discrimination on the basis of their skin color. The report should have emphasized the government's responsibility to maintain law and order and to give priority to ending the violence.
The report evaluates human rights improvements in 1991 citing the repeal of the Population Registration Act, the Group Areas Act, the two Land Acts, the amendment of the Internal Security Act (ISA), the return of some exiled South Africans, an agreed role for the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, renewed access to prisoners by the International Committee of the Red Cross and negotiations toward a new constitutional dispensation. The repeal of some of the legal pillars of apartheid and the promise of reform also resulted in a fundamental change of U.S. government policy toward South Africa when President George Bush lifted economic sanctions.
323
South Africa
The report fails to describe the pivotal role played by the remaining legal underpinnings of apartheid. No mention is made of the gamut of laws and regulations still in force ~ national, provincial and local — which are racist and discriminatory and which violate human rights. The report should have taken these laws into account in measuring human rights improvements on the basis of repealed apartheid laws. Legislation which regulates political activities, meetings, electoral, land, pension, local government, education, welfare and defense matters on a racial basis includes:
•	The Republic of South Africa Constitution Act of 1983 maintains the racially based constitutional status quo. The Population Registration Act Repeal Act still allows for the retention of the racially defined population register until the Constitution Act is abolished.
•	The Electoral Act of 1979 regulates voter registration and parliamentary election and classifies voters into Whites, Coloreds and Indians for the three houses of parliament. Blacks are totally excluded. The same applies to the Local Government Franchise Act of1984 which only allows for White, Colored and Indian voter registration and voting for local government.
•	The Black Administration Act of 1927 provides for the control and management of Black Affairs (only).
•	The Black Local Authorities Act of 1982 and the Black Communities Development Act of 1984 apply only to Blacks and provide for local authorities, town councils and town committees in areas specified by the respective Administrators of the four provinces, who are all White.
•	The empowering legislation which created all the homelands, including the Self-Governing Territories Constitution Act of 1971 provides the homelands' "constitutional," security, pension, labor and a host of other homeland laws.
•	The Referendum Act of 1983 allows the State President to ascertain the views of voters or a category of voters. Since Blacks are disenfranchised, this law only applies to Whites, Coloreds and Indians. Racially exclusive elections are still
324
South Africa
taking place in the country (including the Whites only referendum in March 1992).
•	The Prevention of Illegal Squatting Act of 1951 has replaced the Land Acts as a control measure on both private and public land. Although this Act does not specifically refer to race groups, it has not been applied to Whites but almost exclusively to Black South Africans, of whom one out of five (or seven million people) lack permanent shelter.
•	Several laws regulate access to and ownership of land on a racial basis, including the Excision of Released Areas Act of 1988 which deals with land excision and services to the residents of land including Soshanguve and Letlhabile (Black) townships, and the Housing Development Act of 1987, which regulates the acquisition and alienation of land for Indian township development.
•	Several education acts, including the Colored Persons Education Act of 1963, the National Education Policy Act of 1927, the Education and Training Act of 1982, the Indians Education Act of 1955, and the Indians Advanced Technical Education Act of 1968, regulate education on a racial basis.
•	Various pension laws, including the Social Pension Act of 1973 and the General Pension Act of 1979 exclude the application of these two laws to Coloreds and Blacks respectively.
•	The Probation Services Act of 1986 governs welfare services for White accused and their families only.
•	Racial classification continues to be used by the De Klerk government, particularly in defense matters, as is illustrated by the Defence Act of 1957 which categorically states that the Act does not apply to persons who are not White. Compulsory military conscription still only applies to White males.
The report fails to mention the statutes which limit free political
activity and assembly, including:
•	The Disclosure of Foreign Funding Act of 1989 and the Affected Organization Act of 1974 respectively require organizations which have been declared "reporting organizations" to report any
325
South Africa
money received from outside South Africa and the purpose for which such money will be used, as well as allow for the prohibition of the receipt of money from abroad and the confiscation of such funds. No reference is made to the fact that the Wilgespruit Fellowship Centre remains subject to government restrictions under this law.
•	The Secret Services Account Act of 1978 allows for money to be used for services of a secret nature determined from time to time by the Minister of Finance.
•	The Internal Security and Intimidation Amendment Act of 1991 provides for detention without trial for 10 days which can be renewed by a judge upon application by the Commissioner of Police. Preventative detention for 14 days (Section 50 of the ISA) and witness detention (Section 31 of the ISA) remain unchanged. The government retains the legal authority to control and ban public gatherings. It can also reinvoke the blanket ban on all outdoor gatherings at any moment as long as the ISA remains in effect. The report fails to mention that during May, more than 2,500 persons were arrested for attending gatherings which had been declared illegal. The homeland security laws for the Transkei, Bophuthtswana, Venda and the Ciskei, which are very similar to the ISA prior to the recent amendments, are likewise not discussed in the report.
•	The Admission of Persons to the Republic Regulation Act of 1972 ousts the courts' jurisdiction in determining whether a person is a "prohibited person" or not and Section 13 lists among prohibited persons anyone who is unable to read and write any European language.
•	The Demonstrations in or near Court Buildings Act of 1982 prohibits public gatherings near court buildings and is widely applied.
The report does not meet its own criterion of commenting on the government's will or ability to prevent or punish killings by forces under its control (and/or sponsored by the government) or killings by other politically motivated groups. Given the evidence of the government's inadequate response to the violence, credence is given to assertions by
326
South Africa
anti-apartheid groups and human rights monitors that the South African government has a double agenda of negotiation widi destabilization. The report recounts but does not assess the government's denial of such claims. During the 28 months from January 1990 to April 1992, the records of the independent Human Rights Commission (HRC) show a total of 119 political assassinations, over five times the rate of such killings during five years under the national states of emergency, when the HRC records reflect 45 assassinations, five "disappearances" and 160 attempted assassinations.
Human rights violations in South Africa were epitomized by the deaths of 2,585 (not 2,165 or 2,050 as reported) during 1991. This figure includes 100 deaths caused directly by the security forces. According to the HRC, 60 of these deaths were caused by hit squads and 2,011 by vigilante groups. Forty-six percent of the deaths occurred in the Pretoria-Witwatersrand area in the Transvaal, while 40.9% of the fatalities were in Natal. The Western Cape recorded 91 deaths, all attributed to hit squads or vigilante action. And in the Orange Free State, 102 deaths were attributed to hit squads or to the extreme rightwing. Out of 26,000 murders last year, about 3,000 (or nine murders a day) are described as unrest-related.
The report should have highlighted examples of court judgments relating to excessive force used by the security forces, since these rulings demonstrate a pattern of abuse by the security forces in, for example, the March 1991 Daveyton and the September 1990 and March 1991 Sebokeng massacres.
The report often identifies victims of the violence as Inkatha supporters without consistently including the names of the members of the African National Congress (ANC) or other people who died in similar circumstances. For instance, although more than 60 ANC leaders were assassinated during 1991, the report chooses rather to describe the deaths of the 28 members of the Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP).
The report's description of the form of the political violence as most often being "factional fighting or criminal elements using
327
South Africa
factionalism as a disguise," neither reflects the substance of charges by human rights organizations about the violence, nor does it mention the involvement of the security forces in the violence. No mention is made of the "taxi wars" with strong political overtones in Cape Town or of alleged police involvement in fomenting these conflicts.
Although the "foreign policy role" of the security forces has decreased, questions about their domestic role and funding persist. The "Inkathagate" scandal and the covert funding by South African Defense Force (SADF) front companies of Inkatha should have been reported more fully and accurately to describe the government's covert funding activities.
Most independent observers, including the International Commission of Jurists, agree that Inkatha bears a heavy and disproportionate responsibility for the violence. The report does not mention the Community Agency for Social Enquiry Report that identifies the IFF and the South African Police (SAP) as the major instigators of the violence. It also fails to acknowledge the role of the government's benevolence toward the Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) and does not describe the government's funding of Inkatha and its protégé trade union UWUSA as covert. In ascribing criticism of the Inkathagate scandal, the report only mentions the ANC which creates the impression of self-interested and politically motivated condemnation, rather than a justified outcry over continuing clandestine action by the government.
Credible evidence exists that members of the security forces have participated in attacks on township residents and incited violence with a manifest bias in favor of Inkatha. (The May 1992 murder convictions of five policemen in the Trustfeed massacre case represent an official admission of police involvement and collusion with Inkatha in the township violence.) Several former members of the security forces, Inkatha and IFP-affiliated vigilantes have publicly admitted their own involvement under government sponsorship or orders in the assassination of anti-apartheid activists and in efforts to destabilize life in the townships.
328
South Africa
The report does not mention that the SADF and the SAP continued financial support for the IFP months after President F.W. De Klerk promised that all covert funding had ceased. Inkatha has been fiinded for years by the SADF Military Intelligence and has received comprehensive support from elements in the security forces. Given the fact that the U.S. government authorized US$2.5 million in aid to the IFP (a group with reportedly less than one percent national political support in South Africa), the report should scrutinize the alleged abuses and violations of human rights by the IFP more closely.
The report does not describe or explain the involvement of the security forces in cases cited to illustrate the political tension between Inkatha and ANC supporters or nonaligned residents. Examples include the security forces' failure to intervene to prevent massacres in Alexandra in March and in Sebokeng, Tembisa and Soweto in May. No reference is made to the assassination of leading civic and trade union leader Sam Ntuli in September in Thokoza, even though he was instrumental in promoting the National Peace Accord on the East Rand. Eyewitness accounts of police involvement in the massacre, which followed at his funeral, are not mentioned.
The report refers to some of the evidence of a "third force" of vigilantes and members of the security forces fomenting the violence and threatening a peaceful transition to a democratic society. But it fails to highlight the fact that the government has not prosecuted the perpetrators of political assassinations and deaths of anti-apartheid activists. To date, no prosecutions have followed the Harms Commission of Inquiry recommendations that former army death squad members be prosecuted for assassinations and attempted murder of anti-apartheid activists, despite President De Klerk's promises to take "relentless action" against members of the security forces who promote the violence.
The report also inaccurately declares that the existence of hit squads and a third force has not been proved. Evidence to the contrary appears from the Harms Commission proceedings, the Trustfeeds case and the public admissions of several former members of the security forces, including Captain Dirk Coetzee, Albert Nofomela, Jacques van
329
South Africa
der Merwe, Felix Ndimene, Henry and Adriaan Maritz and Sipho Madlala. Even President De Klerk has acknowledged the existence of a third force.
The report again neglects to evaluate the Harms Commission findings even though the 1990 report referred to the admission by Judge Harms that the Commission "was unable to restore public confidence in part of the state administration." The report does not mention the criticism by human rights groups of the Harms Commission, which applies equally to other judicial commissions of inquiry currently in operation, that the terms of reference were too limited and that the commissions have no powers of executing or enforcing their findings. Neither is the establishment of the Goldstone Commission of Inquiry concerning the Prevention of Public Violence and Intimidation in October reported.
The report does not criticize the Attorney General's decision not to prosecute self-confessed assassins or the cases referred by the Harms Commission. The government has also closed the book on criminal investigations of the assassinations of other political activists, including: Bheki Mlangeni, Chief Mhlabunzima Maphumulo, David Webster, Anton Lubowski, Mzwiwonke "Pro" Jack and Dr. Fabian Ribeiro and his wife. No reference is made to claims by a former security policeman and self-confessed hit squad member. Lucky James Mtambo (at the inquest into Chief Maphumulo's assassination) that the Transkei's military ruler, Major-General Bantu Holomisa, was singled out for assassination by a police hit squad during the funeral of Chief Maphumulo.
The report fails to report in its reference to the assassination of human rights lawyer Bheki Mlangeni, that the police refused access to the independent forensic expert hired by Mlangeni's law partners to investigate his death, nor does it mention that the forensic expert reported that someone had tampered with the remains of the parcel bomb that killed Mlangeni while it was in police custody.
The report's comment that the number of deaths in police custody has declined from previous years should be measured against the
330
South Africa
fact that 10 people died in 1991 and 12 people died in 1990. Moreover, it should have described the investigations of deaths in police custody from previous years, for example, by explaining the background to the case involving members of the notorious riot squad of the Welverdiend Unrest Unit. Although the report later refers to the fact that Sally Sealy of the Independent Board of Inquiry into Informal Repression was charged with obstruction of justice during her research into deaths caused by this Unit, the report fails to link police harassment and intimidation of Ms. Sealy to the Welverdiend riot squad and police.
The report's discussion of torture is inadequate and misleading in a key respect. It provides few details on cases involving members of the SAP, SADF, homelands police and military units, but instead mentions torture claims by former operatives of the military wing of the ANC in detail. It fails to mention that the ANC appointed a commission of investigation headed by respected lawyers, Gilbert Marcus and Lewis Skweyiya, to investigate these claims. While the report asserts that "both security forces and opposition groups" use certain "common torture methods," it does not provide examples which would support such comparable liability.
In describing the government's amendments to the ISA, the report acknowledges that the law still does not comply with international legal norms. Torture and assault of political detainees usually take place within the first 48 hours after detention and the shorter detention period of 10 days is no guarantee of a detainee's safety. The HRC reports that the ISA accounted for 97 detentions without trial in 1991, a decrease from the high number of 241 in 1990. The report offers no criticism of the i^iblic Safety Act (PSA) which the government uses to declare unrest areas ("mini states of emergency") and which authorizes detention without trial for up to 30 days. Twenty-three detainees were held under the PSA during 1991, a decrease from the total of 191 during 1990.
The report's description of "unrest areas" which the government declared in 1991, creates the impression of "law and order being restored." It fails to report that these "mini states of emergency" grant sweeping powers to the security forces, including detention without trial,
331
South Africa
curfews and restrictions on movement, indemnity against prosecution for the security forces who act in terms of the declaration of an unrest area, and unchecked search and seizure powers to the security forces.
The report does not paint the full picture in some of its descriptions of instances of alleged government involvement in the violence. The case of General Lothar Neethling, the Chief of the SAP Forensic Unit, serves as an example. He has not been charged with any crime or removed from his post despite the finding of the Rand Supreme Court in July that he had personally distributed poison to SAP agents to be used to assassinate ANC leaders.
The report does not fully describe the National Peace Accord (NPA) or report tiiat its implementation and enforcement have failed since its signature on September 16. Its characterization of problems with the NPA as arising from the "hardening of attitudes on all sides after years of conflict" is simplistic and speculative. No mention is made of consistent complaints by human rights organizations and other parties to the NPA that the government and the SAP are not properly implementing the NPA.
The report does not describe the Convention for a Democratic South Africa (CODESA) or its working groups, even though CODESA represents the first and most important forum for multilateral negotiations between the various political parties, liberation organizations, the homelands governments and the South African government. The purpose of CODESA is to seek consensual solutions to the political crisis and to negotiate the parameters for the new constitution, a justiciable bill of rights, free elections, a transitional mechanism (interim government), the incorporation of the "independent" homelands into South Aftica and a democratic government.
The report's failure to describe the ANC (or to its leader. Nelson Mandela) in its reference to extra-parliamentary organizations is indefensible. The ANC is the chief protagonist in the negotiations with the minority government for a transition to democracy. The report instead describes the IFP and its leader Mangosutho Buthelezi. Other
332
South Africa
political leaders are not described, despite reference to their organizations.
This year the report pays more attention to the homelands and human rights violations in the Transkei, Bophuthtswana, Venda, and the Ciskei (the TBVC homelands), but fails to examine the fundamental demand for the re-incorporation of these homelands into South Africa. There is no account of the claim by the Ciskei government that it thwarted an attempt to overthrow the military government, or of the ensuing killing of Major-General Charles Sebe, brother of the deposed president, Lennox Sebe in January. The Ciskei government alleged that Charles Sebe wanted to stage a coup d'etat. The report again fails to discuss the policies of privatization and incorporation of land in the homelands, despite the prevailing, discriminatory pattern of land ownership and dispossession.
The report does not name the 10 homelands beyond the TBVC homelands, even though it asserts that "political rights vary within [the] ten black homelands." There is also no discussion of how the political rights vary or of the security laws in place in the TBVC homelands. Although noting that the use of detention without trial declined in 1991, the report neglects to analyze or discuss the 792 detentions without trial in the homelands or the fact that 87% of all detentions without trial in 1991 took place there. The Ciskei regime detained the largest number of people in 1991, while Bophuthatswana held the highest number of detainees without trial in 1990. The HRC also reports that arrests remain prevalent as a form of repression in the homelands, with the exception of Venda. During the year:
•	The Ciskei detained 704 (and not 529 as reported) persons and arrested 335 people, compared with 13 detentions without trial in 1990.
•	Bophuthtswana detained 262 (and not 258 as reported) persons and arrested 792 people. In 1990, the Mangope regime held 608 detainees without trial.
•	The Transkei held five detainees without trial and arrested 82 people, compared with 21 detentions during the previous year.
333
South Africa
•	Venda reported no detentions without trial, while 94 persons were so detained during 1990.
The report does not mention scores of hunger strikes by political prisoners, even though about 201 prisoners in South Africa and 158 in Bophuthatswana engaged in such hunger strikes. No mention is made of murders by homelands police of activists like Joseph Thabang Dlamini, a member of the Witsieshoek Unemployment Workers Coordinating Committee, who was bludgeoned to death by two members of the QwaQwa police in November.
Although the report refers to the South African defense and police establishment as "powerful," no description is given of the size, make-up, training or policies of the security forces. The SAP, for instance, consists of 110,000 members, 60% of whom are Black, with only a few Black police members working in training assignments and none in management or policymaking. (In March 1992, President De Klerk earmarked more than half of the 1992 defense budget of R4,380 million (US$893.8 million) for the Special Defence Account which supports secret security actions.) Despite the dismantling of the notorious Security Management System, the organizational chart of the SAP and the SADF still includes special units which specialize in clandestine warfare:
•	Section C-1 of the Security Police, founded in 1981 to employ Askaris, ex-members of the ANC and SWAPO who were chiefly used as death squad operatives, and which is commanded by Colonel Eugene Terreblanche. Colonel Terreblanche was promoted to Colonel after being publicly denounced by self-confessed hit-squad operative and former SAP Captain Dirk Coetzee.
•	The Special Forces Reconnaissance Commando which consists of about 4,500 men, one-third of the total size of the SADF permanent force. The Buffalo Battalion, which was the mainstay of the Angola war, has been deployed in Natal since 1988.
334
South Africa
• The KwaZuIu Police, commanded by General Jacques Büchner, who was one of the SAP's chief security protagonists involved in the government's 1980s war against the ANC.
The report does not describe any of the homeland security forces as it should have, particularly in view of persistent charges that the KwaZulu Police Force is promoting violence and colluding with the SAP in killing ANC supporters (as confirmed by the 1992 conviction of members of the SAP and the KZP in the Trustfeeds case).
The description of the South African economy does not refer to the fundamentally monopolistic character of the economy, nor does it describe the unemployment crisis which is especially affecting Blacks, particularly in the homelands and rural areas. The South African Chamber of Business reports that six million South Africans, or 43% of the economically active population, are now unemployed. The report only states that the levels of unemployment have "increased significantly, and [that] per capita income amongst blacks has stagnated."
The education crisis is not mentioned, even though it almost exclusively affects Black students and is evidence that the government's racial policies are still practiced and enforced in the education system. The government has indicated that education is to be administered on an "own affairs" (racially based) basis until a new constitution is in place. White schools can voluntarily decide to desegregate, provided that 72% of the parents agree. This led to the opening of about 205 of 2,000 White schools in January. The Universities Act of 1955 still allows for the establishment of universities along racial lines, despite the ending of racial quotas at universities in April.
Racial discrimination and obvious disparities in health care for different racial groups are also not mentioned in the report. Most Blacks still depend on the public sector for health care, since only about six percent are covered by the Medical Aid system of private insurance, as opposed to 70% of Whites. In practice, several hospitals remain racially segregated and the government insists that health care will remain racially based until a new constitution is in place.
335
South Africa
The report does not describe the housing crisis which continues to affect Black South Africans, the severity of which is acknowledged even by the government. No mention is made of the debate about land reform or the Illegal Squatting Act which is used as a control measure, almost exclusively against Black South Afiricans. Despite the scrapping of the two Land Acts, township residents have to tolerate abysmal living conditions and lack most essential municipal services, while enduring a complete breakdown in law and order. And in Bophuthatswana, organizations like the Black Sash and the Transvaal Rural Action Committee, which assist victims of rights abuses and evictions, remain banned.
The report's frequent use of the word "nonwhite" to describe Black South Africans is offensive and inappropriate. It should also have mentioned highly respected judge Ismael Mahomed by name, rather than describe him as South Africa's "first nonwhite judge." The report fails to note in its discussion of gender discrimination, that South Africa has only one woman judge, Leonora Van den Heever.
The report does not discuss the pilot projects for a public defender's office, despite reference to the Mthwana decision in which the Appellate Division (AD) refused to rule that the failure to provide legal representation to indigent accused constitutes an irregularity which renders a trial unfair. The AD also refused to accept the alternative argument of economic necessity as a basis for ordering pro bono legal defense to indigent accused. While the report refers to the practice of appointing pro bono advocates to defend indigent defendants charged with capital crimes, it fails to report criticism that these advocates are usually inexperienced in defending such cases.
The report should have evaluated the South African Law Commission report on the protection of individual rights, given the essential debate about a Bill of Rights and the new constitutional dispensation in South Africa. The report makes no reference to the various proposals for the Bill of Rights or a constitutional court to determine constitutional questions in the future.
336
South Africa
The report does not evaluate the release of political prisoners or the government's compliance with the Groote Schuur and Pretoria Minutes (agreements regulating the return of political exiles and the release of political prisoners), nor does it mention the government's refusal to aid the return of exiled South Africans. It does not evaluate the indemnity or the amnesty process, despite criticism leveled by human rights groups. In effect, the indemnity process requires political confessions by political opponents (like the ANC or the Pan Africanist Congress) of the government. No reference is made to the problems experienced by political prisoners in gaining their release from prison using the indemnity application process. The report does not describe or assess the different definitions of political prisoners applied by the South African and human rights groups nor does it evaluate the government's reasons for refusing the overwhelming majority of the applications for indemnity.
More than a year after the agreed deadline for the release of political prisoners, the HRC reports that 400 political prisoners remain incarcerated. The report makes no reference to capital punishment or to the death row statistics which show that the number of political prisoners on death row has declined from 55 in 1990 to 13 at the end of 1991. This decrease was largely due to overturned or commuted sentences or those amended on appeal. Two inmates were executed in Venda in February.
The report does not mention the continuation of political trials, even though human rights groups report that, by the end of 1991, 141 such trials were under way, involving 1,814 persons. The HRC reports that although the use of the courts for political trials has escalated dramatically since 1989, the number of convictions has declined, indicating arrests are being used as a means of harassment.
The stringent measures of control imposed by the Aliens Control Act and the vast powers of search and seizure granted to Home Affairs Alien Control Officers should have been discussed in more detail.
337
South Africa
The "privatization of apartheid" perhaps best describes the growing trend of racial discrimination through private practices, which can be illustrated by the problems facing Black South Africans since the repeal of the Land Acts and the Group Areas Act. The report does not refer to the critical issues of land reform and reparation and compensation to the more than 3.5 million people stripped of their land and property. Human rights groups point out that the current land ownership and occupation pattern remains entrenched under the Abolition of Racially Based Land Measures Act, despite the advisory commission to which victims of removals can present claims for compensation of land still held by the State. The Upgrading of Land Tenure Rights Act of 1991 allows for the upgrading of lower-order land tenure rights to full ownership.
The report points out that restrictions on freedom of speech and the press have eased. However, the continuing use of Section 205 of the Criminal Procedure Act of 1977 to extract the names of sources from journalists and to criminalize the journalists' refusal is deplorable. The section prohibiting the publication of "untrue matter" about the SAP was recently scrapped. But several other laws remain in effect, preventing the free flow of information and access to the media. These laws include certain provisions of the Broadcasting Act, the Post Office Act, the Defence Act, and also:
•	The Correctional Services Act of 1959 which places the onus on anyone who writes about prisons to prove the truth of statements made. This law also prohibits the publication of any statement by a prisoner unless the statement was made during his/her trial or unless the Commissioner of Prison Services has approved publication;
•	The Armaments Development and Production Act of 1968 which prohibits the disclosure of information relating to the acquisition and development of armaments;
•	The National Key Points Act of 1980 which prohibits the publication of certain information related to places declared as National Key Points; and
338
South Africa
• The Petroleum Products Act of1977 which forbids the disclosure of information related to the source, storage, etc. of petroleum products.
The report should have conducted more thorough research about workers' rights and the status of these rights in South Africa. The report's statement that the "government did not directly interfere significantly with union activities in 1991 " is incorrect. The government direcdy and covertly interfered with labor relations and financed the Inkatha trade union UWUSA as revealed in the Inkathagate scandal. Harassment of trade union leaders continues and Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU) reports that its lawyers defended 1,485 members and union officials in 166 trials, which resulted in only 57 convictions.
COSATU's decision to withdraw from the National Manpower Commission should have been measured against the government's longstanding refusal to extend all basic labor laws to domestic, farm and public sector workers. The government has also refused to extend the Wage Act to unprotected workers before 1996. The report's statement that the working conditions of agricultural and domestic workers and workers in the homelands are "sometimes far less advanced than in the rest of South Africa" is ludicrous and simplistic, given the total discrimination against these workers who are denied the benefit of basic labor legislation.
The report again fails to examine the regressive homelands' labor laws and practices. Its statement that "there have been clear signs that many homelands have discouraged trade union organizing" is excessively vague and incorrect, especially when the prohibitive labor laws and practices of Bophuthatswana are taken into account. It is also wrong to state that recognition disputes are rare, since labor unions are by and large not recognized in the homelands and these disputes continue.
The report again fails this year to report on the host of labor laws which determine workers' status and benefits on the basis of race and gender, such as the Occupational Diseases in Mines and Works Act
339
South Africa
and the Workmens' Compensation Act. No reference is made to groundbreaking initiatives by some public interest law firms and trade unions to address discrimination against employees with AIDS.
340
