HONDURAS
The Report on Honduras suffers from statements that tend to minimize human rights violations by the government and overstate security threats which are cited to justify the abuses that are acknowledged. Distortions are produced by presenting in unequivocal terms what is in fact the government's position on matters that are open to serious question — most notably evident in the Report's bald assertion that "[t]here are no political prisoners in Honduras" — while refusing to credit findings of human rights monitoring organizations, which are consistently cited as "allegations."
This pattern would be less disturbing if it were consistent throughout the Country Reports. Instead, a comparison with the Reports on countries that are not aligned — as Honduras is — with the United States suggests that the Honduras Report was written to promote U.S. geopolitical interests. For example, in contrast to the treatment of findings by human rights monitors in Honduras, the Country Reports affirmatively endorse the findings of such a group in Nicaragua by terming them "credible evidence."
The Report's discussion of political killings is unduly defensive of the Honduran government and understates the extent of the problem. The Report begins with an unequivocal claim that "[t]he Honduran Government neither condones nor knowingly permits killings of a political nature or
-26-
non-political nature," and then suggests that instances where security forces are accused of murder are "rare." The Report cites ten cases of a "possible political nature" through October 1983 and states that "available evidence" suggests that "government authorities did not order any of these murders." It suggests that "most appear to be attributable to some combination of personal and political rivalry in the rural areas."
Human rights groups in Honduras place the number of deaths attributable to security forces much higher. The Committee for the Defense of Human Rights in Honduras has documented 49 such murders for the first half of 1983, at least 13 of which appear to have a clear political motive. With such evidence of security force involvement, it is disingenuous to claim that the government does not "condone" extra-judicial killings, which are merely the product of "personal animosities."
This claim is predicated on the assertion that "[i]n rare cases in which members of the security forces have been accused of murder, the Government has brought the perpetrators to justice." There have, in fact, been few efforts to prosecute. Moreover, a January 1984 case cited as an example of swift action is hardly representative. Major Juan Bias Salazar, then Chief of the Department of National Investigation (DNI), had publicly admitted the victim died in police custody, leaving the government little choice but to
-27-
act. When it did, it did not "fire" Salazar, as the Report states; it transferred him to an equally sensitive post.
The Report also distorts the problems of torture and disappearance in Honduras. While acknowledging that torture is common, the Report creates a misleading impression that redress for such abuses is the norm, noting instances in which disciplinary action has been taken. In fact, many allegations of torture result in no apparent investigation, despite provisions in Honduran law requiring one.
The Report understates the problem of disappearances in several respects. In the section on disappearances, it gives numbers only for "unresolved" cases, thus excluding scores of cases in which missing persons were eventually acknowledged to have been held in clandestine custody for long periods. This approach has the effect of implying that such off icially-sanctioned instances of unacknowledged detention are not themselves cause for serious concern.
Later, in the section on arbitrary arrest and detention, the Report addresses this problem but avoids indicating its extent. While noting that government officials have acknowledged the indefinite detention of prisoners, the Report inexplicably states that "an indefinite number" of such detentions were acknowledged. In fact, on June 10,
1983, Major Salazar admitted to the clandestine custody of 18
i
people, whose detention he acknowledged to be in violation of the Honduran Constitution, a fact the Report also fails to
-28-
mention. On November 10, 1983, the DNI released a list of 78 persons it had detained under suspicion of subversive activity in 1983.
The Report also omits discussion of several problems that undermine the operation of the judicial system. In discussing the Honduran procedure for habeas corpus, it fails to state that courts presented with such petitions have typically accepted as conclusive official denials that the subject of the petition is being held, and have dismissed such petitions without further investigation.
While the Report correctly states that the press operates with substantial freedom in Honduras, it should have noted a series of acts of intimidation during 1983 against the editors and writers for Tiempo, the most independent of the major press organs in Honduras.
The Report's treatment of refugees also suffers from an important omission. By stating simply that "some" refugees are restricted to their camp areas, the Report masks the fact that such restrictions largely apply only to Salvadoran and Guatemalan refugees, while Nicaraguan refugees enjoy relative freedom of movement. This and other instances of discriminatory treatment of Salvadoran and Guatemalan refugees are significant enough to warrant special mention.
The most objectionable statement contained in this Report is the assertion that "[t]here are no political prisoners in Honduras. Individuals are prosecuted not for
-29-
their political beliefs but rather for criminal acts defined in the penal code." Such an extreme lapse in objectivity has no place in the Country Reports.
-30-
