HAITI
The State Department accurately concludes that in 1983 "major human rights shortcomings continue in Haiti." The Report properly emphasizes that the Haitian government continues to torture prisoners, arrest and detain perceived opponents without charge, and maintain severe restrictions on freedoms of speech, press and association. And it is forthright in its assessment that in 1983 political opposition to President Jean Claude Duvalier continues to be "severely restricted."
As in the past, the most glaring deficiency in the Report is its discussion of freedom of movement. This section is little more than an apology for the Reagan Administration's ongoing efforts to expel several thousand Haitians who now seek political asylum in the United States. Its tone is set by the introductory sentence, which declares: "Illegal emigration from Haiti remained a significant problem in 1983." Although the rest of the Report suggests ample bases why Haitians would flee their country in fear of persecution, this section speculates that an increase in emigrants in 1983 is "probably because of worsening economic conditions, hunger and drought in rural areas," and refuses to concede that political persecution may have affected anyone's decision to emigrate.
Defending the interdiction program under which, since 1981, the U.S. Coast Guard has assisted the Haitian Navy in
-22-
forcibly intercepting small boatloads of Haitians on the high seas, the Report notes that "[n]one that of those interviewed after their return have reported mistreatment as a result of their attempt to emigrate." The Report does not say that only a small fraction of the total number of people who were returned to Haiti under this program have been interviewed. In some instances State Department officials have been unable to locate those who are supposed to have returned. U.S. officials continue to refuse to make the names of those who have returned to Haiti available to private groups interested in investigating the fate of these people.
There is evidence that those who return are viewed with suspicion and hostility by the Haitian Government. Such was the case of a young mother who has testified that she was "captured and beaten with wood clubs by the Ton Ton. Macoutes" upon her forced return to Haiti after leaving in mid-1982.
The Report fails to note, as it should, that it is a crime to leave Haiti without an exit visa, a restriction that is similar to those in the Soviet Union and many Eastern European countries. It also seeks to minimize the government's hostility toward prominent exiles who have sought to return to participate in the political life of the nation. Of one important case, the Report simply notes: "In January 1984, Gregoire Eugene, in exile in New York since 1980, was refused the required return visa to Haiti where he
-23-
was considering participating in the legislative elections announced for February." In fact, as the Haitian government was well aware, Mr. Eugene had publicly announced his intention to participate in those elections, an action the Duvalier government found threatening and therefore unacceptable. The Report also neglects to mention that Mr. Eugene's exile was forced in 1980 and was enforced since then by repeated denials of an entry visa to his homeland until March 1984, when Eugene was allowed to return to Haiti — too late to contest the February elections.
Regarding the political process, the State Department notes on several occasions that a number of independent candidates participated in the 1983 municipal elections. While several of the races were contested, it tests the reader's imagination to say that any of the candidates were independent of the Duvalier Government. The Report does point out, accurately, that the country's only political opposition party, the Haitian Christian Democratic Party, was "harassed continually" in 1983.
The State Department also reports that the daughter of Sylvio Claude, the party's founder, was tortured in 1983. Yet it fails to note, as it should, that Mr. Claude was also severely beaten during his detention between September and December 1983.
At several points, the State Department seeks to make a
depressing human rights picture seem a bit brighter. Thus,
for example, while it notes that "human rights abuses
-24-
continued to occur" in 1983, it emphasizes that President Duvalier "has eliminated the killings and disappearances which took place under his father." Although the level of violence has decreased in Haiti over the past 20 years, it is difficult to draw the conclusion that Jean Claude Duvalier has taken affirmative steps to end killings or disappearances. It would be more accurate to say that since 1957 the Duvalier Government has effectively crushed political opposition through a campaign of terror and violence under which many people were killed and many others sought refuge in other countries. Today Haiti has all but eliminated the remnants of earlier political opposition, rendering a sustained plan of violence no longer necessary.
Despite these and other distortions, the Report on Haiti presents an overall picture that is reasonably fair and accurate. Its discussion of the continued harassment of the country's only opposition political party, the jailing and torture of opposition political figures and their families, and the ongoing restrictions on freedom of the press and association make it clear that there was no basis in fact for Secretary of State George Shultz's January 30 certification "that the Government of Haiti has made a concerted and significant effort to improve the human rights situation by implementing the political reforms which are essential to the development of democracy."
