 UPPER VOLTA
 The year 1983 in Upper Volta was marked by political
 instability. On August 4, in a military coup d'etat, Captain
 Thomas Sankara overthrew Major Jean-Baptiste Ouedraogo, who had
 himself seized power in November 1982, and proclaimed a revolu-
 tionary government in the form of the National Council for
 the Revolution. Sankara had served as Prime Minister in the
 Ouedraogo Government until his dismissal by Ouedraogo in May
 1983. On August 24, the National Council for the Revolution
 appointed a primarily civilian cabinet with military personnel
 retaining control of the country's security apparatus. The
 .Ouedraogo Government's pledge to return Upper Volta to consti-
 tutional rule by November 1984 has been abandoned, and political
 parties remain suspended. Committees for the Defense of the
 Revolution are being organized by the Government in both rural
 and urban areas to serve as vehicles for mobilizing the popula-
 tion for development and for promoting the Government's as yet
 undefined revolutionary goals.
 Political upheavals of recent years, including a succession of
 military coups, and the suspension in 1980 of political parties
 and the Constitution have severely curtailed the exercise of
 political rights in Upper Volta. At the same time, respect for
 individual civil rights, including the right to privacy, a fair
 public trial, and freedom from arbitrary interference with
 family, home, or correspondence remains an integral part of life
 in Upper Volta. During the first six months of 1983, former
 President Ouedraogo made a number of moves leading to the
 restoration of political rights. In May, all prisoners held for
 political reasons, including former President Lamizana, over-
 thrown in 1980, were released. At the time of their release,
 President Ouedraogo also pledged to return Upper Volta to
 civilian rule by November 1984, based on a constitution to be
 presented to the people before the end of 1983. Former political
 leaders were poised to renew political activity, though formation
 of political parties was still prohibited, and a constitutional
 drafting committee was being formed. With Captain Sankara's
 assumption of power in August, these plans were abandoned,
 ministers of the Ouedraogo Government were placed under house
 arrest, and former political leaders were restricted to their
 home areas and forbidden to meet with more than three persons
 at a time. Two prominent military leaders lost their lives
 within days of the coup. According to the Government, they
 were killed trying to escape captivity. The non-government
 press (consisting of one daily newspaper) continues to publish,
 though in this period of political instability there is evidence
 of self-censorship. The recent creation of People's
 Revolutionary Courts and the replacement of the entire Supreme
 Court and a number of magistrates since the August 4 coup, will
 undoubtedly have a negative impact on the judiciary, although it
 is too early to tell precisely how severe that impact will be.
 The rights of traditionally active unions to unrestricted strikes
 were restored in early 1983. However, the unions, anxious to
 avoid confrontation with a new regime, did not exercise that
 right during the year. Several unions held congresses during
 1983 but only one, the Primary School Teachers' Union, has
 commented on government policy. In September the Primary School
 Teachers' Union issued a statement highly critical of the
 Government for which they in turn were strongly criticized by
 the Government, but no sanctions have been taken against the
 union.
 (401)
 
 
 402
 During 1983 both the Ouedraogo and the Sankara governments
 arbitrarily retired or dismissed both military and civil
 servants who ranged from retirement age to others in their late
 20's. While some may have been dismissed for cause, no advance
 warning and no explanations were offered. All have been per-
 mitted to collect their pensions but will evidently be barred
 from further public service. This action has affected several
 hundred individuals since the November 1982 coup, some with
 considerable ,administrative and military experience. There is
 no guerrilla activity in Upper Volta nor are any outside forces
 operating in the country.
 Upper Volta is one of the poorest countries in the world with
 an economy based on agriculture and animal husbandry. This
 former French colony has a literacy rate of about seven per-
 cent and 90 percent of its seven million inhabitants live
 in rural areas. Another million or so Voltans live and work
 in neighboring Francophone countries and send remittances to
 their families in Upper Volta which has a positive impact on
 Upper Volta's budget.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1  Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 Fighting at the time of the August 4 coup resulted in five dead
 and 15 wounded. Two prominent military figures were. also killed
 within days of the August 4 coup. The Government states they
 were killed by security forces during an attempt to escape
 from captivity. Others believe they were killed deliberately.
 There is no terrorism in Upper Volta directed either at the
 Government or at the general public.
 b. Disappearance
 There are no reports of disappearances in Upper Volta.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Although there have been allegations, there are no confirmed
 reports of torture being practiced on prisoners. There are no
 reports of cruel, inhuman, or degrading punishment although the
 poverty of society in general results in poor prison conditions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 About 30 former political leaders and government officials,
 either imprisoned or under house arrest at the beginning of 1983,
 were provisionally released in May. Those already tried were
 promised full restoration of civil rights once fines levied by
 court judgments were paid. Cases against those not yet tried
 continued being prepared for trial under the auspices of a
 special court. Following the August 4 coup, six of those just-
 released ex-political leaders were once again restricted, this
 time to their home areas, and barred from meeting with more than
 three persons at once; contact with foreigners requires
 government permission. In October, 13 of these people were
 exiled to their native villages. Several former ministers
 
 
 403
 detained after the coup remain under house arrest with no charges-
 having been brought against them and no timeframe set for their
 release. Other former government officials, some out of the
 country at the time of the coup, remain in self-imposed exile
 abroad. Habeas corpus does not exist in Upper Volta. Laws
 permitting preventive detention for a maximum of 72 hours
 renewable once in criminal cases are followed in practice.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Upper Volta's judiciary has had a tradition of independence.
 Early in 1983, dossiers charging former political leaders with
 crimes against the state were moving forward through the judicial
 process, though slowly, and were expected to come to trial before
 the end of the year. Then, in October, the Government announced
 the creation of two new People's Revolutionary Courts in
 Ouagadougou and Bobo-Diolasso, specifically charged with juris-
 diction over state security and political crimes. The cases of
 former political leaders will be transferred to these People's
 Courts since the Special Court previously created to deal with
 them was concurrently abolished. The two courts break with
 Voltan legal tradition in that there will be no role for a public
 prosecutor, and the accused will have no right to counsel. The
 courts will be composed of three magistrates, three military
 members, and 12 members of local Committees for the Defense
 of the Revolution. It is not yet known how the courts will
 operate in practice, who will decide what is a "political' crime,
 or how jurisdiction will be divided with the regular court
 system. No charges have been brought against the 15 detained
 since the August 4 coup. Illiteracy (about 93 percent) and
 ignorance limit awareness of their rights on the part of the
 poor who do not always receive full benefit of the system's
 guarantees.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Government authorities normally have not interfered in the
 privacy, family, home, or correspondence of ordinary citizens.
 There is no forced entry into homes, although they may be
 searched under a warrant issued by the Attorney General, a
 procedure that is adhered to in practice. There is no
 monitoring of private correspondence or telephones. The
 security apparatus is not used in the surveillance of family
 life. New Committees for the Defense of the Revolution,
 established by the Government following the August coup in
 both rural and urban areas, have been charged by President
 Sankara with lunmasking counter-revolutionaries and
 imperialism," but how this will be implemented in practice is
 unclear. People have been encouraged by the Government to join
 and contribute to these organizations. Large numbers of
 unemployed youth and some students have responded enthusias-
 tically, but their elders have reacted with indifference and
 some resentment. There is no evidence to date of mental or
 physical pressure being brought on citizens to join these
 committees. International radio broadcasts are not jammed,
 and a primary school reform proposal provides for teaching in
 local languages in an expanded primary school system.
 
 
 404
 Section 2  Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The media in Upper Volta consist of one independent daily
 newspaper, a government-operated radio/television station, a
 government weekly magazine, and an official news bulletin.
 Government media disseminate only official policy and report and
 refute criticism of the Government. Shortly after assuming
 office in August, the Minister of Information addressed
 government journalists and told them their role was to "defend
 the revolution." He said they had an obligation to explain and
 instruct the population about government policy and activities.
 The independent newspaper on the other hand, while primarily
 devoted to publishing transcripts of government pronouncements
 and descriptive articles of government activities, does
 occasionally print letters and signed articles critical of
 government policy. In September, a statement highly critical
 of the Government, issued by the Primary School Teachers' Union,
 was published locally only in the independent daily, which
 subsequently also published a government statement refuting
 union criticism. There is a tradition of press conferences in
 Upper Volta in which government, independent, and foreign
 journalists question government officials; a tradition which
 President Sankara continued during his first months in office.
 Foreign journalists operate and file stories freely. Censorship
 is permitted, but it is rarely exercised and was not used in 1983.
 Upper Voltans are generally free to express their opinion.
 However, political views contrary to those of the Government are
 rarely expressed publicly since the 1980 suspension of political
 activity.
 There are no known limitations on academic freedom in Upper
 Volta. Professors are free to teach their courses within the
 confines of the academic curriculum without outside interfer-
 ence. In the arts, movies are subject to rating and possible
 censorship by a review board which includes religious authori-
 ties as well as government officials.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 While political parties remained banned, peaceful assembly and
 association for other groups are largely unrestricted.
 Administrative permission generally is required for mass
 meetings, but permits have been given freely. The last year has
 seen marches primarily for, but also against, government actions,
 some sparked by government calls for demonstrations of support,
 others apparently spontaneously organized.
 Upper Volta is exceptional in Africa for its well organized and
 traditionally active labor groups. Four labor federations and
 a number of autonomous unions exist. They range in orientation
 from old-line economic labor federations traditionally unre-
 stricted in their adversary relationship with the Government to
 a highly politicized federation of civil service locals. One
 federation is affiliated with the International Confederation of
 Free Trade Unions, a second with the Confederation of Christian
 Workers, and a third with the World Federation of Trade Unions.
 The fourth, the Civil Service Federation, has no international
 affiliation; it was reestablished late in 1982 having been
 disbanded in 1981 for flouting an anti-strike law then on the
 books. The right to strike was restored early in 1983 but
 
 
 405
 has not been exercised during the year. Labor has exercised
 its right to organize with several unions having held congresses
 in 1983. It has also exercised its right to train workers. In
 July 1983, the Upper Volta affiliate of the International Con-
 federation of Free Trade Unions organized, in conjunction with
 the African-American Labor Center, a week-long seminar on *The
 Role of Free Trade Unions in Upper Volta and the World" for
 30 shop stewards and union officials. With one exception,
 labor unions have refrained from commenting publicly on
 government policy and actions during the year. The one
 exception, the independent Primary School Teachers' Union,
 strongly criticized the Government in September for its
 arbitrary retirement and dismiss'al of civil servants, among
 other things. The Government subsequently denounced union
 leadership as anti-revolutionary but has taken no measures to
 discipline either the union's leaders or its membership.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Upper Volta is a secular state, and the Government avoids
 discrimination on religious grounds. Islam and Christianity
 exist side by side, with about 25 percent of the population
 being Muslim and about 10 percent Christian. Both Muslim and
 Christian holidays are recognized as national holidays. To
 accommodate charter flights for pilgrims to Mecca in September,
 the Government rolled back its curfew from 9 p.m. to 11 p.m.
 Missionaries are permitted to operate in Upper Volta. Social
 mobility and access to modern sector jobs are neither linked to,
 nor restricted by, religious affiliations.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement is generally unimpeded in Upper Volta,
 though travelers are sometimes subject to police checks. A
 curfew has existed for most of 1983; one is currently in effect
 from 11 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. and is strictly enforced. Foreign
 travel for business and tourism is not restricted but emigration
 is controlled through issuance of exit permits. The announced
 intent of this measure was to limit movement of able-bodied
 producers to neighboring countries, particularly the Ivory Coast,
 where one million or more Voltans continue to reside and work.
 Refugees are accepted freely in Upper Volta and attempts are made
 to provide for their care in cooperation with the United Nations
 High Commission for Refugees. Refugees from Ghana have entered
 Upper Volta since the 1980 coup in Ghana. The current Government
 has made no move to alter this policy.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 Upper Volta is ruled by the National Council for the Revolution,
 which came to power in a military coup led by former Prime
 Minister Captain Thomas Sankara. There is no legislative body,
 nor are there any recognized political opposition groups. The
 National Council for the Revolution appointed a cabinet with four
 military and 15 civilian members. Captain Sankara himself
 retains control of the state security apparatus as Minister of
 Interior and Security. Generally, participation in the
 Government is limited to formal discussion among members of the
 Council and within the weekly Council of Ministers meeting or
 through informal pressure groups acting on the leadership.
 
 
 406
 Political parties remain banned, but citizens are encouraged to
 join local Committees for the Defense of the Revolution. In
 Ouagadougou these committees have been assigned the task of
 choosing the next mayor. In the past, mayors in Upper Volta
 were appointed by the Central Government Administration.
 Minority ethnic groups are as likely to be represented in the
 inner circles of the governing councils as are the Mossi who
 alone comprise 50 percent of the population. Government
 decisions do not favor one ethnic group over another. A recent
 decision to increase the number of administrative regions from
 11 to 25 was announced as a way to give minority groups better
 access to local administrative authorities. One of the first
 moves of Sankara's Government was to ship government-stockpiled
 food to remote northern regions populated primarily by nomadic
 and poorly-educated Tuaregs and Peuls.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Neither the present nor the previous Government made any formal
 public statements with regard to human rights organizations
 during 1983. Previous grievances of the International Labor
 Organization over anti-strike measures were partially redressed
 early in 1983 when the Ouedraogo Government restored the right
 to strike. The release in May, 1983 of all political prisoners
 met some of Amnesty International's expressed concerns over the
 continued detention of politicians. However, since the August
 coup, a number of these politicians have been either rearrested
 or banished to their home areas. During 1983, before Captain
 Sankara came to power, Amnesty International expressed concern
 about the detention without trial of trade unionists and other
 senior officials of the Lamizana regime. However, no interna-
 tional human rights organization has commented on the situation
 in Upper Volta since the August 4 coup. The President of the
 International Committee of the Red Cross made a well-publicized
 visit to Upper Volta in September and met with top government
 officials. The substance of his discussions was not made public.
 A human rights association, formed in Upper Volta in January
 1982 by private citizens, has to date undertaken no activities
 beyond its own organization. Freedom House rates Upper Volta
 .partly free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Poverty is pervasive in Upper Volta. The Government's efforts
 to develop the economy have been hampered, however, by the
 almost total lack of resources in the country. There are no
 identifiable groups which are discriminated against, although
 living standards are generally higher in the few urban centers
 than in the countryside.
 Upper Volta is overwhelmingly tied to subsistence agriculture,
 with 90 percent of the population living in rural areas and less
 than one percent employed in the monetized sector of the economy.
 Gross National Product per capita was $237 in 1981. The country
 is gradually recovering from the severe drought suffered through-
 out the Sahel in the mid-1970's, and agricultural production is
 gradually increasing. Meat, vegetables, and grain are available,
 though costly for families without their own fields and seldom
 
 
 407
 plentiful in drier sections of the country. Nevertheless, Upper
 Voltans were able to supply 93 percent of the calories needed for
 nutritional well-being. On the average, just 25 percent of the
 population has access to safe water, with a disproportionate
 number of those people being in urban areas. Fifty percent of
 the urban population, compared to only 23 percent of the rural
 population, has access to clean water.
 The general poverty of the country adversely affects the avail-
 ability of social services. The literacy rate is estimated at
 seven percent with only 21 percent of the primary school children
 enrolled in schools; 26 percent of the males and 15 percent of
 the females. Further, the population is growing at the rate of
 2.5 percent per year as of 1983, despite an infant mortality rate
 of 181 deaths per 1,000 live births. Life expectancy at birth
 is 39 years. The primary causes of death and morbidity are
 malaria, and gastrointestinal, infectious, and parasitic
 diseases. Population pressure is somewhat restrained by large
 scale annual migrations to neighboring countries for seasonal
 agricultural work.
 Most of Upper Volta's people belong to two major West African
 cultural groups, the Voltaic and the Mande. The Voltaic are the
 most numerous and include the Mossi who make up about 50 percent
 of the population. Most Voltans adhere to traditional religious
 practices, but the Muslim and Christian minorities include most
 of the country's educated elite.
 The current Government has emphasized in public statements its
 awareness of the plight of women and its commitment to involving
 women in the country's development. Women have the same rights
 as men under Voltan law and are active participants in Voltan
 economic life. Their political role has, however, traditionally
 been limited. With expanding educational opportunities, Voltan
 women are slowly assuming a larger role in Voltan society. The
 Ministry of Social Affairs works to promote greater participation
 by women in the nation's economic, social, and political life.
 One woman has been named to the current Cabinet and several
 others have been appointed magistrates in the judicial system.
 Greater emancipation for women is a recurring theme in speeches
 by Bead of State Sankara.
 
 30-231 0 - 84 - 27
 
 
 408
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: UPPER VOLTA
 1981     1982    1983
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...       30.7     19.6      8.8
 LOANS ..................  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................  30.7     19.6      8.8
 A.AID  .... ............. .....  14.1  11.2      0.3
 LOANS ..................  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   14.1     11.2     0.3
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD  FOR  PEACE .......    15.2      6.8      7.1
 LOANS ......... ........  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS....... ........    15.2     6.8      7.1
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY.  IN  $-LOANS .....     0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY.  IN  FOR. CURR.....      0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........      15.2     6.8      7.1
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV A WFP.        3.0      1.3      2.3
 VOL.RELIEF  AGENCY .....     '12.2     5.5      4.8
 C.OTHER  ECON. ASSIST...        1.4     1.6      1.4
 LOANS ......... ........  0.0      0.0      0.,0
 GRANTS .......... .... 1.4         1.6      1.4
 PEACE  CORPS ......       1.4     1.6      1.4
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0     0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............        0.0     0.0      0.0
 II.MIL.  ASSIST.-TOTAL...       0.1      0.1      0.1
 LOANS ..................  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       0.1      0.1      0.1
 A.11AP  GRANTS ..........     0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL  IL.EO.TRNG ....      0.1      0.1      0.1
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...       30.8     19.7      8.9
 LOANS ..................  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   30.8    19.7      8.9
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........     0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..................  0.0     0.0      0.0
 ..........................................................
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983    1946-83
 TOTAL .........   72.3    47.3     22.4    46316
 IBRD              0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IFC               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.5
 IDA               62.0    33.0     18.5    246.1
 IOB                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0     10.2     0.0     52.4
 UNOP               1.4     4.1      0.0     37.1
 OTHER-UN           0.9     0.0      3.9     16.1
 EEC                8.0     0.0      0.0    111.4
 
 
