URUGUAY
This Report seeks to downplay ongoing abuses of human rights in Uruguay by omitting several critical points, relying more on government accounts than reports compiled by private bodies, and seeking to offset its discussion of government abuses with frequent references to "continued progress in the democratization process."
The Report's treatment of political prisoners is particularly inadequate. While the Report acknowledges that 843 national security prisoners were detained as of October 1, 1983, it fails to note that most of these prisoners have been held for more than a decade, on questionable charges, with little or no hope of release. Instead, the Report stresses that 140 persons detained for subversive activities were released in 1983, and that the number remaining in detention at the end of 1983 was lower than the previous year. Additionally, the Report does not indicate the source of its statement that there are 843 "security" prisoners, which is probably based on information provided by the Uruguayan government. Such clarification would be useful since at least one non-governmental group puts the figure at just over 1,000. In any case, the ratio of political prisoners to population in Uruguay remains among the highest in the world, a fact the Report does not note.
The Report neatly sidesteps any discussion of conditions in the prisons. While noting that "some groups" have
-75-
claimed that prison conditions have deteriorated, it emphasizes that these charges have diminished since visits of the International Committee of the Red Cross began in May. The issue is not whether conditions have deteriorated, because conditions are so bad that if they remain the same, a serious problem exists. In 1983 there continue to be reports of severe mistreatment of prisoners, particularly in the isolation cells on the second floor of the men's prison, Libertad. Among the "groups" that have commented on these conditions is Amnesty International, which released a detailed report on Uruguay in November 1983. Families of prisoners also report that psychological experimentation continues to be performed in the prisons and that a number of prisoners have suffered serious mental breakdowns. Ignoring all of these reports, the State Department instead looks to the government of Uruguay as its source, noting that "according to the Government, treatment of prisoners is firm, but the physical and psychological integrity of the prisoner is respected."
The Report also seeks to minimize the problem of torture, which remains a common occurrence when prisoners are initially arrested. While the Report acknowledges that 25 students were arrested in June, it avoids concluding that any were tortured. Instead it cites an Uruguayan human rights group, Servicio Paz y Justicia (SERPAJ), which it says "alleged" that "several" of those arrested were tortured. It
-76-
adds, with a tone of skeptism, that "SERPAJ claimed to have obtained written testimony from relatives of the detainees." (Emphasis supplied.) In fact most of the 25 students were severely tortured at the central police station on Maldonado Street in downtown Montevideo when they were first arrested in June. Yet because U.S. Embassy officials in Uruguay have never talked with the relatives of these students, they do not have to report with certainty that torture is occurring. As the Report notes parenthetically, SERPAJ was shut down by the government of Uruguay in August, in part because it publicly reported the torture of these students.
With respect to freedom of movement, the Report alludes to but fails to explain the significance of Wilson Ferreira's forced exile. Ferreira is the leader of the Blanco party and the candidate who received the largest number of votes of any presidential candidate in Uruguay's last national elections in 1972. Ferreira now faces trumped-up criminal charges that are intended to keep him out of the country. As the Report notes, he faces an order for his arrest if he returns. His continued "proscription" prevents him in any case from running in elections scheduled for November 1984, even though he was the clear winner of the Blanco Party's internal elections held in July 1983. For the State Department to express its optimism about "progress in the transition back to democracy" without mentioning the effective bar to Ferreira's candidacy is misleading at best.
-77-
