AFRICA WATCH OVERVIEW

The year 1990 was as dramatic as the previous one. The work done by Africa Watch in its first year created a considerable demand, both inside and outside Africa, for us to expand our activities to accommodate these developments.

The year was marked by a popular movement for democracy and human rights which spread nearly as rapidly as the movement the previous year in Eastern Europe. As in Eastern Europe, the electronic media played an important part in spreading news and consciousness of human rights issues -- particularly the international radio stations such as the British Broadcasting Corporation, Radio France International and Voice of America. (Africa Watch gave regular interviews to these and other radio stations throughout the year.) The democracy movement spread most rapidly in Francophone West Africa. Benin moved toward a multiparty system with a new reform-minded Prime Minister after years of "Marxism-Leninism." The right-wing Ivory Coast also embraced multipartyism after widespread popular protests, as did Gabon. Even an entrenched one-party dictator such as Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire felt the need to pay lip service to the multiparty creed. These transitions were fraught with problems. Harassment of opposition parties continued and there were allegations of fraud in the elections in both Gabon and the Ivory Coast in late 1990.

Zambia, like the Ivory Coast, was forced to accede to the demand for multiparty politics after widespread popular demonstrations. The ruling party in Zimbabwe decisively voted against moving to a one-party state after public debate had revealed the extent of popular opposition to such a change. But in Kenya, the government set its face against reform, detaining opposition politicians and human rights activists and shooting unarmed protesters.

The spur to all these events was without doubt the transformation of Eastern Europe in 1989, although the underlying cause was long-standing popular revulsion against repressive policies. Some governments outside Africa tried to make political capital out of these changes, seeing them as a move toward a particular free-market economic ideology. In some cases this was undoubtedly true, but in others, such as the Ivory Coast and Zambia, human rights agitation was bound up with opposition to free-market policies, particularly as they affected food prices. In reality, the only common denominator was a concern for greater political choice and respect for human rights.

A number of other countries continued on a slightly separate path toward political reform which had begun before the Eastern European revolution. Nigeria, for example, is due to move from military rule to a highly restricted civilian democracy in 1992. Political critics and human rights activists continued to suffer harassment and arbitrary detention, which bodes ill for a genuine transformation. Mozambique embraced a multiparty system and adopted a new Constitution including a Bill of Rights which guarantees the most important internationally recognized human rights. At the end of 1990, the Angolan government announced that it was planning a similar move. In both countries the hope was that political reforms might help to end protracted civil wars which have been the major source of human rights abuse.

South Africa also continued to move toward political reform. The events of early 1990 were dramatic: the legalization of the African National Congress and the release of Nelson Mandela. This was followed later in the year by the lifting of the nationwide state of emergency, the context in which serious abuses of human rights had taken place. But further progress was slow, as security forces acquiesced in and even fomented so-called "tribal" or "black-on-black" violence, which claimed hundreds of lives in Natal and later Transvaal.

However, other countries were completely untouched by the reforming spirit. Systematic human rights abuse and bloody civil war continued in the countries of the Horn of Africa: Ethiopia, Somalia and Sudan. A particularly deadly feature of these conflicts was the cynical manipulation of food supplies by the armed parties, resulting in widespread famine in Ethiopia and Sudan. Somalia's President Mohammed Siad Barre tried unconvincingly to climb on the reformist bandwagon with changes that were purely cosmetic. The international community, like the people of Somalia, remained unimpressed, and open rebellion continued; at the end of the year, the position of the Siad Barre government was precarious.

Across the continent, in Liberia, a rebel insurgency which began in December 1989 grew during 1990, feeding upon popular revulsion against abuses by government troops. Yet rebel abuses simply contributed to a tragic spiral of violence which was unchecked at the end of the year.

Africa Watch's priorities remained focused on the situations in the Horn and southern Africa, generally the sites of the worst abuses, with the necessary addition of Liberia, the oldest US ally in Africa. But other political developments forced us to turn some attention elsewhere. Expansion of staff has allowed us to undertake systematic work on some West African countries, notably Mauritania, Cameroon and Nigeria. Support for local human rights groups and defense of human rights monitors continued to play a crucial part in our work, particularly in a country such as Kenya, where the advocates of human rights courageously refused to be silenced by official intimidation. Africa Watch also tried to draw attention to other lesser-known human rights problems: the 26-year-old dictatorship in Malawi, the denial of due process to pastoralists in a Tanzanian land dispute, the denial of religious freedom in Ghana, and restrictions on academic freedom in Zimbabwe.

Our publications program has expanded to meet these various demands. Thirty-five newsletters were issued in 1990, as well as four full-length reports, on Somalia, Sudan, Liberia and Malawi. A further report on South Africa was due for publication in early 1991. In 1990, Africa Watch also decided to expand its publications program to include reports on certain continent-wide human rights issues. The impetus was the need to stimulate debate on structural issues and to encourage specific constituencies, such as academics, lawyers and health professionals, to promote the cause of human rights. The first report in this series, Academic Freedom and Human Rights Abuses in Africa, will be published in January 1991. The Africa Watch staff contributed numerous articles to newspapers, magazines and journals -- not only on human rights abuses themselves, but also on questions such as how governments should properly investigate human rights violations. Staff members also gave frequent radio and television interviews.

Access to many of the countries of Africa was difficult. During 1990, Africa Watch was able to conduct missions to a number of countries, including Mozambique, Angola, Zimbabwe and South Africa, to investigate human rights conditions there. But some governments, such as those in Malawi, Sudan, Kenya and Mauritania, excluded us outright. Others, such as those in Cameroon and Somalia, stalled on requests to visit, with the effect of excluding us. Consequently, we depend more than we would wish upon interviews with refugees, often in neighboring countries. The vast number of such refugees is itself testimony to the continuing extent of abuse in Africa, and the magnitude of the work that remains for Africa Watch and its colleagues in the human rights movement.
CAMEROON

Human Rights Developments

The human rights situation in Cameroon has been characterized by tight restraints on freedom of expression and association, security forces that act with impunity, and abysmal prison conditions, all of which serve to intimidate those who might voice dissent. In early 1990, however, a growing number of citizens began calling for democratization. The government responded by cracking down on the pro-democracy movement, beginning with the arrest of those trying to form an alternative political party and culminating in the killing of seven people at a rally for that party on May 26. Although the government later seemed to accede to some of the pro-democracy demands, there were indications that conditions were tightening up again at year's end.

The crackdown began with the arrest in February of ten prominent citizens -- later dubbed "the Douala Ten" -- who attempted to form an alternative political party, the Social Democratic Front (SDF). They were tried from March 30 to April 5 on charges of "subversion," under Ordinance No. 62-of-18 of March 12, 1962. Three were sentenced to prison terms: Yondo Black, a lawyer and former president of the Cameroon Bar Association, received a three-year term; Anicet Ekane, a company director, a four-year term; and Jean-Michel Tekam (tried in absentia), a five-year term.1 Ekane's prison term included a parallel conviction for "insulting the President" under Article 153 of the Penal Code. The trial galvanized protest among previously silent sectors of the population, including lawyers, journalists and students.

The government denied that the ten had been arrested because of their efforts to form a political party, claiming instead that the arrests were for "the holding of clandestine meetings, [and] the fabrication and distribution of tracts hostile to the regime, abusive of the President and inciting revolt." The government's claim was contradicted, however, by its inclusion among the allegedly "hostile" tracts of a draft document on the formation of the new political party.

Theoretically, political pluralism is permitted in Cameroon. Article 3 of the Constitution states: "Political parties and groups may take part in elections. They shall be formed and shall exercise their activities in accordance with the law." In reality, Cameroon is a one-party state controlled by the Rassemblement Democratique du Peuple Camerounais (RDPC) (Cameroon Peoples' Democratic Movement), under the presidency of Paul Biya.2

Despite the obstacles to judicial independence, the Cameroon Bar Association has become increasingly vocal in advocating an opening in the political system and the establishment of basic human rights guarantees. In protest against the detention of Yondo Black and his co-defendants, more than 200 lawyers from the Bar Association attended the trial and, dressed in their black robes, acted as part of the defense team. As a further sign of protest, they decided that as of March 28, they would not attend other trials until the "Douala Ten" case was concluded. Some of these lawyers were subjected to harassment by the government, including efforts to close down their offices and investigate them for tax irregularities. In addition, some received death threats. One of the defense lawyers, Pierre Mbobda, was killed by police under suspicious circumstances in Bafoussam on April 4.3 Some 150 lawyers from the Bar Association attended his funeral.

By mid-1990, it seemed as if the Biya government was beginning to soften its stand. One of the most notable changes has been the significant easing of censorship, which has led to considerable press freedom, virtually without government interference. During the party congress at the end of June, Biya announced a series of liberalizing steps, including: ending certain aspects of the emergency regulations that had been in force since 1962, such as the laws on subversion; easing travel restrictions by abolishing the need for exit visas; reinforcing press freedom; and establishing a national human rights commission. This statement was followed later in July with an announcement that all political prisoners would be released. On August 10, Biya issued a presidential decree granting clemency for political prisoners, under which Black and Ekane, as well as another well known political prisoner, Djeukam Tchameni, were released.4

US Policy

The Bush administration generally supported the pro-democracy movement, although its human rights policy would have been enhanced had the US embassy in Yaoundé been willing to back up this support with public statements. The embassy, and particularly Ambassador Frances Cook, deserve credit for putting human rights concerns on their agenda and for sending signals of support to the pro-democracy movement. By keeping in regular contact with pro-democracy activists, the embassy demonstrated its interest in their efforts and provided a measure of protection for the individuals involved. In addition, the embassy sent a representative to the trial of the "Douala Ten," and played a role in ensuring that representatives of other Western embassies were present. These signals did not go unnoticed by the Cameroonian authorities. However, Africa Watch is unaware of a single public statement made by the embassy or the State Department in Washington to reinforce these signals.

The only statement on the public record during 1990 was the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices. The report presented an accurate picture of the serious human rights abuses in Cameroon, including the abuse of detainees, arbitrary arrest and detention, harsh prison conditions, and violations of freedom of expression and assembly. Nevertheless, Africa Watch is unaware of any repetition of these observations by the State Department during 1990.

The Work of Africa Watch

Africa Watch, which began monitoring human rights in Cameroon in April 1990, published a newsletter in June documenting the Cameroonian government's crackdown on the pro-democracy movement. The newsletter expressed Africa Watch's concern about the government's efforts to silence those demanding an end to one-party rule, and called on the government to adhere to internationally accepted human rights standards.

Africa Watch wrote to the government in July requesting permission to send an official fact-finding mission to Cameroon. The Cameroonian authorities have yet to respond. Africa Watch will continue to pursue this effort, in the hopes of conducting research inside the country in the near future.

1 Two-year suspended sentences were given to Charles Rene Djon Djon and Rodolphe Bwanga. The rest of the defendants were acquitted; Albert Mukong, Henriette Ekwe, Gabriel Hamani, Francis Kwa Moutome, Vincent Fekom and Julienne Badje.

2 In 1982, Biya was handed the presidency by President Ahmadou Ahidgo, who had headed the nation since Cameroon's independence in 1960. Ahidgo's party, the Union Nationale Camerounaise (Cameroon National Union), was the RDPC's precursor. There have been no recent efforts to gain recognition for alternative political parties in Cameroon. The last attempts, by the Union des Populations Camerounais (Cameroon People's Union), the banned opposition group, were rebuffed in 1985.

3 The circumstances surrounding his death are still unclear. According to one version, the police shot him when he put his car in reverse and pulled away from a roadblock. According to another version, the police had been following him and, after he stopped the car to relieve himself, a plainclothes policeman startled him and then fired his weapon when Mbobda reversed his car to get away. Minister of Justice Adolphe Moudiki said that the incident would be investigated. At this writing, Africa Watch has no further information on the case.

4 It should be noted that on April 22, President Biya announced that those still in prison for their role in the April 1984 coup attempt would be released. The government's communiqué stated that the amnesty reflected the need to strengthen national unity. It is believed that this measure would affect some 100 prisoners, although no exact information is currently available. Some of these prisoners have already completed their sentences but have remained in detention; a few of those arrested after the coup may have died in detention.
ETHIOPIA

Human Rights Developments

The year 1990 witnessed a continuation of systematic, large-scale violations of human rights in Ethiopia. Despite the announcement of political and economic reforms in March, the government made no attempt to check abuses. Any diminution in the extent of abuses merely reflected the government's dwindling control over large areas of the countryside, as well as the massive scale of abuses in previous years. Ethiopian citizens continued to be ruled by a government that regarded life and liberty not as rights but as privileges to be granted at its pleasure.

The end of 1989 saw a dramatic advance southward by the rebel forces of the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF), a coalition led by the Tigrayan People's Liberation Front (TPLF). The rebels thrust to within 100 miles of Addis Ababa. The government responded with the same counterinsurgency tactics that it had used in previous years, including indiscriminate bombing. The authorities also forcibly conscripted tens of thousands of young men and boys, some as young as 13 or 14, in violation of international law and Ethiopian regulations on military service. Conscripts were picked up on the street, in school and at market, given rudimentary training, and sent to the front to do battle with some of the most hardened guerrilla fighters in the world.

In February, the government suffered a major defeat with the loss of the port town of Massawa to the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF), a movement fighting for an independent Eritrea. During the fighting about 200 civilians were killed, many of them while being kept hostage as "human shields" by the retreating government forces. This defeat triggered an intensification of conscription. Reports from rural villages told of large-scale forcible round-ups of young men and boys. There were also immediate reprisals. Massawa was repeatedly bombed by government aircraft, using napalm or phosphorus bombs, high explosives and cluster bombs. The bombers' main targets appeared to be civilian areas of town and places where civilian refugees were encamped outside town. The cluster bombs were particularly lethal when used against civilian targets, since each bomb showered a hail of lethal fragments over a wide area. Over 50 civilians were killed in one such attack, and over 100 in all the bombing raids taken together. In addition, about 25,000 tons of food donated by international humanitarian organizations were burned, and the government prevented a ship carrying relief supplies from docking by threatening to attack it.

Under pressure from both the US and the USSR (Ethiopia's major arms supplier), the Ethiopian government largely ceased bombing Massawa in June, although isolated attacks occurred in early September and late October. Elsewhere in the country, frequent bombing raids continued, including in Eritrea, Tigray, Wollo, Gondar, Shewa and Wellega. Many civilians have been killed, much property damaged, and on several occasions convoys carrying relief items have been destroyed.

For the most part, government counteroffensives in 1990 were unsuccessful. Government troops continued to employ the counterinsurgency tactics used in previous years, including regular killing of civilians, forcible displacement of commmunities, and looting and destruction of property. On numerous occasions, soldiers in garrison towns near the front line arbitrarily opened fire on local residents, including women and children. The army was "living off the land," requiring the local population to provide and prepare food. There were also accounts of soldiers forcing local women to serve the garrisons as cooks, cleaners and prostitutes; in some cases, these women were reportedly forced to stay with the troops when they moved elsewhere.

The site of some of the worst abuses was the Eritrean capital, Asmara, which was completely surrounded by EPLF forces. Government soldiers in Asmara killed many civilians and created famine conditions by requisitioning food, preventing the free importation of food, and preventing people from leaving for EPLF-controlled areas.

The government also cracked down on internal dissent. In May, twelve army officers were executed after having been found guilty of involvement in a coup attempt a year earlier. The early stages of the trial appeared to adhere to due process requirements, but at the end the presiding judge was abruptly removed, and the executions were carried out in secret immediately after the verdict was announced. When this became known, students at the University of Addis Ababa demonstrated to protest the killings, and were met with a violent response, including the use of live ammunition.

In March, President Mengistu Haile-Mariam promised an end to communism. However, one-party rule continued, and no provisions were made for a free press, an independent judiciary or a free trade-union movement. Almost all repressive legislation remained in force, including the Special Penal Code, introduced in 1974 and later amended, which prescribes execution and lengthy prison terms for a wide variety of vague and broadly worded offenses, such as committing an act "designed to destroy the unity of the people" or "intentionally...weakening the defensive power of the state." The same punishments apply to attempts to leave the country without official permission, which the Code treats as a form of treason.

The rebel movements also committed human rights violations, albeit on a much smaller scale. The EPLF blocked a shipment of relief food bound for the port of Massawa, and shelled Asmara indiscriminately, killing civilians near the airport. The TPLF was intolerant of dissent within its own ranks, and detained some members without charge. A joint operation by the Oromo Liberation Front and the EPLF during January and February in western Ethiopia yielded at least one incident in which Amharic-speaking civilians were deliberately killed.

US Policy

From the time of the restoration of Emperor Haile Selassie after the defeat of the Italians in 1942 to the seizure of power by the Marxist Colonel Mengistu in 1977, Ethiopia was the most important US ally in east Africa. Of particular concern to successive US administrations was use of the Kagnew air base, an important military communications center during the Cold War era, and Haile Selassie's dominance in the Organization for African Unity, which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa. After 1977, relations swung to the opposite pole, with mutual declarations of hostility, the expulsion of the USAID mission and the withdrawal of the US ambassador, as the Ethiopian government aligned itself with the Soviet bloc, receiving several billion dollars worth of military assistance from the USSR. Thereafter, the US resolutely criticized the human rights record of the Ethiopian government. It refused to upgrade diplomatic relations, and gave only humanitarian assistance to the country, the great majority of which was sent through private voluntary organizations.

This firm posture of disapproval continued through the first half of 1990. In April, during a visit to the United States by Ethiopian representative Rassa Kebede, the Bush administration protested the bombing of Massawa. It also brought pressure to bear on the Mengistu government to allow relief food to pass through government lines to reach rebel-held territory, by apparently conditioning the supply of humanitarian relief to government-held areas on an agreement to allow it to pass to rebel-held areas, and by raising the issue at the Bush-Gorbachev Washington summit in June. In addition, the US opposed Israel's sale of military technology to Ethiopia.

One of the administration's main concerns was the fate of the Ethiopian Jews, known as Falashas. Most of the Falashas emigrated to Israel in the mid-1980s, but about 15,000 remained in Ethiopia at the end of 1990. Early in the year, they left their homes to go to Addis Ababa, in expectation of transport to Israel. However, the Ethiopian government blocked emigration, in the hope of obtaining more weaponry from Israel. Opposing the notion of bartering human beings for weapons, the US pressed for attention to the humanitarian needs of the Falashas.

This firm stance in opposition to Ethiopia's human rights abuses began to fade in the last half of 1990, apparently in reaction to President Mengistu's strong support for the US position on the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. In addition to a series of unprecedented high-level meetings with the Mengistu government -- Secretary of State James Baker met several times with Foreign Minister Tesfaye Dinka -- the United States quietly acquiesced in substantial World Bank loans to Ethiopia. According to the World Bank, some $430 million in loans were under consideration for Ethiopia at the end of 1990. The US Treasury Department told Africa Watch that the World Bank maintains a "core lending" program -- loans actually extended -- of about $100 to $150 million. Although as a formal matter the United States continued to oppose by abstention all loans to Ethiopia unless they meet basic human needs -- at least some of them did not -- the magnitude of the loans under consideration and extended suggested that the Bush administration was not using its vast influence within the World Bank to stop the loans on human rights grounds.

The Work of Africa Watch

Africa Watch began its systematic research on Ethiopia in April 1990, issuing newsletters that focused on the following issues:

o Violence by the Ethiopian army against the civilian population.

o The violent and arbitrary methods of conscription, and the youth of many conscripts.

o The bombing campaigns against civilian targets since 1988, including eyewitness testimonies of the bombing of Hausien, a market town which was destroyed in June 1988, with the loss of between 1,000 and 1,800 lives.

o The student protest in Addis Ababa in May and its suppression by the security forces.

o The siege of Asmara in the 200 days after the capture of Massawa by the EPLF, addressing violations of the laws of war by both sides to the conflict, including the use of starvation as a weapon of war.

Africa Watch also wrote to President Mengistu, with a copy to Secretary of State Baker, protesting the situation of the Falasha population in Addis Ababa. Africa Watch published an article in The Nation in October highlighting the plight of the Falashas and other Ethiopian abuses.

KENYA

Human Rights Developments

The human rights situation in Kenya deteriorated seriously in 1990, with the government arresting, detaining and sometimes torturing human rights advocates and proponents of multiparty democracy. The year began with clergymen, lawyers and opposition politicians, encouraged by changes in Eastern Europe, discussing the reintroduction of multiparty democracy in Kenya. In June, President Daniel arap Moi abruptly ordered the debate to end. He threatened to hunt down supporters of a multiparty system "like rats."

Meanwhile, Cabinet ministers and ruling party officials called on supporters to take violent action against those advocating political reform. One Minister urged government backers to cut off the fingers of people flashing two raised fingers -- a sign of support for a two-party system. Two prominent figures died under suspicious circumstances in which it was widely believed that the government played a role. In February, Kenya's Foreign Minister, Dr. Robert Ouko, reputed to be out of favor with President Moi, was murdered. The perception of government involvement was reinforced by its refusal to release a Scotland Yard report which, under pressure, it had commissioned. In August, Bishop Alexander Muge, who had recently denounced the government, was publicly warned by the Minister of Labor that if he visited the Minister's constituency, he would not leave alive. Muge did visit the district and was killed in a car accident as he was leaving.

Having banned three publications in 1988 and 1989, the government intensified its campaign against the Nairobi Law Monthly, one of the few remaining press outlets willing to criticize the country's drift toward dictatorship. On several occasions, the Special Branch threatened and later arrested the magazine's editor, Gitobu Imanyara, a nonpracticing attorney. In September, the Attorney General banned the magazine, making possession a criminal offense. When the magazine's lawyer won a temporary stay of the banning order pending a full hearing by the High Court, he was charged with contempt of court in an unrelated matter.

In early July, the government denied a permit for a rally calling for the restoration of multiparty democracy. As a result, the principal organizers, two former Cabinet ministers, Kenneth Matiba and Charles Rubia, issued a public statement that the rally would not take place. Just prior to the originally scheduled date, however, the government arrested and detained the two ex-ministers, along with Raila Odinga, the son of a former Vice President and a former long-term political prisoner. The detentions were imposed under Kenya's Preservation of Public Security Act, which allows indefinite detention without charge or trial. Detention orders were also issued for two human rights lawyers, Mohammed Ibrahim and Dr. John Khaminwa, as well as for editor Gitobu Imanyara, all of whom were held without charge or trial.

At the time, Gibson Kamau Kuria, an internationally recognized human rights lawyer, went into hiding to avoid arrest. When he appeared at the US Embassy, Ambassador Smith Hempstone granted him refuge and facilitated his departure from the country. Paul Muite, another prominent human rights attorney, went into hiding for nearly three weeks.

Several days after the arrests, thousands turned out to attend the canceled rally. It was forcibly broken up by police who fired on demonstrators. In protest, demonstrations and clashes occurred in several cities across the Central Province. The police and army suppressed these as well, again using indiscriminate deadly force. While the government claimed a death toll of 23, it appeared that more than 100 died as a result of military and police action. In one incident, six school children were shot dead. As many as 1000 people were arrested.

Three weeks later, in late July, the government released Ibrahim and Khaminwa. However, Imanyara was charged with sedition for publishing an issue of the Nairobi Law Monthly entitled "The Historic Debate: Law, Democracy and Multiparty Democracy in Kenya." The charges were still pending at the end of 1990. If convicted, he could be jailed for seven years.

There were other arrests of dissidents throughout the year. In March, Reverend Lawford Imunde was arrested and denied legal counsel. He was later convicted of sedition on the basis of "seditious" entries in his personal diary. In an affidavit, he stated that he had been forced to add incriminating statements to his diary, and that while in custody, and he had been beaten, kicked in the genitals and forced to take cold showers to which he was allergic.

In late June and early July, twenty-four people were arrested for the production, sale or possession of music cassettes with lyrics critical of the government.

In July, the authorities arrested four opposition figures who were charged with holding a seditious meeting: George Anyona, Ngotho Kariuki, Augustin Kathanga and Edward Oyugi. They were also charged with possessing a seditious publication -- an issue of Africa Confidential. According to their lawyers, they were beaten, interrogated while naked by female officers, and kept in water-logged cells.

In early October, the government announced the arrest in Nairobi of Koigi wa Wamwere, a former Member of Parliament who had been living in exile in Norway. Wamwere was allegedly associated with an illegal opposition movement, the Kenya Patriotic Front. The authorities claimed that he had returned to Kenya to incite violence. There were credible reports that in fact he had been abducted from a neighboring country.

Special Branch officers arrested two prominent human rights attorneys as accomplices of Wamwere: Mirugi Kariuki and Rumba Kinuthia. Kariuki had been tortured while in detention between 1986 and 1989. The government claimed that he was arrested this time with a cache of arms and ammunition. His wife issued a press release denying these allegations and expressing concern for her husband's well-being. Africa Watch is unaware of any government statement about Kinuthia's arrest. According to their lawyers, both Kariuki and Kinuthia were tortured in custody and may have been forced to sign confessions. They have been indicted for treason, which is a capital offense in Kenya. At the same time, the Kenyan government began picking up various people for questioning.

The government also promoted ethnic tensions by fanning resentment against the Kikuyu, Kenya's largest ethnic group, accusing them of supporting multiparty democracy for ulterior political motives. By making direct reference to the experience of the Ibo tribe, who suffered brutally during the civil war in Nigeria, KANU officials attempted both to intimidate those Kikuyu advocating a multiparty system and to incite hatred against them among members of other ethnic groups. This occurred at the same time that President Moi justified the government's resistance to a multiparty system because of the dangers of "tribalism."

Also of concern to Africa Watch, the government in November 1989 instituted a "screening" procedure requiring all Kenyans of ethnic Somali origin and all Somali nationals living in Kenya to carry a special card that identifies them as being of ethnic Somali origin or a Somali national. They are eligible to receive state-supplied services as well as to obtain authorization for internal and external travel only if they produce this card.

Many Kenyans of ethnic Somali origin and many Somalis who had fled to Kenya from the war in Somalia were forced to seek refuge abroad in 1990, and a large number fled to Tanzania or Burundi, where many were detained, or to Somalia, where the Kenyan citizens found themselves stateless. At least 2,000 Kenyan citizens of Somali origin were deported to Somalia and suffered great physical hardship. As of September, they were living in the compound of the Ministry of the Interior in Mogadishu. They had no recognized legal status, either as legitimate refugees or citizens of either country. They were not receiving adequate humanitarian assistance.

On October 16, President Moi announced that all Rwandese refugees would have to leave the country. He claimed that Rwandese refugees were using Kenya as a base for subversive activities -- a direct reference to the October invasion of Rwanda by rebels based in Uganda. On October 22, he extended the order to Ugandan refugees. The exact number of refugees forcibly repatriated is not known, but by December at least 1,000 were known to have reached the Ugandan border in a specially assigned train. Many Ugandans were rounded up in Kenya by police and members of the youth wing of the ruling party. These actions were in clear breach of the Kenyan government's obligations under the United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, to which Kenya is a party; Article 32 guarantees refugees the protection of due process of law before repatriation, and Article 33 prohibits forcible refoulement except when a refugee has been convicted of a serious crime endangering the community.

US Policy

Despite some important contributions during the first half of the year, the Bush administration's record on human rights in Kenya later in the year was decidedly mixed. While Ambassador Smith Hempstone made a number of public pronouncements in support of multiparty democracy, and the State Department issued timely statements condemning the July arrests, the Bush administration in the ensuing months resisted congressional efforts to cut aid to Kenya on human rights grounds, and Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Herman Cohen took an unjustifiably accomodating stance toward the Moi government.

During the multiparty debate, Ambassador Hempstone encouraged the restoration of multiparty democracy by announcing in a speech before Kenyan businessmen that in the future US foreign assistance would be allocated to countries that "nourish democratic institutions, defend human rights and practice multiparty politics." The message was not lost on either the government or the people of Kenya. The ambassador also hosted gatherings at the embassy, where human rights activists and proponents of multiparty rule were often invited.

Hempstone's statements and actions provoked scathing condemnation from Kenyan authorities. The official Kenya News Agency released a statement accusing the embassy of "gross interference in the internal affairs of Kenya." It charged: "Under the pretext of concern for free expression and plural politics the Embassy of the United States of America has attempted to dictate to the people what choices this country should make in her politics." The Kenya Times, the KANU-owned newspaper, published a front-page editorial condemning Ambassador Hempstone, headlined "Shut up, Mr. Ambassador." During the July crackdown, Ambassador Hempstone's sheltering of Gibson Kamau Kuria resulted in even more vitriolic attacks.

The July arrests of Kenneth Matiba and Charles Rubia prompted the State Department to issue strong statements condemning the regime's actions. One such statement read:

We are distressed by the detention without charge in Nairobi during the past two days of Kenneth Matiba and Charles Rubia, prominent Kenyans who have advocated multiparty democracy....These actions can only serve to tarnish Kenya's image in the international community. We call on the government of Kenya to accord these people due process. We further urge the Kenyan government to allow its citizens the right to express opinions freely and to assemble peacefully without hindrance, both principal tenets of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

This statement sent a timely and clear signal of support for those pressing for a multiparty political system.

Unfortunately, the message that the administration delivered publicly in the months following the crackdown downplayed human rights concerns. Prominent members of Congress wrote Secretary of State James Baker requesting that all military aid and development assistance be suspended. The State Department responded by announcing that Assistant Secretary Cohen would visit Nairobi to express US concerns. Meanwhile, the administration attempted to stave off any action on Kenya's aid. On July 5, one day after the crackdown, the administration signed an agreement to release $5 million in military aid previously appropriated by Congress. Under pressure from Congress later in July, the administration put a freeze on the aid.

The administration sent other mixed signals. On July 30, Ambassador Hempstone participated in a public "signing ceremony" of a US-Kenyan food aid agreement which was reported as a "landmark in US relations with Kenya." Hempstone noted that the aid agreement (which represented a change by providing $10 million of food aid in grant rather than loan form) "is not only the first time the US has provided such a grant to Kenya, but it is also the first time we have made such a commitment to any African country."

Arriving in Nairobi in early August, Assistant Secretary Cohen made no public criticism of the July crackdown and generally minimized US support for political pluralism and human rights. When asked about US backing for multiparty democracy, Cohen chose to emphasize the KANU Review Committee, formed to make minimal changes in ruling-party procedures without breaking KANU's monopoly on political power. He went on to ask: "Who are we [the US] to say that this [multiparty democracy] is best for everybody?" During the visit, he did not meet any human rights advocates or relatives of political detainees. In regard to the detentions, Secretary Cohen claimed that he had "discussed recent events in Kenya" but that he was "not at liberty" to reveal what Moi had said about them.

Cohen's visit strengthened President Moi's hand at a time of mounting international pressure for Kenya to democratize, sending a clear message that the US was not going to press human rights concerns. This stance only helped to facilitate the serious deterioration of respect for human rights that followed. On Cohen's return to Washington, according to congressional sources, the administration lobbied against any reduction in aid to Kenya.

This more accomodating posture toward Moi was maintained throughout the remainder of 1990. When the Nairobi Law Monthly was banned, the Bush administration did issue a public protest, but used considerably weaker language than in July, expressing only "regret." The administration said nothing about the October arrests, and continued to emphasize the hoped-for reforms from the KANU Review Committee rather than the introduction of a multiparty system.

While not significantly reducing the amount of aid going to Kenya in fiscal year 1991, Congress, for the first time, attached certain human rights conditions to the military appropriations component. Under the terms of the 1991 legislation, the President will be required to certify that certain human rights conditions have been met if Kenya is to receive the $15 million in military assistance that was appropriated. Among the conditions, the Kenyan government must: charge and try or release all prisoners, including detainees; stop the mistreatment of prisoners; restore the independence of the judiciary; and permit freedom of expression. Such legislation is clearly a positive way of addressing aid, but given the administration's past forebearance toward abuses by the Kenyan government, scrutiny should be maintained to avoid an unjustified certification. In November, three senators visited Nairobi and warned the government that aid would be cut if the country's human rights performance did not improve.

The Work of Africa Watch

Concerned about the mounting abuses, Africa Watch publicized these developments, pressed for US insistence on respect for human rights, and attempted to generate as much protection as possible for the human rights advocates under fire.

In early 1990, Africa Watch published two newsletters on the deteriorating human rights situation, focusing on the political crackdown and the government's efforts against the Nairobi Law Monthly. In September, another newsletter drew attention to the screening of ethnic Somalis. Africa Watch also issued a series of press releases protesting such events as the arrest of Gitobu Imanyara, the banning of the Nairobi Law Monthly, and a visit by British MPs who praised the Kenyan government's record on human rights.

In April and May, when Gitobu Imanyara visited Great Britain and the United States, Africa Watch helped to introduce him to journalists, editors and US congressional staff. These contacts proved invaluable when Imanyara was repeatedly arrested in July and August.

Africa Watch protested the July crackdown and hosted a visit by Gibson Kamau Kuria and Kiraitu Murungi when they went into exile. Murungi, another prominent Kenyan human rights lawyer and a law partner of Kamau Kuria, avoided arrest only because he happened to be out of the country at the time of the crackdown. The two human rights lawyers visited Africa Watch's London, Washington and New York offices, where they made contact with a range of potential supporters.

Africa Watch published an article in the Nairobi Law Monthly criticizing Assistant Secretary Cohen's failure to raise human rights concerns publicly during his visit to Kenya, as well as his efforts to distance himself from the human rights community. Another Africa Watch article published in Africa Report in November also criticized administration policy.

Africa Watch wrote an article published in The Nation in August expressing regret that Nelson Mandela had failed to speak out on behalf of detainees during a visit to Kenya. Several other articles written by Africa Watch were devoted to highlighting the plight of detained Kenyan lawyers and appeared in Legal Times, the Chicago Tribune, the Washington Journalism Review and the Connecticut Law Review. Efforts were made to mobilize bar groups to send letters of concern to President Moi.
LIBERIA

Human Rights Developments

The ten-year regime of President Samuel K. Doe, characterized by its utter disregard for human rights, came to a violent end in 1990 with the killing of Doe and the disintegration of the country into warring factions. Instead of benefiting from the end of the dictatorship, the Liberian people have been subjected to further abuses by all sides.

The conflict in Liberia, which began in late December 1989 and gathered momentum throughout much of 1990, has bequeathed a disasterous human rights situation. All parties to the conflict -- the Liberian Army and the two insurgent forces, Charles Taylor's National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL) and Prince Johnson's Independent National Patriotic Front (INPFL) -- have committed grave abuses of human rights. Even the West African "peace-keeping" force -- ECOMOG -- has been accused of abuses.5 Many thousands of people have been killed, and over half the population of Liberia has been displaced, including over 750,000 who have become refugees in neighboring countries.

The conflict began in Nimba County, in the northeast, where Taylor's forces attacked. The army responded with a brutal counterinsurgency campaign, killing civilians indiscriminately, burning entire villages, looting and raping. The victims were primarily members of the Mano and Gio ethnic groups, who make up most of the population in Nimba. President Doe, an ethnic Krahn, had surrounded himself with members of his own ethnic group, providing economic and educational opportunities for them at the expense of the rest of the population, and permitting the mostly Krahn military and police to commit egregious abuses against civilians. Doe's government was particularly hostile toward the Manos and Gios because of an abortive coup attempt in 1985, led by Thomas Qwiwonkpa, a former general from Nimba, who was a Gio.6

As the conflict wore on, Doe's forces committed abuses outside Nimba as well. On the night of July 29-30, government soldiers massacred some 600 people -- mostly Gios and Manos, including many women with children -- at St. Peter's Church in Monrovia.

Doe's death on September 10 did not end army abuses. The remnants of Doe's forces continued to operate, under the command of Gen. David Nimley, who himself has been implicated in gross abuses against civilians. The army engaged in torture and inhumane treatment of detainees and, especially after Doe's death, widespread looting, pillaging and harassment of civilians.

The NPFL increasingly committed abuses against the Krahns as well as the Mandingos, another ethnic group which was viewed by the rebels as having supported Doe. Prince Johnson's INPFL, a smaller force which broke from the NPFL in February, was engaged in abusive conduct within Monrovia. Rebel abuses included killing civilians, torturing and mistreating detainees, taking hostages and conscripting children. The most dramatic of the rebel atrocities against prisoners was carried out by Prince Johnson himself: the mutilation and killing of Doe.

In the meantime, ECOMOG joined the fray in late August. Concerns about the ECOMOG force include: its bombing of heavily populated civilian areas; abuses by its soldiers including looting, harassment of civilians and attacks against women; and the coordination of its activites with the remaining Doe soldiers and some of Prince Johnson's forces, without regard to their past abuses. These actions violate the obligations that ECOMOG's member states have now incurred as occupiers of part of Liberia under the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.

On November 28, all the parties to the conflict signed a ceasefire agreement in Bamako, Mali. As of the end of December, the ceasefire appeared to be holding and conditions, at least in Monrovia, were improving.

US Policy

Despite the long-standing historical ties between the United States and Liberia, the Bush administration has not adequately exercised its special responsibility toward the Liberian people at this critical juncture. US policy toward Liberia must be viewed in the context of Washington's extensive support of the Doe regime. During the eight years of the Reagan administration, US officials minimized the regime's obvious human rights abuses and poured money into Liberia,7 making it the largest recipient of US aid in sub-Saharan Africa. Unfortunately, the US did not use its aid program as a lever to press for human rights improvements.

Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Herman Cohen appeared to adopt a "wait-and-see" attitude throughout most of 1990. As late as June, US officials were still justifying their support for Doe while downplaying the systematic abuses of his regime. In testimony on June 19 before the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Africa, Assistant Secretary Cohen responded to questions about past US support for Doe by saying:

I think that if you look back at the beginning of the Doe regime, you can look at it two ways. It was a brutal takeover with a lot of cruelty; that was the bad side. On the other hand, it represented the takeover of Liberia by the majority of the people....So, I think that it was quite natural for us to want to help, and help bring them along. And that, I would say, explains why we invested a lot of money in the Doe government.

The close US involvement with the Doe regime was underscored in late January 1990, when two US military advisers were sent to Nimba County to accompany the commander of the Liberian government forces. The administration claimed that their purpose was to advise the Liberian army on how to curb abuses. But this claim was wholly unrealistic, since two US advisers could hardly serve as a restraining force for troops intent on abusing civilians. At most, the advisers served as a public-relations cover for the abuses that were committed.

In testimony before of the Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee on Africa on November 27, Cohen described US policy as one of "neutrality." Between December 1989 and the early summer, Cohen said, in meetings with all those involved, the US message was "always the same: Liberia's problems must be settled by Liberians on the basis of democratic values." What this neutrality appears to have meant is that the Bush administration has simply deferred to ECOWAS. This is particularly misguided because the ECOWAS military force, ECOMOG, has assumed a combat role in alliance with the INPFL and the remnants of Doe's forces. That these Liberian troops, who have been responsible for grave human rights abuses, are coordinating their military operations with a "peacekeeping" force is most alarming.

Instead of protesting abuses, the Bush administration has reverted to its role of apologist for those Liberians in power. After meetings with rebel leaders Charles Taylor and Prince Johnson in September, Assistant Secretary Cohen stated that both men "would like to see Liberia with a truly democratic system, and they would cooperate in organizing that."8 This statement was startling in light of the horrendous atrocities that troops under both men were then committing -- atrocities that Assistant Secretary Cohen found no time to comment on publicly. The Assistant Secretary should have used the meeting to make clear publicly that, unlike the policy toward Doe, there will be no US assistance to any force that tries to seize or maintain power by slaughtering civilians. Later, in his November 27 testimony, Cohen expressed reservations about Taylor's negotiating posture during in the peace process, but failed to condemn human rights violations by any of the parties to the conflict.

Cohen also testified that while Doe was still in power, the US "offered to evacuate Samuel Doe and his family from Liberia to another African country whenever he wished to leave, but he failed to take up the offer." This effort is significant in light of criticisms leveled at the US for not calling on Doe to step down, similar to the manner in which the US helped to engineer the departure of Ferdinand Marcos of the Philippines and Jean-Claude Duvalier of Haiti.

Approximately half of Liberia's population has either fled the country or is internally displaced. The primary countries receiving Liberian refugees are the Ivory Coast, Guinea, Sierra Leone and Ghana.9 These countries -- particularly the local people who have taken the Liberian refugees into their homes and villages -- need additional assistance to bear the burden of the huge influx of Liberian refugees. Because of the historical links between Liberia and the United States, and because US support for Doe played a major role in the destruction of the country, European governments and international agencies have looked to the US to take the lead in focusing international attention on Liberia's plight, since they consider Liberia a "US problem." The US is already the largest donor to Liberian refugees. As of December 19, the US government had provided $65,514,988 in assistance to the refugees, out of a total of $112,992,146 provided by the international community.

Another dimension to the problem involves Liberians stranded in the United States who seek temporary refuge from the political and ethnic violence plaguing their country. On July 27, the US Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) issued a cable establishing a voluntary departure program for Liberians on a case-by-case basis, enabling some Liberians to remain in the US. To apply for the new status, however, Liberians with valid visas must turn in their documents and effectively place themselves in deportation proceedings -- a step that many are unwilling to take. Moreover, this new status applies only to those Liberians who arrived in the US before July 27, allowing them to stay for six months; Liberians arriving since then receive no special protection.

While Africa Watch welcomes this step, it is not sufficient to protect all Liberians in the United States who might face persecution if returned to their native country. First, given the continuing level of violence in Liberia, the July 27 cutoff date should be extended to include those who have fled Liberia since then, as well as those who will be forced to flee in the future if abuses do not subside. Second, since the fighting and its attendant abuses did not end on July 27 and abuses may continue for many months to come, the six-month voluntary departure period should be extended to no less than one year. Third, to make it economically feasible for Liberians fearing persecution to remain in the United States, the INS should establish a system for prompt processing of requests for employment authorization, along the lines of the deferred-departure program for Chinese in the United States instituted after the Tiananmen Square crackdown.

Some relief came from an amendment to the Immigration and Nationality Act passed by Congress in October. Section 302 establishes the category of "temporary protected status"; the Attorney General may accord such status if he finds that there exist "extraordinary and temporary conditions in the foreign state that prevent aliens who are nationals of the state from returning to the state in safety." The amendment specifically provides that these conditions include:

an ongoing armed conflict within the state [when], due to such conflict, requiring the return of aliens who are nationals of that state to that state (or to the part of the state) would pose a serious threat to their personal safety.10

The granting of temporary protected status in the United States also includes work authorization. While Liberia is not specifically mentioned in the amendment, it provides an obvious vehicle for protecting Liberians during this tumultuous period in their country's history. In November, the State Department wrote to the Attorney General requesting that Temporary Protected Status be extended to Liberians.

A related problem is that, at the moment, it is almost impossible for Liberian refugees in other West African countries to enter the United States, even if they have relatives there. The reason for this seems to be that, given the level of violence in Liberia, it is extremely difficult for such a refugee to counter the presumption that he or she intends to immigrate to the United States. In addition, for fiscal year 1990, the regional ceiling for refugee admissions to the United States from Africa was only 3,500. The ceiling for fiscal year 1991 was raised slightly, to 4,900.

A further difficulty was caused by the normal procedure for registering as a refugee, which requires applicants first to obtain refugee status from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and then to apply for admission to the United States at one of the US refugee-processing posts in Africa, none of which is in West Africa. In late December, however, the State Department issued a cable which designated Liberia a country of special humanitarian concern for fiscal year 1991. This enables Liberians to apply for refugee status without either prior clearance from the State Department or referral from UNHCR. In addition, the cable authorizes US embassies in West Africa -- Abijan, Accra, Conakry, Freetown and Lagos -- to process refugee applications from Liberians.

The Work of Africa Watch

Africa Watch has attempted to document abuses by all sides to the Liberian conflict, and has tried to influence US policy to confront the tragedy more constructively. In response to the first wave of refugees who fled to the Ivory Coast beginning in late January, Africa Watch sent a researcher to the Ivory Coast in February, who traveled to the Danane and Toulepleu prefectures and conducted interviews with refugees from the Mano, Gio and Krahn ethnic groups. In April, Africa Watch published a 28-page report, Liberia: Flight From Terror, which discussed human rights violations committed by the Liberian armed forces, rebel abuses and the role of the United States.

On June 19, Africa Watch testified before the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Africa about human rights in Liberia. Africa Watch urged the US government to publicly call on both the Liberian goverment and rebel forces to cease their attacks on civilians.

Another researcher went to the Ivory Coast in September to interview more recent refugees and to meet relief workers knowledgeable about the current situation in Liberia. She interviewed newly arrived refugees in several Ivorian villages in the area of Tabou, as well as refugees who had fled in July to the Ivorian department of Guiglo. The mission resulted in a 27-page newsletter about violations of the laws of war by all parties to the conflict, and included sections on the humanitarian needs of those displaced by the conflict, both within and outside Liberia, and US policy. Africa Watch also published three articles about the human rights situation in Liberia: "A Cry From Our Distant Cousins," in the October 2 edition of the Los Angeles Times; "The World Watches Liberians Die," in the October 23 edition of the International Herald Tribune; and "Failures of State," in the November-December edition of Africa Report.

Africa Watch worked with members of the Liberian community and other human rights activists to disseminate information about the new INS guidelines. In September, Africa Watch wrote letters of concern to INS officials about US immigration policy toward Liberians, and expanded on these concerns in a memorandum to the Senate Judiciary Committee later in the month.

5 ECOMOG, or the Economic Community Monitoring Group, comprises five countries of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS): Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Nigeria and Sierra Leone. They entered Liberia as a peace-keeping force on August 24, but soon took on an offensive role against Charles Taylor's NPFL. The stated purpose of the ECOMOG force was to neutralize Taylor's troops, install the interim government and organize fair elections.

6 In the aftermath of the coup attempt, Doe's soldiers engaged in bloody reprisals against real and suspected opponents, targeting mostly Gios and Manos. Qwiwonkpa himself was captured and killed, and his body horribly mutilated.

7 From 1980 to 1985, the US provided $500 million to Doe's government. After the fraudulent general election of 1985, Congress passed resolutions conditioning further Economic Support Funds on concrete human rights improvements. Because of congressional pressure, the US ended most assistance to Liberia in 1986. However, US military "advisors" remained in Monrovia.

8 Kenneth B. Noble, "U.S. Official Sees Peace Hopes Waning in Liberia," New York Times, September 21, 1990.

9 As of mid-December, the number of refugees was estimated as follows: Sierre Leone, 235,000; Guinea, 409,000; Ivory Coast, 235,000; Ghana, 8,000; Mali, 1,500; and Nigeria, 1,000. In mid-October, Sierra Leone announced that it could no longer accept refugees, although refugees have continued to enter that country.

10 The amendment also provides for the granting of "temporary protected status" if there has been an earthquake, flood, drought, epidemic or other environmental disaster; if the foreign state is unable, temporarily, to handle the return to the states of aliens who are nationals of the state; and if the state has requested such designation."

MALAWI

Human Rights Developments

The small Central African country of Malawi remained largely unaffected by the agitation for multiparty democracy and human rights which swept through many of its neighbors in 1990. Since independence in 1964, Malawi has been under the highly autocratic and idiosyncratic rule of Life-President Dr. Kamuzu Banda. Malawi is a one-party state, but even members of the ruling Malawi Congress Party (MCP) are not immune from the whims of the nonagenarian President and his tiny circle of advisors. Among those currently detained without charge is a former secretary-general of the party, Aleke Banda (no relation to the President), who has been in custody since 1980. Another individual detained throughout 1990 was Margaret Marango Banda (also no relation), chairwoman of the northern region of the national women's organization, the Chitukuko Cha Amai Mu Malawi (Development of Women in Malawi), or CCAM. She was arrested in 1988, apparently because she criticized corruption in the running of the CCAM, but she has not been charged. A former government minister, Gomile Kuntumanji, died in Chichiri Prison in April. He had been held without charge since 1969.

Regulations in force since 1965 empower the authorities to detain without charge, and without even the semblance of a review of the detainee's case. Africa Watch knows of no releases of those detained under these regulations since 1986. One prisoner, Machipisa Munthali, has been held since 1965. Also detained is Jack Mapanje, the country's best known poet, who was arrested in 1987. He is held at Mikuyu Prison, near Zomba, the country's main detention center. No reason has been given for his detention, but it may have been for plans to publish a volume of poetry which would have been obliquely critical of Banda's style of government. Rigid censorship is in force, with bans on circulation applying to works of many of the West's best known literary figures, as well as to books on the Soviet Union or other Communist states.

Official control over the domestic news media is complete, and is enforced by periodic detention of journalists. In February 1990, the only foreign correspondents based in the country, Mike Hall and Melinda Ham, were expelled without explanation. They previously had been obliged to leave the country, in October 1989, while their work permits were renewed, apparently because Hall had written about the common practice of forcing people to buy party cards. While Hall was out of the country in late 1989, he gave interviews to the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) about human rights in Malawi, which may have contributed to his eventual expulsion.

The hostility to books and the press is only one of the more visible signs of a highly organized system for suppressing dissent. Malawi exhibits an unusual degree of totalitarian control for an African country, with rigid control of all institutions of political and civil society. The legal profession, for example, is impotent because all important cases are heard before "traditional courts" where lawyers have no right to be heard and judges are answerable directly to the President. The Protestant churches are largely held in thrall by Banda's position as an elder of the Church of Scotland. The localities are policed by members of the party and the paramilitary Young Pioneers, who sell party cards and eavesdrop on "subversive" talk. A sugar company employee, Thoza Konje, spent the whole of 1990 in detention after he had been overheard in a barroom conversation criticizing the government's ethnically discriminatory policy of redeploying teachers to their region of origin. Another man who spent the year behind bars was Dr. George Mtafu, the country's only neurosurgeon. He, too, had criticized official discrimination against Tumbuka speakers from northern Malawi.

On March 18, 1990, police shot dead more than 20 protestors in the capital, Lilongwe, in an incident which showed both the ruthlessness of the Malawian state and the level of popular dissatisfaction. The incident was sparked by the failure of the police to prosecute a businessman who had beaten one of his employees to death for alleged theft. The dead man, a Mozambican refugee, was a truck driver accused of stealing a bag of maize. It is claimed that the businessman bribed a senior police officer to avoid prosecution -- the third time he had done this. The businessman was also believed to be an associate of a senior presidential advisor.

Because the dead man had no family in Malawi, his body was to be handed over to the local party branch in the suburb of Kawale, where he had lived. Party officials, reflecting popular discontent, refused to accept the body. On March 18, the ambulance containing the body set off from the mortuary under armed police guard. Angry local residents threw stones at the convoy, and the police responded by opening fire, killing more than 20 and injuring others. Many of those who died were passers-by who were unconnected with the protest. The massacre went unreported in the Malawian press (and elsewhere, since the only resident foreign correspondents had been expelled the previous month). However, a few days later both the Inspector General of Police and the Police Commissioner for the Central Region were dismissed.

A particularly appalling practice which apparently continued unchecked in 1990 was the so-called "hard-core program," introduced in the early 1980s as a punishment for recalcitrant criminal offenders. Victims are sent to Nsanje or Dzeleka prisons, where they are chained naked to the floor of their cells and either fed on one-quarter rations or denied food altogether. Few are believed to survive this treatment. In 1990, Africa Watch obtained the names of a number of prisoners alleged to have died as a result of the hard-core regimen.

US Policy

Malawi's relationship with the United States has long recovered from an early hiccup in 1965, when Ambassador Sam P. Gilstrap was expelled over the presence in the US of a senior Malawian opposition figure. The party newspaper thundered at the time: "Malawi will not tolerate the Reds and Yankees to interfere in our affairs." However, Gilstrap soon returned and Malawi later indicated that it supported US policy in Vietnam "one hundred and fifty percent."11

The Bush administration's attitude toward the Banda government, like that of earlier US administrations, is warm. In a report to Congress, it stated:

Malawi has been a reliable partner in helping to bring about peaceful change in southern Africa. Malawi has also been a valuable force for moderation, maintaining a dialogue with South Africa while moving to improve its relations with Mozambique and Zimbabwe. U.S. security assistance helps Malawi to continue this role, and to maintain its current orientation and policies, thus contributing to stability in this sensitive region. Moreover, the security relationship serves as a symbol, to friends and adversaries, of continued U.S. readiness to play an active and constructive role in southern Africa.12

According to the most recently available comparative data, the US was Malawi's fourth largest bilateral aid donor, with $18 million given in 1987 (out of a total received of $205.7 million).13 Aid requested for fiscal year 1991 totaled $25 million (with the possibility that this would be increased to about $40 million), compared with an estimated $21.5 million in FY 1990. Military aid increased from $1.4 million in FY 1989 to an estimated $2.2 million in FY 1990, before being reduced to approximately $1 million in FY 1991.14 In January 1990, USAID announced the cancellation of $40 million of Malawi's bilateral debt to the US on the strength of Malawi's commitment to reform programs of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF).15

One of the stated objectives of US policy is to "[m]aintain good relations with Malawi, and influence with the military, while encouraging respect for human rights."16 It is not immediately apparent how this is to be achieved. The bulk of military aid in 1991 will consist of Foreign Military Sales financing for aircraft, equipment and weapons. The International Military Education and Training (IMET) program, as applied to Malawian personnel, has no stated human rights component.

The US has consistently voted in favor of loans to Malawi in the IMF and World Bank. In 1983, Malawi received a three-year loan of SDR81 million17 from the IMF, which has been followed by a further loan of SDR55.8 million to support structural economic reform. The World Bank made three structural-adjustment loans between 1981 and 1985. The third was for $114 million and was followed by a supplementary credit of $40 million financed by the World Bank, Japan, Britain and the Federal Republic of Germany. Since 1987, the World Bank has concentrated on loans to different sectors of the Malawian economy, with the emphasis on agriculture. In April 1990, World Bank directors approved a $70 million loan for "adjustment" in the agricultural sector.18

The reports on Malawi in the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices have generally been critical and, in recent years, accurate, although sometimes with strange gaps of information. Thus, the 1988 report stated that ethnic and regional tensions were insignificant at the very moment when the government was embarking on a purge of northerners from the civil service and education system. The 1989 report, which corrected that error, stated that the US had attempted to raise the case of Jack Mapanje with President Banda. Africa Watch has also heard independent accounts of US embassy officials attempting to raise human rights concerns with the Malawian government. While these efforts are commendable, it is unfortunate that they should coincide with a large increase in military assistance to Malawi and the rescheduling of bilateral debt. The combined message conveyed to the Malawian government by these measures is clearly the opposite of the Bush administration's professed revulsion over human rights abuses.

A concurrent resolution submitted by Rep. William Green in Congress in May 1990 requests the Secretary of State to condition US military and economic assistance to Malawi on a marked improvement in respect for human rights. It also urges the administration to channel humanitarian assistance through nongovernmental organizations, focusing on development programs that benefit the Malawian people and Mozambican refugees. The resolution also requests the Malawian government to allow human rights organizations such as Africa Watch and Amnesty International to conduct investigative missions in Malawi.19

The Work of Africa Watch

At the end of 1989, Africa Watch was refused admittance to Malawi to carry out research and discuss its concerns with the government. In January 1990, an Africa Watch researcher traveled to Zambia and Zimbabwe to interview Malawian refugees. Research into abuses in Malawi continued throughout the year.

In October, Africa Watch published Where Silence Rules: The Suppression of Dissent in Malawi, which reviewed Malawi's human rights record since independence in 1964, as well as including up-to-date information on detentions, torture and political killings. The report received considerable international publicity, especially in light of the generally scant media coverage of Malawi. In an unusual development, a senior figure in the Malawian government replied publicly to the report's findings, stating that it was malicious and based solely on unfounded allegations made by refugees. He did not explain, first, why Malawian refugees had fled the country or, second, why Africa Watch had been forced to conduct its research outside Malawi. Africa Watch continued to press the government to allow a human rights mission to visit the country.

11 Philip Short, Banda, London 1974, p. 239.

12 US Department of State and Defense Security Agency, Congressional Presentation for Security Assistance Programs, Fiscal Year 1991, p. 194.

13 OECD Development Assistance Committee, Geographical Distribution of Financial Flows to Developing Countries.

14 Congressional Presentation for Security Assistance Programs, FY 1991, p. 195; EIU Country Report, No. 3, 1989; USAID.

15 EIU, Country Report, No. 2, 1990.

16 Congressional Presentation for Security Assistance Programs, FY 1991, p. 194.

17 IMF loans are denominated in Special Drawing Rights, calculated in terms of a basket of currencies. The SDR is currently equivalent to approximately $1.44.

18 Financial Times, April 10, 1990.

19 101st Congress, 2d Session, H. Con. Res. 327.
MAURITANIA

Human Rights Developments

Virtually closed to the outside world, Mauritania has been largely beyond the reach of international observation since its independence from France in 1960. It was briefly in the headlines in April 1989 when a border incident between Senegal and Mauritania sparked off communal violence that left hundreds dead.

Mauritania is an artificial creation linking the nomadic population of Arab/Berber descendants, known as beydanes or "white men," living in the north and the sedentary black ethnic communities living in the south.20 Prior to independence, blacks, with their more settled lifestyle and greater access to education, dominated the civil service and the professions. Since independence, however, political power has been concentrated in the hands of the beydane community, which has subjected the country's black population to gross human rights abuses and denied it equality of opportunity in every aspect of public life. Blacks face discrimination in employment in the civil service; the administration of justice before the regular courts and religious courts; access to loans and credits from banks and state-owned enterprises; and opportunities for education and vocational training.

The government's decision to make the beydanes' language, Arabic, the official language facilitates discrimination both in the school system and employment, since Arabic is not the mother tongue of blacks, other than former and current slaves. There is only one black judge on the religious courts, and only one black head of a major mosque. Black religious leaders are given smaller government subsidies for the maintenance of their mosques and religious schools than their beydane counterparts receive. Even in prison, black political prisoners and petty criminals are subjected to special punishments and inferior conditions of detention.

To stave off war in April 1989, Mauritania and Senegal decided to repatriate each other's citizens. The Mauritanian government took advantage of the agreement to further the country's "Arabization" by getting rid of its black population. While the mass expulsions abated in the last four months of 1989, the government stepped up its campaign of deportations in early 1990 and continued them throughout the year. In towns, people were arrested in their homes and offices, or simply on the street, and deported. They were stripped of their identity papers and any valuables in their possession and, often, in their homes. Prior to deportation, prominent citizens who the authorities assumed would not flee were requested to come to police stations for at times daily questioning about black opposition groups based in Senegal, or about their "Senegalese ancestors," as a way of establishing their foreign status or simply as a means of intimidation. Despite government claims that only those who had obtained their Mauritanian citizenship fraudulently would be expelled, those deported for the most part were people who had lived in Mauritania for generations; their identity papers had either been confiscated or torn up by the authorities as they were being expelled. Many deportees who tried to return to Mauritania were either arrested and detained or expelled back to Senegal.

The government also continued in 1990 the policy it had begun in 1989 of denying blacks passports and not issuing blacks identity papers. Some blacks were arrested after asking for identity papers. Some individual members of the beydane community exploited the government's policies to settle private scores -- dispossessing black farmers of their land, crippling black business competition and, on a wide scale, refusing wages to black employees and domestic servants. Some of the blacks who complained were arrested or expelled to Senegal.

In the villages along the Senegal River Valley, either the army forcibly evicted entire villages, or repeated army atrocities encouraged villagers to flee. These villagers, too, were subjected to vindictive searches, their possessions and livestock were confiscated, and often their entire village was burned. For example, in April, eight hundred people, the population of two villages, fled to a refugee camp in Bekel, Senegal, after threats from the army. A night curfew along the valley, imposed after the events of 1989, continued throughout 1990. Beginning in about March 1990, an unofficial state of emergency was in place along the valley, particularly in villages that the government suspected of political agitation.

There was a dramatic escalation in 1990 of the number of black Mauritanians killed by the army, particularly along the valley. Sometimes, the attacks were reprisals for attacks by the principal Mauritanian armed opposition movement, the African Liberation Forces of Mauritania (FLAM), based in Senegal. Other times, the motive was to show black Mauritanians living on the Mauritanian side of the valley the cost of assisting blacks who return secretly to collect their livestock, or to discourage blacks from crossing the river from Senegal and swelling the growing black opposition in Mauritania. For example:

o On March 6, Abdoul Boucka N'diaye, a former soldier, and Mamadou Moussa N'diaye, his 20-year-old nephew, were killed in the village of Djowol. They had gone fishing when they were arrested by the national guard, who took them to a military camp just outside the village and slit their throats.

o On April 10, soldiers and armed Haratines (black former slaves) arrested seven people in the village of Moudji, including Silly Youmé Bâ and Mamadou Demba Sall. All seven were executed; three were shot and four had their heads crushed by stones. When their bodies were found, all had their hands tied behind their backs.21

o On April 17, Tierno Saybatou Bâ, a religious leader, was shot dead in the village of Ngoral Gidala as he bathed in the river. He was accused of planning to cross over to Senegal to join the political opposition.

o On or about October 27, a young man was arrested in the village of Souboualla, near Kaeda, and accused of being a member of FLAM. He was beheaded, and his head was taken to his village, where the villagers were forced to dance around it.

A substantial percentage of the people expelled and killed were members of the Peul ethnic group. For the last several years, Peuls have been the primary target of the Mauritanian government's campaign of persecution against its black citizens, apparently because of the number of prominent positions they occupied. At the end of 1990, the government began to target the Soninke ethnic group.

By year's end, over 50,000 expelled black Mauritanians were registered at refugee camps, and 30,000 to 40,000 more were living in Senegalese towns and villages. Another 25,000 to 30,000 had sought sanctuary in Mali, where the government refused to recognize them as refugees.

One positive development was the release in late September of over a dozen black political prisoners arrested in September and October 1986, tortured and sentenced to four- and five-year prison terms after a grossly unfair trial. They had been accused of being members of FLAM and implicated in the publication in April 1986 of a document called "The Manifesto of the Oppressed Black," which detailed a wide range of black grievances. They had been given a year's remission at the end of 1989. They included Ibrahima Sall, a former lecturer in history at the University of Nouakchott, and Ibrahima Sarr, a journalist. Against this encouraging development was the government's refusal to release 35 black army officers sentenced in October 1987 to 20 years' imprisonment for allegedly having been part of a coup attempt. They were held at Aioun el Atrouss, a remote fortress. Many of the prisoners' families had been deported.

The end of 1990 saw hundreds of blacks arrested throughout the country, following a government announcement on December 6 that it had foiled a coup attempt planned for November 27. Several of those arrested were said to have died under torture. Some were released after days or weeks in detention, but the others were due to be tried under charges of treason, which carry the death penalty. The Mauritanian government accused Senegal of backing the coup attempt, which Senegal denied. Among those arrested were black members of Mauritania's small navy, customs officials, members of the army, police officials, civil servants, as well as hundreds of ordinary civilians. Most of the military officers and soldiers arrested are from the Soninke ethnic group and include: six senior officers working for the navy at Kadei; three teachers working at a military training school at Atar; a member of the National Guard at Nouadhibou; and many military personnel and others working as doctors and nurses at Nouadhibou naval base. Others who came from other ethnic groups were also arrested at other military installations. It was impossible to calculate the number who were originally arrested or those who remained in detention at year's end. Those detained were rumored to be held at a military barracks at Jereida. Other reports indicated that they were being held at a military camp called Mamekhare.

It was impossible to take the government's claim of a coup attempt seriously. First, the charges were announced only in December, even though the arrests began in mid-October. Second, the number of black army officers and rank-and-file soldiers had been drastically reduced since the last alleged coup attempt by black army officers in October 1987. After that, blacks were purged from the army, no new black recruits were hired, and those blacks that remained were disarmed. Black members of the army, police force, National Guard, various security services and the customs service were also prominent among the black professionals who were deported. Third, the government identified Mauritania's navy -- a relatively insignificant force -- as the chief architect of the coup, again suggesting that the arrests were in fact part of the government's broader policy of discriminating against the country's black population.

The existence of black slaves who belong to beydane masters has existed for centuries in Mauritania. July 5, 1990 marked the ten-year anniversary of the latest formal abolition of slavery in Mauritania; slavery had previously been abolished in 1905 and again in 1961. Unfortunately, none of these official terminations eradicated slavery in practice, particularly in the countryside, where the institution is still widespread. Slavery continues because legislative enactments were not accompanied by initiatives in the economic and social field. Although slaves are no longer sold on the open market, sales continued through discreet arrangements, such as "exchanges" or the giving of lifelong "presents." Slaves have no legal rights, and generally are not permitted to marry, have a family, attend school or go to mosque. They are routinely tortured and subjected to acts of appalling cruelty as punishment for such offenses as disobeying their master or attempting to escape.

US Policy

Like most other foreign governments and international organizations involved in trying to resolve the dispute between Mauritania and Senegal,22 the Bush administration focused its attention on the international aspects of the dispute. Presumably to encourage the two sides to negotiate, the administration avoided any step that would alienate the Mauritanian government. The result was a general failure to speak out publicly about the discrimination against blacks in Mauritania which lies at the heart of the conflict between the two countries.

There were two exceptions to this policy of silence. First, in December 1989, Janet Mullins, Assistant Secretary of State for Legislative Affairs, wrote to Rep. Gus Yatron, chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Human Rights and International Organizations, stating:

At the conflict's outset, the US Government urged both Senegal and Mauritania to halt the violence and expulsions and seek diplomatic solutions to the problems that caused them. Our Embassy in Nouakchott has expressed to the Mauritanian government in strong terms on numerous occasions our concern over the clear violations of human rights which occurred there. Senior State Department officials have visited Senegal and Mauritania to assess the problems and have stressed to the authorities the need to respect human rights. Mauritania has now stopped expelling its black citizens and there have been no recent reports of major human rights violations.23

Second, the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1989, published in February 1990, included a well informed chapter on Mauritania which bluntly described a wide range of institutionalized abuses against the country's black population, including politically motivated killings, torture, unfair trials, deportation without due process, the dismissal of blacks from the civil service, the army and other professions, and the discrimination against blacks in employment, religion and access to land. The report was equally frank and informative about the lack of political rights for all Mauritanian citizens, highlighting the domination of the political process by the military, the absence of opportunities to exercise freedom of assembly and association despite legal guarantees, crippling restrictions on freedom of expression, government domination of the media, and the unfair nature of trials before the State Security Court, which tries offenses against state security. Country reports in previous years have also been frank in their criticisms of the government's human rights record, though not as detailed as the report issued in 1990.

The total US aid to Mauritania for fiscal year 1990 was approximately $6 million. This included $590,000 in development assistance, some $5 million in food aid (PL 480) and $124,000 in military training (IMET). For FY91, the administration requested roughly similar amounts of aid. There appeared to be some discussion at year's end that these figures would be reduced in light of Mauritania's close relations with Iraq.

The Work of Africa Watch

Having been refused permission to visit Mauritania, a representative of Africa Watch spent a month in Senegal in May and June, interviewing a wide range of black Mauritanians in the cities and throughout the camps in the Senegal River Valley. On the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the last abolition of slavery on July 5, Africa Watch published a detailed newsletter highlighting the largely cosmetic nature of the abolition and documenting the continued existence of slavery in Mauritania. Africa Watch published an article in June in The Guardian of London detailing the killing, deportation and persecution of black Mauritanians, and an article in August in The Christian Science Monitor discussing the persistence of slavery despite its legal abolition.

20 The blacks in the south are members of four ethnic groups -- the Halpulaar, Soninke, Wolof and Bambara -- which together make up roughly 40 percent of Mauritania's population. About another 20 percent are black slaves and former slaves of the beydane community who share its culture and identify politically with their former masters. To distance black from black and to weaken blacks as a political force, the government has used these current and former slaves in its repression of blacks from the south.

21 Amnesty International, "Mauritania: Human Rights Violations in the Senegal River Valley," October 1990, p. 10.

22 These include the Organization of African Unity, which has been involved from the beginning, and the European Community/Africa-Caribbean-Pacific, which in October 1990 appointed the former Belgian Prime Minister, Leo Tindemans, as a mediator.

23 While the deportations had tapered off at the end of 1989, they escalated again in early 1990 and continued throughout the year.
MOZAMBIQUE

Human Rights Developments

Mozambique has been beset by civil war for most of the last 30 years. First, the nationalist forces of the Mozambique Liberation Front (FRELIMO) fought the Portuguese colonial authorities, who were responsible for large-scale massacres of civilians and other human rights abuses. Then, since soon after independence in 1975, the FRELIMO government has faced an armed insurgency, the Mozambique National Resistance (RENAMO), which was backed initially by Rhodesia and later by South Africa. In this war, too, appalling abuses have been committed. Human rights violations by RENAMO -- which include killings, mutilation, abduction and hostage-taking -- have become well known, in part because of a report by Robert Gersony, commissioned by the US State Department and published in 1988. However, there have also been serious abuses on the government side, notably killings, torture and long-term detention without trial. The war has displaced three million people, or one-fifth of the population; there are more than 800,000 refugees in Malawi alone. Five million Mozambicans depend on food aid.

In 1990, the Mozambican government took dramatic steps to guarantee human rights and to end the civil conflict. In January, a new draft Constitution was announced, which included a judicially enforced Bill of Rights containing guarantees of the right to life, the right not to be subject to torture, freedom of conscience, religion and association, and various internationally accepted norms for a fair trial. After public and parliamentary debate, various other rights were added, notably a guarantee of press freedom and the transformation of Mozambique into a multiparty system. The document was finally approved in November.

Also in November, the government began a third round of peace talks with RENAMO. (Earlier negotiations, beginning in 1989, had failed to produce results.) At the beginning of December, a partial ceasefire was announced -- apparently a major breakthrough.

None of these developments came out of the blue. The legal system, in particular, has undergone a major restructuring in recent years designed to protect the rights of prisoners. Until 1988, those charged with crimes against the state were tried by a Revolutionary Military Tribunal -- part of a state-security court system which was distinct from the ordinary judicial structure based on Portuguese civil law. Trials before the Revolutionary Military Tribunal were often summary, and those who came under its jurisdiction had no right to appeal or to petition for habeas corpus.

In 1988, a Supreme People's Court was established as the country's highest judicial body. This led to the abolition of the Revolutionary Military Tribunal. Security cases are now heard before regular provincial-level courts, with a right of appeal to the Supreme People's Court (known as the Supreme Court under the new Constitution). While these developments represent a considerable improvement in theory, Africa Watch remains concerned that in practice security prisoners still are not adequately informed of their legal rights, often lack proper legal representation, and receive trials which fall short of internationally accepted standards of fairness. This is a particular problem in the provinces, where there is a chronic shortage of lawyers and general dislocation as a result of the war. Africa Watch has also observed similar shortcomings in security cases heard in Maputo.

The security police (SNASP) retain extensive powers of detention, including the authority to detain those accused of economic and political crimes against the state. In September 1989, the government restored the right of SNASP prisoners to petition for habeas corpus. Ostensibly, these prisoners now have the same rights as other prisoners -- the right to counsel and the right to be charged or released within a certain period.

A continuing area of concern for Africa Watch is the forced removal of populations in the course of government counterinsurgency operations, resulting in acute shortages of food for those displaced. In a number of districts of the northern province of Zambezia, people who had been living in RENAMO-controlled areas were forced from their homes, where they had been able to provide adequately for themselves, to camps, where there was no food and poor sanitation. In Mugulama, for example, the displaced had been under army control for two months beginning in January 1990 before relief agencies were told of their presence. It was reported that 20 to 30 were dying of starvation daily. Challenged on this practice, the government claimed that it was moving people for their own protection.

US Policy

The US embassy in Maputo has played a positive role in reinforcing the Mozambican government's moves to enshrine human rights protection in law. In particular, Ambassador Melissa Wells, who left Mozambique in late 1990, was instrumental in encouraging President Joaquim Chissano along the path of reform.

Mozambique has become one of the largest recipients of US aid in sub-Saharan Africa, with a total of $51 million proposed for fiscal year 1991. (The figure is so high because of nearly $30 million in PL480 Title II food aid.) Within this large figure are a number of small but useful expenditures. For example, the United States funds the National Institute for Legal Assistance (INAJ), which is at present the only source of legal advice in the country; it provides typewriters for rural courts and law books to the university, and during 1990 funded a conference of international jurists on the draft Constitution.

In January, after the publication of the new Constitution, the Bush administration removed Mozambique from the list of Marxist-Leninist states barred from receiving Export-Import Bank assistance. The rationale for the move was not only improved respect for human rights, but also changes in economic policy -- in particular, Mozambique's recent membership in the World Bank and International Monetary Fund and its adherence to an IMF structural-adjustment program.

The Work of Africa Watch

Africa Watch began work on Mozambique only in late 1990. A research team visited the country in October and November, where it met President Joaquim Chissano, Minister of Justice Ussumane Aly Dauto and other officials. It also attended court hearings and interviewed prisoners. One member of the team stayed on in Mozambique, while the second plans to return in early 1991. Future research will focus on the situation in the war zones, leading to a report to be published in 1991.
NIGERIA

Human Rights Developments

An unsuccessful but bloody military coup attempt on April 22 weakened the already fragile state of human rights in Nigeria in 1990. The military government of Gen. Ibrahim Babangida used the attempt as the occasion for a massive crackdown on civilian opposition figures and institutions. The government's heavy-handedness in this and other instances called into question whether the planned transition to civilian rule, due to be completed in 1992, would proceed.

A total of 69 alleged coup plotters were executed in 1990, after trials which lacked the most basic safeguards. Forty-two were shot on July 27; twenty-seven more were killed on September 13 after a retrial. Military and civilian suspects alike were tried by a military tribunal, presided over by a former government minister who was later reappointed to his ministerial post. The proceedings were conducted in camera. The accused were not allowed to choose their own legal counsel. There was no judicial appeal.

The crackdown on dissent that followed the coup attempt shook the foundations of Nigeria's fragile civil society. A number of newspapers and magazines were temporarily closed. Journalists, lawyers, human rights activists, politicians, religious figures and academics were targeted for arrest and harassment. Several leaders of the Christian Association of Nigeria (CAN) were temporarily detained for protesting discrimination against Christians.

The universities, which have been a particular target of the government for some time, continued to suffer in 1990. In December 1989, the government promulgated Decree 47, which authorizes imprisonment and fines for any student found guilty of taking part in a demonstration or organizing a protest. In March 1990, a government announcement of an agreement for a $120 million World Bank loan for the 21 federal universities touched off boycotts and demonstrations by students who feared that part of the agreement would require a cut in academic programs and staff. Some of the demonstrations were broken up by armed troops. After the coup, a number of students were arrested, particularly members of the National Association of Nigerian Students, which has been banned since 1986. Three academics, Professors Obaro Ikime and Omotoye Olorode and Dr. Idowu Awopetu, were arrested and detained for three months after the coup; they were later forced into retirement for "the public interest." In an August 27 address to the nation, Gen. Babangida legalized the Academic Staff Union of Universities, which had been banned since 1988, on the basis that "universities can, and indeed should, make positive contribution to the emergence of a new sociopolitical order." However, the President warned:

[The] government will not hesitate to deal with individuals and groups who attempt to use our univerities as launching pads to foment troubles and subversion and to destabilize the program of transition to civil rule.

In addition to the bashing it took after the coup, the press endured mounting threats on its independence in 1990. Shortly before the coup attempt, then Chief of General Staff Augustus Aikhomu accused the media of leading a campaign "to bring down the government." Later in the year, Aikhomu again urged journalists to promote views to ensure unity, peace and stability. Finally, the Government threatened to implement Decree 59 of 1988, which establishes the Nigerian Media Council and authorizes it to set entry qualifications for journalists, keep a registered list of journalists and monitor their conduct according to ethical standards. Late in 1990, however, authorities indicated that the legislation may be subject to further revision.

The State Security (Detention of Persons) Decree 2 of 1984 was a major focus of Nigerian human rights groups in 1990, particularly the Civil Liberties Organization. The decree, which cannot be challenged in court, has been regularly used to silence government critics; probably hundreds of Nigerians are currently detained under it. In late January, the government amended the decree by reducing from six months to six weeks the initial period that a detainee may be held before his or her case is administratively reviewed. However, a detention may still be renewed indefinitely. The amendment also removed the authority of the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Inspector General of Police to detain suspects by decree, vesting this authority exclusively in the Chief of General Staff. In addition, the amendment established a panel to review the cases of all those currently being held under Decree 2. The decree was widely used by the government to detain opponents in the aftermath of the attempted coup.

In a case which gave rise to widespread concern, the government denied due process to a section of the urban poor in Lagos. Some 300,000 residents of the Maroko slum were left homeless when the government razed their neighborhood in July, after giving residents a mere seven days' warning. Attempts to bring the matter before the courts were fruitless; the one court that agreed to hear the case set the date for the hearing two days after the planned demolition, then dismissed it on the grounds that the dispute had been overtaken by events. The former residents were settled in camps, which are overcrowded and lack heat, light, sanitary facilities and clean water. There is not enough food and no medical services. Police have reportedly assaulted, raped and harassed the residents.

The government has continued to keep a tight hold on labor organizing, ever since it dissolved the Nigerian Labor Congress (NLC) in 1988, apparently for its opposition to government policies. The government has sought to control the reconstituted NLC, and in 1990 cancelled May Day celebrations, citing fears of security problems in the wake of the coup attempt.

On January 31, the government dropped criminal charges against Gani Fawehinmi, a prominent human rights lawyer, and Alhaji Balarabe Musa, a politician. The two had been separately charged in 1989 with offenses under the Transition to Civil Rule (Political Program) Decree 19 of 1987. The program for transition to civilian rule, which has been carefully orchestrated by the government, prevents all former politicians from running for election. In addition, in 1989, the government declared illegal all political parties then seeking registration. Thereafter, Gen. Babangida announced that only two government-created parties would be authorized -- one a little to the left, and one a little to the right. Musa was charged with launching a political party despite being banned from participation in politics, and Fawehinmi was charged with obstructing the transition-to-civil-rule program. Despite being granted bail by the courts, they were both administratively detained for several months under Decree 2. Fawehinmi was held incommunicado under harsh conditions.

On September 6, the police blocked the site of a planned national conference on Nigeria's political future. In a letter to the conference organizers published that day in a Nigerian newspaper, Attorney General Prince Bola Ajibola, who had been invited to the conference, stated that he would not attend and warned organizers that they might be subject to five-year prison sentences if they proceeded. Shortly before the conference was due to take place, on August 16, its chairman, Alao Aka-Bashorun, a well known government critic and former president of the Nigerian Bar Association, was picked up for questioning by the State Security Service. His passport was seized. In December, a Lagos high court agreed to hear a five million naira (approximately $500,000) suit against the federal government for canceling the conference.

The weakening of the judiciary continued to be an issue in 1990. In addition to the debilitating effects of rule by military decree -- particularly Decree 13 of 1984, which states that no court challenges are permitted to any decree or edict of the government -- the government on a number of occasions has ignored rulings of the court. For example, in 1989, the Lagos High Court ordered the State Security Service to return the passport of Gani Fawehinmi. The passport was not returned until October 1990, when Minister of Information Alex Akinyele released it as an act of clemency, making no reference to the court order of the previous year.

Violence by the police continued to be a major problem in 1990. According to a paper delivered by the National Institute of Advanced Legal Studies in a recent conference on human rights and the administration of justice in Nigeria, 60 percent of a sample of accused persons alleged police mistreatment. The problem appears to be exacerbated by an attitude of tolerance adopted by the highest levels of government toward violence directed at common criminal suspects. For example, Lagos State Governor Col. Raji Rasaki publicly stated in 1990 that citizens should feel free to lynch armed robbery suspects.

Nigeria's prisons are notoriously overcrowded, and prisoners regularly die as a result of substandard conditions. In March 1990, seven of 29 armed robbery suspects due to appear before a military tribunal died in custody from undisclosed causes. A report the same month by the Civil Liberties Organization (CLO) on the Kirikiri Maximum Security Prison stated that 48 inmates had died in the course of the previous year. Although the government attributed these deaths to "natural causes," the CLO investigation revealed that malnutrition, 72 percent overcrowding, and a lack of medical attention to diseases such as tuberculosis were largely responsible.

US Policy

The Bush administration made public statements about human rights in Nigeria only twice in 1990 -- on the two occasions that coup suspects were executed. A July 31 statement by the State Department said:

We have limited information about the 42 people reportedly executed following the rejection of the appeals of their convictions by a military tribunal. We are nevertheless concerned that they were tried in camera and did not have the right to choose their own counsel. We have consistently expressed concern to the Nigerian government about upholding respect for human rights in Nigeria, including the rule of law, especially since the abortive coup.

We will continue to make Nigeria aware of our human rights concerns, including respect for the rule of law.

A statement on September 14, before the State Department had verified that the second round of executions had been carried out, merely acknowledged that death sentences had been handed down.

The State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1989, issued in February 1990, provided a generally balanced view of human rights conditions in Nigeria, although it played down both police abuses and prison conditions by referring to "press reports" and "frequent charges" of abuses, rather than addressing them in its own voice.

In replies to letters sent by Africa Watch about the role of the US government in promoting human rights in Nigeria, Bush administration officials have stressed that in private discussions with the Nigerian government they have consistently pressed for respect for human rights. Africa Watch believes that a stronger public stance is called for, since the Nigerian government has repeatedly avowed its respect for human rights.

In fiscal year 1990, direct US aid to Nigeria consisted of $11.5 million in development aid for specific projects and $100,000 in military training. For 1991, these levels remain roughly the same, but $6 million in Economic Support Funds has been added for unspecified development projects.

The Work of Africa Watch

Africa Watch began monitoring human rights in Nigeria in 1990, out of recognition of Nigeria's significance to the region and to Africa as a whole, and the important political development now under way. Four newsletters were published at various stages in the aftermath of the coup attempt, addressing the executions, arrests and press closings. The September newsletter also discussed the closing of the national conference.

On July 31, Africa Watch sent a lengthy letter to Gen. Babangida, raising a wide range of concerns relating to freedom of the press and religion, the weakening of the judiciary and labor unions, attacks on the universities, abuses by police and prison authorities, and the elections. After the second round of executions, a letter of concern was again sent to the President, as well as to the Nigerian ambassador to the United States, requesting permission for an Africa Watch delegation to visit the country. The government has not replied.

Africa Watch also sent letters to US officials with responsibility for Nigeria, alerting them to our human rights concerns.
SOMALIA

Human Rights Developments

In 1990, facing deep cuts in foreign aid and diplomatic isolation after international exposure of massive human rights abuses by his government, President Mohamed Siad Barre announced a number of measures, largely cosmetic or unimplemented, intended to improve his image. These included the release in October and November of about 20 suspected rebel sympathizers held without charge or trial since July and August 1989; promises of a referendum on a new constitution and local multiparty elections in 1991; abolition of the National Security Court (NSC), a special court which reported directly to the President and handled "political" cases; reintroduction of the right to habeas corpus in political cases; the abolition of the principal security agency, the National Security Service (NSS); ratification of a number of international treaties; and promises to allow Africa Watch and Amnesty International to visit the country. On September 3, the President dismissed his Prime Minister, whose government had been in power only since February, and in late November, he made further Cabinet shuffles; in each case these moves were preceded by talk of "change." And on December 26, in a move to forestall the collapse of his government, President Barre legalized the formation of oppostion political parties.

The various announced reforms, by only scratching at the surface of repression, did little to stem a dramatic deterioration in the human rights situation throughout 1990. In part for that reason, the organized rebel movements and prominent opposition voices rejected these moves as irrelevant to the raging political turmoil and demanded, as in the past, that President Barre step down before negotiations to end the civil war can begin.

For example, the abolition of the NSS was not accompanied by the demise of other security agencies with similarly unlimited powers of arrest and detention and notorious reputations for torture and ill-treatment of detainees. These include the President's own bodyguards, the Red Berets; the "Backbreakers," a branch of the military police; the Hangash, another branch of the military police; the Victory Pioneers, a uniformed paramilitary group; and the investigative wing of the ruling Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party (SRSP). Similarly, the decision to dismantle the NSC did not guarantee a fair system of justice because other courts, such as the Mobile Military Court and the Regional Security Court, retained the power to sentence people to long prison terms and even death without any pretense of due process. In an effort to show that the government was opening the political system, President Barre resigned as Secretary General of the ruling party, only to be replaced by a son-in-law who for many years headed the NSS.

Promises to allow international human rights groups access to the country never materialized. In an April meeting with representatives of Africa Watch in New York, then Foreign Minister Ahmed Jama Abdulle extended an invitiation to visit the country but later failed to respond to inquiries about the timing of such a visit. In June, Amnesty International was due to have talks in Mogadishu with the government but the authorities postponed the visit at short notice.

The government continued to arrest and detain citizens without charge or trial for peaceful expression. In June, 45 prominent Somalis, including the first civilian president, the former president of parliament, former ambassadors, civil servants, religious leaders, elders and intellectuals, were arrested after they signed a document that was sharply critical of the government's human rights and economic policies and detailed steps toward national reconciliation. They were detained for three weeks and brought to court on charges of sedition and treason, which carry the death penalty. Surprisingly, they were acquitted for lack of evidence -- the first such acquittals ever in a political trial in Somalia. The trial, which lasted only a few hours, became a major political event, with the court surrounded by huge crowds facing heavily armed guards. The government was clearly anxious to avoid a bloodbath if heavy sentences were imposed.

But Somali jails and unofficial detention centers continued to hold thousands of lesser known political detainees and common criminals, living under inhumane and abusive conditions. In fact, the number of those in custody escalated dramatically as the government sought to "contain" the thousands of displaced persons arriving every month in Mogadishu by detaining many of them in former military training camps outside the city. Arrested during roundups known locally as "rafs," several thousand people, for the most part small farmers and nomads from the central region belonging to the Hawiye clan, were held at Dhanane military training camp, situated near Laanta Bur prison in the direction of Merca; Qorileh camp, located about 25 kilometers east of Mogadishu on the coast; and a camp to the west of Belet Weyne. It was impossible to estimate the exact number of prisoners and detainees in Somalia, since the government refused to publish any figures, but unofficial sources placed the figure at between 7,000 and 10,000, including many arrested when war broke out in the north who were believed held at Berbera, Borama and Burao.

By the end of 1990, Somalia was in an advanced state of anarchy. As conditions worsened and the economy crumbled, opposition intensified and citizens became more outspoken in their criticism of government policies and leadership. The three principal rebel movements also agreed to coordinate their military tactics and to cooperate politically in their campaign to hasten the departure of President Barre.

Perhaps the most significant development in 1990 was the extent to which the war, until then confined largely to the rest of the country, was felt in the capital. As thousands fled to Mogadishu from more insecure regions, the economy weakened substantially. In addition, the United Somali Congress (USC), a rebel organization formed in 1989 by the Hawiye, Somalia's largest clan which is centered in Mogadishu, stepped up its campaign to destabilize the government. Beginning in August, the USC intensified its attacks in Mogadishu, and at year's end was said to be within 50 kilometers of Mogadishu. It was widely believed that the main obstacle holding the USC back was advice from clan elders that an assault by the USC on Mogadishu would unleash massive government reprisals against civilians.

Random killings by soldiers, particularly the President's heavily armed bodyguards, the Red Berets, as well as by ordinary criminals and soldiers in plainclothes, became so common that people were afraid to leave their homes at night. The government blamed "robbers" for the murder of a number of foreigners, but it was widely believed that they were killed by the Red Berets. Shooting was heard every night in Mogadishu and corpses were found in the morning in different districts. Both soldiers and civilians were responsible for looting government warehouses to obtain food; looting of private homes was facilitated by the frequent absence of electricity, adding to the climate of fear. Government troops and rebels used rocket-propelled grenades, injuring many innocent bystanders. Bomb explosions at the central post office, at a military barracks and outside a government ministry killed at least 10 people.

The Red Berets shot dead over 100 civilians at a soccer stadium on July 6 after the crowd jeered the President; over 300 were injured. A number of demonstrators, policemen and soldiers died in late October when protests about a sharp increase in gasoline prices and calls for the release of political prisoners escalated into violent clashes in Mogadishu. Scores of others were injured. Families of those injured during political protests often did not take their wounded to hospitals for fear of arrest. From the end of November to the end of the year, more than 150 people died in Mogadishu, mainly as a result of fighting between two clans, the Abgal and the Galgalo. The Abgal accused the Galgalo of attacking them at the government's instigation. In addition, many civilians died from shots fired from passing cars belonging to the army and security agencies.

Many embassies reduced their staff, restricted the movement of those who remained, and advised their citizens not to visit Somalia. Insecurity in Mogadishu forced thousands of people to seek a measure of peace in the refugee camps in Ethiopia. The government's ability to mobilize its forces against the USC was strained by the growing defections from the army of both officers and rank-and-file soldiers; many joined one of the armed rebel movements.

The war in the north, which broke out in May 1988 between the government and the Somali National Movement (SNM), continued unabated in 1990. In addition, the insurgencies that began in 1989 in the central region, led by the USC, and in the south by the Somali Patriotic Front, intensified and led to massacres of unarmed civilians by the army. The heavy fighting created such a level of insecurity that most aid agencies pulled out of Somalia, leaving hundreds of thousands of people displaced within the country beyond the reach of international assistance and observation. Hunger and disease also took their toll on the civilian population. The war has destroyed the country's infrastructure -- which was limited to begin with -- and the displaced face food shortages, inadequate shelter and the absence of medical facilities. Refugees, mainly from the north, continued to flee to Ethiopia, Djibouti and Yemen to escape the insecurity in Somalia. International assistance to Somali refugees in Ethiopia and Djibouti became increasingly inadequate as more people fled.

The government's counterinsurgency strategy continued to draw no distinction between civilians and armed insurgents. Targeting the nomads who make up an overwhelming majority of the country's population, the army and pro-government militias sought either to punish them for their presumed support of the rebel movements or to discourage them from providing any such assistance. In Belet-Weyne, Kismayo, Bosaaso, Burao, Loya'ade and other towns and villages, the army killed unarmed civilians, destroyed their livestock and water-reservoirs, and looted and burned their homes and warehouses. This repression has encouraged the civilian population to arm itself and to form militia groups. The increasingly militarized situation throughout country, as well as the government's lack of effective control over much of the territory, rendered the government's promise to hold multiparty elections largely meaningless.

US Policy

From 1978 until 1989, the United States was Somalia's most important ally, and a significant source of economic and military assistance. The relationship was cemented during the Somali war with Ethiopia in which the Soviet Union switched its alliance from Somalia to Ethiopia. The provision of military, economic and diplomatic support, accompanied by a decision to refrain from public criticism of human rights abuses, was rationalized by the need to protect US interests in this strategically located country. Those interests include a naval facility for the US Central Command at the port of Berbera as well as military and electronic facilities elsewhere. Even after war broke out in the north in May 1988, the Reagan administration continued to provide military assistance and to defend the regime against a US Congress that was increasingly critical of the government's human rights record and its conduct of the war.

In 1989 and 1990, however, the Bush administration began to disengage significantly from Somalia, and the change in its policies were as dramatic as they were welcome. This was in large measure the result of pressure from Congress, which demanded the disengagement on human rights grounds, as well as of the realization that the government was disintegrating. The end of Cold War rivalries also reduced Somalia's significance to the United States.

The erosion of confidence in the Somali army apparently prompted the United States to cancel "Operation Brightstar" naval exercises in September 1989; the exercises were not rescheduled in 1990. The ten-year Berbera agreement granting access to these facilities expired at the end of 1990.

The Persian Gulf crisis renewed fears that Somalia's strategic location would encourage the Bush administration to overlook Somalia's human rights record and strengthen ties to the government, but the crisis did not appear to have influenced administration policy toward Somalia. By the end of 1990, the administration had announced no plans to use the Berbera base, which in any event had less strategic significance as a jumping point to the Persian Gulf in light of the massive deployment of US troops in Saudi Arabia. Nor, in light of the turmoil in Somalia, did the port present itself as an inviting spot for rest and relaxation for troops on leave.

In a reflection of the administration's dissatisfaction with the government of Mohamed Siad Barre, there were no new Economic Support Funds or military assistance granted in fiscal years 1989 or 1990. A once large USAID mission has been scaled down to two people whose purpose is to close down old programs. All projects, including development programs, have been suspended. By contrast, US economic aid for 1988 totaled about $30 million.

Aside from human rights considerations, the provisions of the "Brooke Amendment" also made Somalia ineligible for new aid beginning in January 1990 because the government was in arrears on its international debt. But even in the unlikely event that the government were able to repay its debts, Congress placed strict limits on aid to Somalia in the Foreign Aid Appropriations bill for fiscal year 1991, which President Bush signed into law on November 7, 1990. No provision was made for military aid or Economic Support Funds, and all other assistance to Somalia was placed on a "reprogramming basis," meaning that Congress must be informed before any disbursement of development aid goes forward.

State Department officials issued a number of public statements in 1990 either protesting government abuses or criticizing the government's conduct of the war. For example, on July 11, The State Department condemned the killings in the soccer stadium:

According to reports we have received from Mogadishu, troops inside the stadium fired shots into the air after a crowded soccer match became unruly. The crowd rushed out of the stadium and was fired upon by troops outside. The troops inside then also opened fire on the crowd. President Siad Barre was inside the stadium and he had delivered a speech just before the incident occurred.

We deplore the continuing violence in Somalia. We call upon the government, as we have done in the past, to establish control over its own forces and to take political steps necessary for national reconciliation.

In August, the State Department publicly protested, both in Mogadishu and in Washington, a massacre in Berbera in which the army shot dead 17 Isaak men and critically wounded two others in front of a restaurant in the center of town on August 16, in retaliation for attacks against government personnel and property by the SNM.

The Work of Africa Watch

In January 1990, Africa Watch published a 268-page report on the war in northern Somalia, which had broken out in May 1988. By the beginning of 1990, an estimated 50,000 to 60,000 had been killed and nearly half a million had fled the country, the majority for Ethiopia. Entitled A Government at War with Its Own People: Testimonies About the Killings and the Conflict in the North, the report was based on research and interviews with newly arrived refugees in August 1989 in Djibouti and from June to October 1989 in England and Wales, where a sizeable refugee community had also gathered. The report provided eyewitness accounts of the human rights abuses that preceded the outbreak of war, and examined the conduct of the war by government forces and SNM insurgents.

In July 1990, Africa Watch issued a press release on the massacre of over 100 unarmed civilians at a soccer stadium in Mogadishu. In August, Africa Watch issued a press release drawing attention to the August 16 massacre in Berbera. A 30-page newsletter published in September exposed the superficiality of the government's "improvements" and documented a wide range of recent government abuses, including several massacres of unarmed civilians and the detention and torture of political opponents.

Africa Watch published an article in the November edition of Africa Events underlining the limitations of the government's campaign of reform. An article in The Christian Science Monitor, also in November, drew attention to the plight of Somali refugees in Ethiopia and the displaced within Somalia, particularly the deliberate denial of food by the government to the displaced. And an article by Africa Watch in December, describing the acceleration and abuses of the war in Mogadishu, appeared in The Guardian of London.
SOUTH AFRICA

Human Rights Developments

The year 1990 was one of both celebration and tragedy in South Africa. The world rejoiced over State President F.W. de Klerk's February 2 speech, in which he lifted the ban on the African National Congress (ANC) and other opposition groups and promised to free Nelson Mandela, halt executions, release a number of political prisoners, allow some exiles to return home and partially end emergency restrictions. By year's end, the national state of emergency had been lifted and the Separate Amenities Act of 1953, which had required local officials to reserve municipally owned property exclusively for whites, had been repealed.

Detracting from the optimism generated by these promising developments were the brutal killings in the second half of 1990 of more than 1,000 South Africans in the townships around Johannesburg. The so-called "black on black" violence spread in late July from Natal province, where it has claimed the lives of at least 5,000 over the past four years, to the Transvaal, where it continued throughout the rest of the year. Despite abundant evidence of official complicity, South African leaders denied allegations that government security forces were implicated in the killings, while admitting that the violence might be the work of a "hidden hand" or "third force."

The repression in South Africa in 1990 was in part a backlash by the security forces against the expectations of blacks who, in the wake of President de Klerk's promises and Mandela's release, demanded an end to apartheid. Members of the security forces did not change their tactics according to the new attitudes of the national government, and they continued to persecute blacks as before, particularly members of the ANC and other opposition groups. Not a day after de Klerk's February 2 speech, which included a promise to end the season of violence, police used force to suppress jubilant demonstrations by blacks. On March 26, initial talks between the government and the ANC were called off after 17 black protesters were killed by police in Sebokeng, south of Johannesburg.

The momentous changes of February sent shock waves throughout South Africa's "independent" homelands, whose residents suffer the extremes of poverty and corruption and must bear the additional burden of the loss of their South African citizenship. On March 4, a brutal surge of repression in the Ciskei ended in a coup, removing the tyrannical regime of President-for-Life Lennox Sebe. Three days later, in Bophuthatswana, at least six demonstrators were killed and hundreds injured when police fired on a peaceful protest by some 150,000 residents, whose demands included reincorporation into South Africa. A state of emergency has been in effect in Bophuthatswana since March and is used to persecute members of the opposition. On April 5, leadership of Venda was "handed over" by President Frank Ravele to Col. Gabriel Ramushwana. Protests against official abuses, including some 19 killings in February and March and numerous detentions, had brought Venda to a virtual standstill prior to the coup.

The South African government denied any responsibility for what appears to be the self-destruction of the homeland system and blamed it instead on "inter-tribal" conflicts. In May, the government announced that it would no longer pursue independence for the six "self-governing" homelands, and that it would not incorporate any more land into the homelands without the approval of the legal residents of that land. Only two months later, however, the Ciskei leader, Brig. Oupa Gqozo, claimed that South Africa had agreed to incorporate nearly 100,000 acres of land into the Ciskei.

Several judicial inquiries were undertaken in 1990. The most publicized, and ultimately the most disappointing, was the Harms Commission. Justice Minister Kobie Coetsee announced the establishment of the Harms Commission on January 31, in response to outcries by South African and international human rights groups over allegations by three former police officers in October and November 1989 that they had been members of an officially authorized and funded police death squad. In early 1990, another death squad, the Civil Cooperation Bureau (CCB), sponsored by the South African Defense Forces, was revealed. The allegations presented the de Klerk government with one of its first major domestic crises and nearly provoked the dismissal of the Defense Minister, Gen. Magnus Malan.

Unfortunately, the Harms Commission was seriously flawed in both design and practice. At the outset, Justice Harms announced that he would limit the inquiry to acts committed within the borders of South Africa, even though many anti-apartheid activists had been assassinated on foreign soil. Government witnesses, some of whom showed up to testify in wigs and other disguises, were not required to produce pertinent documents. The CCB was disbanded in August, but no prosecutions resulted. The Harms Commission report, which was released in November, failed to name any special units of the army or police, let alone any individual officers, as participants in the death squads. The report was denounced by opposition groups as a whitewash.

On the other hand, the Goldstone Commission, which investigated the Sebokeng massacre in March, found that the riot police had used force which was "quite immoderate and disproportionate to any lawful object sought to be attained." Nearly half of the 281 people killed by gunfire had been shot from behind.24 Although the commission recommended prosecution of several members of the riot police, there was no public indication that prosecutions had begun by the end of 1990.

In Natal, which has been devastated by violence for several years, 50 died in the three days immediately following Mandela's release. On April 2, President de Klerk announced that he would send more police and army troops to the area, seemingly an ineffective solution in light of repeated claims by human rights groups that security forces have exacerbated and prolonged the bloodshed. De Klerk excluded Natal when he ended the national State of Emergency in June, but finally lifted the emergency there in October.

Police abuses are likely to continue throughout the country because the police retain wide powers, including the ability to detain suspects indefinitely for interrogation under Section 29 of the Internal Security Act of 1982. Max Coleman of the Detainees' Parents Support Committee was quoted as saying that, from January to late November 1990, some 1,600 had been detained in South Africa -- double the number detained in 1989. Reports of torture and deaths in detention continue. According to Coleman, three blacks died in detention in South Africa in 1990.25

In July, Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, leader of the KwaZulu homeland that is scattered throughout Natal, announced that his Inkatha cultural movement had become a national political party. The war in Natal soon spread to the townships around Johannesburg, where it has pitted predominantly pro-Inkatha inhabitants of hostels against predominantly pro-ANC township residents. The hostel dwellers, whose legal residences are in KwaZulu, have been forced to come without their families to seek work in the townships. The horrible living conditions of the hostels provide a prime breeding ground for violence

The first incident occurred after a July 22 Inkatha rally in Sebokeng turned violent, killing 24. The violence escalated rapidly in August and September. In response, on September 15, the South African government initiated Operation Iron Fist, which called for curfews, the arming of police vehicles with machine guns, the use of aerial spray dyes, and razor-wire barricades to encircle hostels and squatter camps. Twenty-seven townships were placed under emergency rule. On September 19, amid accusations that the security forces were contributing to the violence, President de Klerk ordered the formation of "special investigative units" to examine allegations of police misconduct in the township violence. Mandela was among those who said that the matter was too serious to be treated as an internal police matter, and called instead for an independent inquiry, which the government has so far refused to allow. By year's end, the Transvaal township violence had claimed over 1,000 lives. Emergency rule was lifted, but increased fighting in December resulted in the reimposition of emergency rule in four townships.

US Policy

US policy toward South Africa followed the trend set during President Bush's first year in office. That policy differed markedly from the "constructive engagement" of former President Reagan and former Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Chester Crocker, in that Bush administration officials were more vocal in their criticism of the South African government and were usually more careful to explain the uneven nature of many government reforms.

For example, after President de Klerk's announcement in June of the partial lifting of the State of Emergency, the Bush administration stated:

We welcome the announcement of the ending of the State of Emergency in South Africa except in Natal. This is another significant step toward creating a climate conducive to negotiation that will lead to a democratic, non-racial, South Africa....

Much work remains to be done by all sides. The issue of the remaining political prisoners needs to be resolved. The continuing climate of violence and intimidation must be transformed, and the senseless killings in Natal Province must end.

The administration also maintained a firm and clear voice on sanctions. In reaction to President de Klerk's February 2 speech, President Bush said that he had been convinced of the need "to review all policy."26 Shortly thereafter, President Bush invited both President de Klerk and Nelson Mandela to visit the White House. However, the administration was quick to state that it remained bound by the conditions of the 1986 Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act, and could not yet lift or modify sanctions.

During the first official visit to Washington by a South African President since 1945, Bush gave an unprecedented blessing to de Klerk by pronouncing South Africa's path to reform "irreversible." However, in keeping with the administration's commitment to maintain sanctions, any discussion of the sanctions question was assiduously avoided. Before meeting with Bush, de Klerk had said that he did not come with a "shopping list" of steps that he expected the US administration to take; after their meeting, both said that the sanctions were not mentioned. Following the meeting, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Herman Cohen made clear that the administration would not lift sanctions until further steps were taken:

The two remainaing obstacles are the relase of prisoners and the lifting of the state of emergency in Natal. President de Klerk indicated that the prisoner release procedures are now in train but he did not indicate when he expected those procedures to be completed. The state of emergency he did not comment on.

(Although the state of emergency was later lifted, all prisoners had not been released by year's end, so sanctions continued.)

In one of the few areas of difference with the Bush administration in 1989, Africa Watch criticized it for its silence on the fragmentation of South Africa into separate bantustans, and noted that some of the most serious violations of human rights occurred in the "independent" homelands of Ciskei and Bophuthatswana. On March 9, 1990, following a military coup and the imposition of a state of emergency in Ciskei and the killing of seven protestors in Bophuthatswana, the administration broke this silence and issued one of its first public statements condemning the South African government's homelands policy. Commenting on the violence in Bophuthatswana, the State Department said:

[T]he United States does not recognize the so-called `independent homelands' established by the South African government. We are concerned by the serious violence which has erupted in at least two of the homelands. People in these areas are being denied the rights which are due to all South Africans. We regard compulsory assignment of blacks to these homelands and efforts to deprive them of their South African citizenship as fundamental violations of human rights.

This was an important advance in US policy.

However, there was one major human rights development in South Africa that completely escaped the administration's public commentary: allegations regarding the role of the security forces in fanning the violence between supporters of Inkatha and the ANC. To the knowledge of Africa Watch, no public statement by the US government has ever directly commented on the role of the South African security forces in this violence. Instead, to the extent that the administration has focused on the issue of fighting between Inkatha and the ANC at all, it has treated the issue as a domestic political problem. For example, in April, the State Department simply urged that "all parties put political considerations aside and work together to develop a strategy for ending the violence." Similarly, in the chapter on South Africa in the Country Report on Human Rights Practices for 1989, issued in February 1990, the State Department accurately noted the devastating impact that this violence has had upon South Africa, but failed to comment upon the role of the security forces.

The lack of US comment on the South African security-force role in this violence was highlighted by events before and during President de Klerk's visit to Washington. In the week prior to his arrival, the death toll in just the townships around Johannesburg had reached over 750, and reports in both the US and South African press commented on the alleged involvement of South African security forces in fanning the violence. However, according to Assistant Secretary Cohen, when President Bush met President de Klerk, he restricted his remarks on this issue to expressing "concern about the growing violence in South Africa" and urged de Klerk to "fulfill his responsibilities to maintain law and order."27 While this strong statement of concern was to be applauded, it would have been more effective if President Bush had shown some recognition of the role of the government forces in promoting the violence.

The Work of Africa Watch

In 1990, Africa Watch continued to concentrate attention on the neglected issue of human rights abuse in the homelands. A newsletter in January on abuses related to forced incorporation of land into Ciskei highlighted the suffering endured by one community whose homes were demolished in reprisal for their resistance to incorporation. Africa Watch published an article in the October issue of Africa Events which traced the roots of the recent township violence to homeland policies and discussed current human rights issues in the homelands.

Throughout the year, Africa Watch contacted the South African authorities about particular cases of detention in the homelands, including Venda human rights activist Magwedzha Phanuel Mphaphuli, detained on March 22 in the city of Louis Trichardt; Glen Thomas, a field worker with the Grahamstown Rural Committee, a human rights group which works with the rural people in the Ciskei and the northern border region, who was arrested in May; and Dr. Thabo Rangaka, Nomvula Hlongwane, Mangel Panchia and others arrested on November 12 and 13 for their involvement with MAREF -- the Mafikeng Anti-Repression Forum -- an organization which monitors human rights in Bophuthatswana.

Africa Watch sent messages to Mandela, President de Klerk and South African Ambassador to the United States Piet Koornhof which welcomed Mandela's release, the lifting of the ban on the ANC and other organizations, the decision to suspend executions and the release of several other political prisoners. The messages to the government also urged the complete lifting of the State of Emergency, the repeal of the Population Registration and Group Areas Acts, and the release of all political prisoners.

In early January 1991, Africa Watch will release a full-length report, The Killings in South Africa: The Role of the Security Forces and the Response of the State. Written by an Africa Watch researcher who visited Natal and other areas of South Africa in mid-1990, the report contains dozens of eyewitness accounts of the violence, including descriptions of the role of the security forces in promoting the violence and their failure to respond to the needs of the victims.

24 David Beresford, "Riot police condemned by SA judge," The Guardian (London), September 3, 1990.

25 Christopher Wren, "Despite Changes, South Africa Detentions Remain," New York Times, December 2, 1990.

26 Maureen Dowd, "Bush Would Weigh Easing Sanctions," New York Times, February 3, 1990.

27 White House Readout Following the Visit of President de Klerk with President Bush, September 24, 1990.
SUDAN

Human Rights Developments

The year 1990 was tragic for human rights in Sudan. The prior year had fostered a mixture of hopes and fears, with the first half of the year yielding progress toward peace in the government's seven-year-old civil war in the south against the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA), the mounting of a relief operation (Operation Lifeline) in famine-stricken areas, and extensive efforts to protect constitutionally guaranteed freedoms by such organizations as the Bar Association, the Doctors' Union and the Journalists' Union.

This period of relative optimism ended with a coup d'etat on June 30, 1989, in which the parliamentary government was overthrown by Lt. Gen. Omer al-Bashir, who became head of the ruling Revolutionary Command Council (RCC). After an early period of uncertainty, the true colors of the new government became clear. Immediately after the coup, several hundred politicians, trade unionists, lawyers, journalists and businessmen were detained, and all nonreligious organizations were dissolved. In November and December 1989, the government renewed its war effort, suspended Operation Lifeline, passed the "Popular Defense Act" to legitimize militia forces (which were responsible for gross violations of human rights), and stepped up its assault on the trade-union movement, which was engaged in nonviolent protests against the government, especially its dissolution of trade unions. One prominent unionist, Dr. Mamoun Hussein, was sentenced to death.

The year 1990 dawned in the midst of a crackdown of unprecedented proportions. Several hundred trade-union activists were arrested in December 1989 and January 1990, including the leaders of Sudan's professional associations. Many were taken to unofficial detention centers, known as "ghost houses," and subjected to torture. For a few, the aim of the mistreatment was to obtain information; for the majority, it appears to have been simply to intimidate. Detainees were confined for long periods in dark, cold and wet closets, denied adequate food and medical attention, beaten and lashed, given electric shocks, doused with icy water, subjected to mock executions, prevented from praying and denied visits from families and lawyers. After some weeks of this treatment, most were transferred to regular prisons, in which torture was not practiced, but detainees were allowed only infrequent visits and denied medical attention. Seventy political detainees were transferred to Shalla Prison in Darfur, where conditions are very poor. Few detainees have been charged.

Detainees have occasionally been released, and Dr. Mamoun was reprieved. However, there have been continual rounds of new arrests, and torture continues. In April, a young doctor, Ali Fadl, died under torture. Two businessmen have been hanged after being convicted of currency offenses.

After coup attempts in March, April and September 1990, many army officers were arrested. In April, twenty-eight senior officers were summarily tried and executed. Ten executions followed the September coup attempt.

Government policy includes strict censorship. Only government-controlled newspapers are permitted to publish, and in August, a journalist was sentenced to 14 years in prison after being convicted by a military tribunal of producing seditious literature.

The government has violated international labor law by dissolving all trade unions, confiscating their assets and replacing them with government-appointed "steering committees." Trade unionists involved in strikes have been accused of "waging war against the state" (a crime that carries the death penalty) and many have been imprisoned.

While the government has made no clear statement on the issue, the imposition of a version of Islamic Law is certainly one of its central aims. The version proposed for Sudan discriminates against non-Muslims and women, includes crimes such as apostasy (which many devout Muslims find alarming), and mandates cruel, inhuman and degrading punishments such as amputation and lashing. Justice is currently meted out in special "Revolutionary Security Courts," staffed by active-duty military officers, in which no defense counsel is allowed, rules for admitting evidence are arbitrary, and rights of appeal are limited. The Bar Association has been dissolved and many prominent lawyers have been detained or placed under restrictive orders.

In late December 1989, members of an Arab militia armed by the previous government and legitimized by the Popular Defense Act committed a massacre at el Jebelein. About 1000 members of the (non-Muslim, southern) Shilluk tribe, including women and children, were burned or shot to death. The government response to this atrocity has been to deny any measure of responsibility for what it described as "tribal fighting." An official inquiry was launched, but its findings, if any, have not been made public.

Killings by militia have also continued in the Nuba Mountains of southern Kordofan and in Darfur, where local conflicts were exacerbated by repeated invasions by the Chadian army to fight rebel Chadian forces stationed in the region and supported by Libya. In early December 1990, these forces overthrew the Chadian government of Hissan Habré.

January and February 1990 witnessed an escalation of the war in the south, especially around Juba, the southern regional capital, home to about 200,000 civilians. There were reports of atrocities by both sides, including indiscriminate shelling of Juba by the SPLA. The SPLA also prevented all relief flights from reaching the town for several weeks.

In March, an agreement was signed launching Operation Lifeline II, to provide humanitarian relief to civilians on all sides of the conflict. While the relief program succeeded in delivering most of the aid promised, humanitarian organizations met numerous obstacles mounted by both sides. The SPLA refused to allow trains and barges to move for many months, and when it finally relented, pro-government militias then prevented the trains from traveling. In June and repeatedly in September, government planes bombed relief centers in the south.

Government food policy in the north has been negligent and irresponsible. Through a set of misguided policies, including the export of the entire national grain reserve, the government succeeded in turning a food shortage into a severe famine, which was intensifying at the end of 1990. The purpose of the sale appears to have been to acquire hard currency for the purchase of weapons needed to pursue the war. Abuses such as the burning of shantytowns and the forced removal of residents have served to exacerbate the suffering of underprivileged groups. The government has refused to recognize the famine or to appeal for significant amounts of assistance. It has also systematically restricted the work of humanitarian organizations, except those associated with Muslim fundamentalism. Many tens of thousands of Sudanese citizens, mainly children, will die on account of this famine.

Food shortages led to civil unrest in several towns, including a strike by railway workers in Atbara in November, to which the government responded with harsh measures, including lethal force against protesters.

US Policy

During 1990, the Bush administration became increasingly disenchanted with the Sudanese government, and began to show a corresponding readiness to criticize its abuses. This criticism became especially vociferous after al-Bashir declared his support for the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. This changing attitude follows 15 years in which successive US administrations have been extremely reluctant to criticize the Sudanese human rights record. For example, while the new US ambassador, James Cheek, strongly protested the death sentence of Dr. Mamoun in December 1989, the US said nothing in response to the massacre at el Jebelein the same month.

This policy of rare public comment in the face of Sudanese abuses continued through the first half of 1990. In February, USAID began withdrawing all nonemergency assistance to Sudan, but that move was required by US laws mandating an end to most US aid when an elected government is overthrown in a coup d'etat, as well as when a government is in arrears on its international debt. In March, the US government played a prominent role in pushing for the establishment of Operation Lifeline II, but declined to criticize the government's human rights record at the time, apparently on the grounds that such criticism might endanger the agreement for the relief operation. Human Rights Watch holds that, however laudable a humanitarian-relief effort, fear of jeopardizing its existence -- in effect, giving in to perceived or actual government blackmail -- is no grounds for remaining silent about serious human rights violations.

On April 26, following the first round of executions of army officers, State Department spokesman Richard Boucher was questioned by a journalist about whether there had actually been a coup attempt or people had simply been "rounded up and shot." His response, indicative of the US reluctance at the time to criticize Sudan on human rights grounds, was: "I think that's something for a good reporter to find out."

Following the al-Bashir government's declared support for the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, the Bush administration began criticizing Sudan's human rights record publicly. In September, when the government bombed relief centers in the south and impounded food in the north, the administration publicly condemned the bombing, delayed a shipment of concessionary-sale wheat destined for Sudan, and diverted funds consigned for relief in government-held areas to help finance UNICEF operations in rebel-held areas. These actions had the immediate effect of forcing changes in Sudanese government policy. Contemplating Sudan's enormous needs for relief in the face of nationwide famine, the Bush administration also attached strict conditions to the delivery of such relief to ensure that it was not used for political purposes, including requirements that it reach the needy and that humanitarian organizations not be obstructed in carrying out their work.

Similarly, the administration delivered strong criticism of Sudanese government abuses in testimony before Congress in October and November. For example, on November 27, testifying before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee's Subcommittee on Africa, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Herman Cohen reported:

The human rights situation has not improved in any significant way. Sudanese citizens are still subject to detention without charge by the security forces, and we estimate there are currently two to three hundred political prisoners. Some prisoners are occasionally released, but new ones replace them. Perhaps the only hopeful sign is that physical and psychological abuse of detainees has decresed. Reports of torture -- common earlier in the year -- are now rare. But many detainees are still held in substandard conditions in isolated areas and do not receive proper medical care.

We have told the government of Sudan numerous times that the human rights situation there is unacceptable and must be improved. In particular, we have said that all detainees should be either charged or released, that they should be treated humanely, and that if charged they should receive prompt and fair judicial process.

Africa Watch would have wished that such outspoken criticism might have been delivered throughout the year.

The Work of Africa Watch

In March, Africa Watch published a report entitled Denying "The Honor of Living" -- Sudan: A Human Rights Disaster. The report addressed not only the actions of the current government in suppressing dissent and dismantling the institutions of civil society, but also the war policies of previous governments and abuses by the SPLA. There were also chapters on the creation of famine in southern Sudan and the resurgence of slavery.

Africa Watch has also published 14 newsletters on Sudan, six in 1990. These have covered:

o The political detention of lawyers, academics, doctors, trade unionists, journalists, writers and poets.

o The massacre at el Jebelein.

o The government's attempts to reduce the status of women in Sudan, under the banner of Islamic propriety, by restricting their access to employment and their right to travel.

o The civil conflict in Darfur.

o The summary trial and execution of army officers, and the death under torture of Dr. Ali Fadl.

o Conditions in Shalla prison.

o Government censorship and control of information, and actions against journalists and academics.

o Government actions that have produced nationwide famine and crippled the mechanisms for responding to the acute humanitarian need.

o Torture in detention facilities, and the denial of medical care in prisons.

o The case of Mahjoub Sherif, "the People's Poet," who is imprisoned without trial.

Twice in 1990, Africa Watch testified before Congress on human rights in Sudan. On March 15, it testified before a joint hearing of the House Subcommittee on African Affairs and the Select Committee on Hunger. On November 27, it testified on human rights and famine in Sudan before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee's Subcommittee on Africa.

On June 1, Africa Watch presented a petition on violations of labor rights in Sudan to the United States Trade Representative (USTR). The petition detailed abuses of workers' rights under the Bashir government and sought to have Sudan removed from the list of countries which receive trade benefits under the Generalized System of Preferences, as required by US law. On September 28 and 29, Africa Watch testified before the USTR on labor rights violations in Sudan. The decision of the USTR is expected by April 1, 1991.
ZIMBABWE

Human Rights Developments

The year 1990 was one of significant change in Zimbabwe. A 25-year-old state of emergency was lifted, and with it the government's power to detain without charge. The few remaining detainees were released, as were some 200 prisoners convicted of politically related offenses. After much debate, the ruling party decided not to proceed toward the creation of a one-party state.

On the negative side, however, general elections early in the year were accompanied by intimidation of opposition parties and manipulation of the media. In late 1990, the government sought to reduce the independence of the University of Zimbabwe and to amend the Constitution to restrict certain rights.

In July, Minister of Home Affairs Moven Mahachi announced that the government would not seek parliamentary renewal of the state of emergency when it expired that month. The emergency had been imposed in 1965, shortly before the Rhodesian government made its Unilateral Declaration of Independence from Britain, and was retained after Zimbabwe gained lawful independence in 1980. It gave the government a variety of special powers, notably the right to detain indefinitely without charge or trial on grounds of national security. This power was used extensively by the Rhodesian government, but also at certain times by the Zimbabwean government. At one point, in 1985, some 200 detainees were believed held under emergency powers. By 1990, the number detained had dwindled to a handful of individuals alleged to have carried out acts of sabotage on behalf of South Africa. Their detention orders lapsed when the emergency ended.

Local and international human rights groups had called for the emergency to be lifted. They had also requested the release of more than 200 prisoners serving sentences for politically motivated security offenses. In July, the government announced an amnesty for these prisoners. Later, a South African woman sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment for spying was released after completing only one quarter of her sentence. She had been tortured before her trial and Africa Watch had called for her release because of the unusually cruel and degrading treatment that she had already suffered.

Under the terms of Zimbabwe's independence, certain "entrenched clauses" of the Constitution would not become open to amendment by a two-thirds majority in Parliament until the tenth anniversary of independence in April 1990. For some time, President Robert Mugabe had made clear that once he had the constitutional freedom to introduce such a measure, he wished Zimbabwe to become a one-party state. However, in the last two years, public opposition to such a move has grown. In August and September, the Politburo and the Central Committee of the ruling party, the Zimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF), met to consider the issue. Both bodies overwhelmingly rejected the one-party system, removing it from the political agenda for the foreseeable future. President Mugabe won considerable praise for allowing free discussion of the issue within the party and for then abiding gracefully by the majority decision.

However, a continuing bone of contention is the operation of the Ministry of Political Affairs, which is in effect a subsidy from the taxpayer to the ruling party. The use of government money to fund one of the contestants must cast doubt on the result of the general election held in March, which was said to have yielded a showing of nearly 80 per cent for ZANU-PF. Other causes for concern were the blatant partisanship of the government-owned daily newspapers, radio and television, as well as the use of administrative measures to prevent the main opposition party, the Zimbabwe Unity Movement (ZUM), from holding meetings in the months leading to the election. ZUM members were subject to harassment, often in the form of short-term detention without charge. Only days before the election, a leading ZUM candidate in Gweru was shot, apparently by security officials, and his election agent was detained and beaten. The harassment continued in the aftermath of the election, with some ZUM organizers detained and one parliamentary candidate arrested on a trumped-up charge of illegally possessing a gun. The charge was later dropped and the persecution of ZUM members eased with the lifting of the state of emergency.

In October, the government introduced legislation to restrict the independence of the University of Zimbabwe and to increase the disciplinary powers of the university administration. The Minister of Higher Education is to have a hand in the selection of a majority of the members of the governing body, and important guarantees of independence are removed from both staff and student disciplinary committees. In late 1989, the university was closed for some weeks after riot police came on campus to break up a student seminar on government corruption.

In December 1990, the Parliament passed government-proposed amendments to the Declaration of Rights, making whipping of juveniles a constitutionally authorized punishment and declaring hanging a legitimate way of carrying out the death penalty. In 1989, the Supreme Court had found that whipping of minors was in violation of the section of the Constitution outlawing inhuman or degrading punishment. The government responded at the time by removing all corporal punishment from the statute book but now seeks to restore it. The Supreme Court had asked for argument on the issue of whether hanging contravened the same constitutional provision. The amendment is clearly designed to pre-empt its ruling.

The significance of these amendments goes beyond the question of whipping and the death penalty. It raises the prospect that the government may attempt to amend the Constitution whenever it faces an adverse Supreme Court ruling, effectively undermining the Declaration of Rights. At the end of 1990, a confrontation between the government and the Supreme Court was expected.

US Policy

The Bush administration describes its aim as "helping to maintain a democratic, racially harmonious, and economically successful Zimbabwe."28 However, apart from the largely accurate chapter in the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices, Africa Watch is aware of only one public statement on human rights in Zimbabwe issued by the administration in 1990. In that statement, a State Department spokeswoman, questioned on the conduct of the elections, described them as "free and fair, despite acts of intimidation and violence during the campaign."29 In Africa Watch's view, this underestimated the significance of harassment of ZUM for many months before the election, as well as the importance of the government's control of the principal mass media and the Ministry of Political Affairs. The State Department said nothing on a variety of other topics that merited comment, for example, the (ultimately unsuccessful) campaign for the creation of a one-party state.

The embassy in Harare has been quietly active in promoting human rights issues, consulting local human rights groups in the preparation of its own reports and distributing material from international bodies. In addition, the State Department's country reports on human rights practices in Zimbabwe in recent years have been accurate and balanced.

The Work of Africa Watch

In late 1989, Africa Watch published a report on Zimbabwe, which was widely read within the country. In the course of 1990, a number of the recommendations in the report were implemented, notably the lifting of the state of emergency and the release of political prisoners. In January and November 1990, an Africa Watch researcher paid two brief visits to the country.

In March, Africa Watch submitted a memorandum to President Mugabe detailing harassment of opposition parties and making recommendations for measures to ensure free and fair elections.

A newsletter published in April detailed violence against opposition members during the election campaign and the later arrest of some ZUM organizers. Their subsequent release was also reported. Another newsletter in November detailed the government's proposals on the university and the Constitution.

28 US Department of State and Defense Security Agency, Congressional Presentation for Security Assistance Programs, FY 1991.

29 State Department Regular Briefing, April 2, 1990.
AMERICAS WATCH OVERVIEW

The trend in Latin America from dictatorial rule to elected government continued in 1990. On March 11, a freely elected government was inaugurated in Chile after more than 16 years of military dictatorship. On December 16, Haiti had its first truly free and fair election ever. And some steps toward fair elections were achieved in Guyana, as the government pledged to institute meaningful reform for elections to be held in 1991. However, a reversal of the trend took place in Suriname in late December, when the military dislodged the elected government that it had allowed to take office two-and-a-half years before. And some countries in the region have made little or no progress toward free and fair elections, notably Mexico and Cuba.

Even with this healthy trend toward respect for the will of the people, it would be difficult to say that elections have brought about an end to human rights violations. The largest number of extrajudicial executions and disappearances in the hands of government agents are now taking place in Colombia and Peru, two countries that are otherwise genuine democracies. In Guatemala and El Salvador, despite regular elections, power continues to reside in the hands of the military, and the pattern of human rights violations persists. In many of the countries ruled by elected governments, violations such as torture of common crime suspects, police brutality and subhuman prison conditions have grown worse in recent years.

The obvious lesson is that elections, even when free and fair, do not by themselves guarantee human rights. Nonetheless, clear progress on human rights has been made in Latin America, and the progress is related to the expansion of democracy. In most countries, there is now a far more open and vigorous debate in the domestic press than under prior dictatorships; there is also more freedom to associate and organize all forms of institutions of civil society. Latin Americans interested in human rights are taking advantage of these openings, and many countries now enjoy the benefits of strong, diverse and creative nongovernmental organizations dedicated to the promotion of fundamental rights.

There is abundant evidence, however, that their work in defense of human rights is still much needed. Democratic governments must be pressed to exercise better control over their armed forces and law-enforcement bodies so that they carry out their duties within the limits established by law. Courts and prosecutors must be prompted to live up to their obligation to protect the rights of all citizens and to ensure that no one is above the law. Parliaments must be pressed to question and examine policies that affect human rights. In addition, international human rights organizations like Americas Watch must continue to exercise moral pressure in support of our colleagues in Latin America, to ensure that governments comply with their international obligations and uphold the rule of law.

Several internal armed conflicts still cause severe loss of life in Latin America -- notably, in Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala and Peru. In varying degrees, the insurgent groups in all of these conflicts commit violations of the laws of war by attacking impermissible targets or putting the civilian population needlessly at risk. In response, armed and security forces conduct counterinsurgency campaigns which involve "dirty war" tactics, such as executions, disappearance and torture.

US troops were directly involved in only one, short-lived conflict: the December 1989 invasion of Panama. An investigation conducted by Americas Watch a few weeks later revealed that the operations conducted by US troops in highly populated areas violated the obligation to minimize harm to civilians.

Civilian governments have shown themselves unwilling or unable to control the counterinsurgency operations of their armed and police forces. In addition, governments all too frequently resort to states of emergency that limit civil liberties in a manner that are disproportionate to the actual threat to peace. In recent years, there has been increased awareness of the need to demand from all forces respect for the standards of international humanitarian law. Local human rights groups in Colombia, El Salvador and Peru have led demands to "humanize" their country's war; they also increasingly monitor and report deviations from those standards by both sides to the conflict. In so doing, domestic groups must overcome serious obstacles to researching these violations, since they occur in remote and highly dangerous places. At the same time, their insistence on performing this task has not only resulted in higher legitimacy for human rights work, but also contributes to a reduction in violations by both sides.

There was also increased activity in the search for peace in several internal conflicts. Early in 1990, the armed conflict in Nicaragua, with rebels armed and sponsored by the US government, finally came to an end. The intervention of the United Nations and the Organization of American States was valuable in ensuring compliance with the commitments leading to the end of that war. In turn, they prompted promising initiatives by the United Nations to search for peace in the conflicts in El Salvador and Guatemala. At year's end, the peace talks on El Salvador were offering hope for substantial progress. Also in 1990, the Colombian government successfully finalized protracted and difficult peace discussions with one major guerrilla organization and, in the wake of that agreement, talks began with three other groups. Although the prospects for peace with the two largest rebel organizations remain in doubt, the search for a negotiated peace in Colombia has taken hold. In Peru, on the other hand, there was no sign that the ten-year-old war with Sendero Luminoso could be ended through negotiations.

Peace talks in all of these countries have an important effect on human rights. In the first place, the mere fact of the talks, and the prospect of peace, make all parties show greater respect on the battlefield for the laws of war, even if no ceasefire is immediately attained. Moreover, respect for human rights often becomes an important issue in the talks, improving the human rights climate and sometimes resulting in agreements to allow verification by impartial sources.

Unfortunately, the need for peace also sometimes has a negative effect: the impulse for reconciliation results in sweeping amnesty laws that often cover egregious crimes committed by both parties. In 1990, this occurred when the Nicaraguan Assembly passed an amnesty law between the February election and the April inauguration of Violeta Chamorro. Similar amnesties, under the pretext of peace accords, were enacted in earlier years in El Salvador and Guatemala. In each case, Americas Watch protested vigorously, because the amnesty established impunity for serious crimes by both sides to the conflict as a matter of law.

How to address the legacy of massive violations of the recent past continues to be the most difficult problem confronting the emerging democracies in the region. Human rights organizations have led the struggle for full accountability to expose the truth of what happened and to bring gross abusers to justice. Argentina had taken the lead in this effort, but on December 29, 1990, President Carlos Menem completed the retreat from truth and justice by pardoning the few remaining generals who were still serving sentences for their role in the "dirty war." Chile started on its own road of accountability in 1990, when President Patricio Aylwin created a Commission on Truth and Reconciliation, whose report will be published in 1991. Impunity for past abuses in Haiti, long a smoldering issue, instantly came to the forefront when the December 16 elections were won by a candidate committed to punish the crimes of the Duvalier dictatorship and subsequent military governments.

Americas Watch continued to focus on accountability for human rights violations, in accordance with the policy positions adopted by Human Rights Watch on the matter. Throughout the year, we criticized the Bush administration's refusal to lend any support to those struggling to uphold the principle that egregious crimes should be punished. Silence on truth and justice issues, which was the norm throughout the Reagan years, has largely continued under the Bush administration. While in isolated cases the administration urged prosection of those responsible for particular abuses -- in Haiti, Guatemala and El Salvador -- these have been rare exceptions to a policy of not expressing support for efforts to redress abuses. Nor has the administration protested when pressure from those responsible for abuses led to the enactment of amnesties. Although in the past the White House has expressed strong support for democracy in countries where it has been threatened, in the most recent episodes of military threats to civilian governments (Argentina and Chile, both in December 1990), the Bush administration minimized the dangers to democracy and downplayed the seriousness of military challenges. This is a serious mistake. Military pressures on civilian governments and, more important, the military's perception that it is unaccountable to anyone remain the most serious threats to democracy in Latin America.

In 1990, Americas Watch devoted considerable efforts to documenting violence against peasants and advocates on their behalf in the context of land disputes, a problem which affects several countries in the region. Americas Watch takes no position on who should have title to lands in dispute; instead, we concentrate on the violence directed against those who try to defend their claims, when that violence is supported or tolerated by agents of the state. Our report on Mexico, published in June, included some information on rural violence in that country. In mid-year, we sent a team that spent several weeks in different regions of Brazil, and in August we conducted a mission in Paraguay. The reports from those missions will be published in early 1991, and we hope that they will increase attention to the serious problem of violence in rural areas.

A major new source of human rights violations is the fight to stop drug trafficking in several countries. In its much-publicized drive to interdict the flow of drugs to the United States, the Bush administration has provided substantial amounts in military aid to Colombia, Peru, Bolivia and Mexico, and has tried to engage other countries in an effort to use military forces to destroy crops, intercept shipments and disrupt trafficking networks. Disappearances, torture, murder of prisoners and even acts of indiscriminate fire in the course of such operations have proliferated in Colombia and Mexico, and they are mostly attributed to special police forces created and funded with US support.

In addition, drug-interdiction policies, as planned by the Bush administration, are designed to involve the armed forces of each country in the "war" against drug trafficking. Initially reluctant to accept such a role, the armed forces of several countries are now ready to accept the fresh US aid, so long as they can put it to use for their traditionally higher priority of fighting local insurgencies. In an effort to involve the military in the drug war, US diplomats and advisors have been willing to tolerate this diversion of funds. As a result, US weapons and training are increasingly becoming entangled in the conduct of "dirty" counterinsurgency wars.

Initially, the US Congress seemed to go along with and even encourage the administration to pump resources into the "war on drugs," as a means of limiting the flow of drugs to an avid US market. By mid-1990, however, many voices in Congress were raised to question the human rights implications of a policy that emphasizes military solutions to law enforcement problems. In November, Congress enacted several conditions on aid under the International Narcotics Control Act of 1991 which, if taken seriously, could go a long way toward correcting some of the most serious abuses in the Andean countries. However, no similar interest has been shown with regard to Mexico, and the Bush administration strictly refuses to offer any criticism of the Salinas government, either on drug-interdiction policy or any other human rights-related matter, lest that criticism interfere with the development of a major free-trade agreement.

Americas Watch continued throughout 1990 to devote attention to efforts to use the regional mechanisms for human-rights protection established by the Organization of American States (OAS). These efforts are an outgrowth of our participation on behalf of relatives of the disappeared in the first adversarial case, against Honduras, heard by the OAS Inter-American Court of Human Rights. In August 1990, the Court issued another ruling in favor of the victims, when it ordered Honduras to pay interest for a one-year delay in paying damages and to adjust the payment to reflect two devaluations of the Honduran currency. The Honduran government has made partial payment of the amounts owed, and we continue to represent the families in this matter. In October, the OAS Inter-American Commission on Human Rights decided to submit a new case to the Court in which Americas Watch is co-counsel along with a Peruvian human rights organization. The case, which will be litigated in 1991, involves the disappearance of inmates from the Peruvian island prison of El Frontón, in the course of the bloody riots of June 1986.

Americas Watch is processing more than forty similar cases before the Commission, with the intent of taking some of them to the Court. In all cases we act in conjunction with local human rights groups. The cases present a variety of important issues of fact and the potential to advance significant principles of international law. To serve these needs better, we have entered into an agreement with several human rights groups in Latin America to provide free legal services to victims of abuse who wish to use these protection mechanisms. The program got under way in October 1990.

Americas Watch took several new steps in 1990. In addition to continuing to try to cover the region in a balanced and comprehensive manner, without abandoning our concerns in those countries where we have long been involved, we published our first report on Mexico in June, receiving prominent coverage and attention to our concerns, not only from the Mexican press and public but also from the government. Thereafter, we continued to monitor conditions in the country, and in 1991 we will publish a report on prison conditions and a major update to our first report. In addition, Americas Watch strengthened its contacts and sources on Venezuela -- a country on which we have not yet reported -- and toward the end of the year we contributed to a mission by the Argentine Team for Forensic Anthropology to conduct exhumations of victims of repression during the civil disturbances in Caracas at the beginning of the term of President Carlos Andrés Pérez. We expect to be able to publish our first reports on Venezuela, as well as on Bolivia, in 1991.

ARGENTINA

Human Rights Developments

Official impunity for gross abuses continued to be the leading human rights issue in Argentina. In October 1989, President Carlos Saúl Menem pardoned most military officers who still faced prosecution for violations of human rights in the late 1970s. However, yielding to international and domestic outrage, he exempted the seven men who had been convicted by Argentine courts. They include the five former commanders of the armed forces, among them former Presidents Jorge Videla and Roberto Viola, and the former Police Chiefs of Buenos Aires Province, Gens. Ramón Camps and Pablo O. Ricchieri. Following the initial pardon, President Menem frequently promised to pardon these remaining officers before the end of 1990. On December 29, despite extensive public opposition, he finally pardoned and released all of them, including Carlos Guillermo Suárez Mason, who had been extradicted from the United States to stand trial for his crimes as chief of the Buenos Aires army garrison.

Americas Watch has criticized the presidential pardon of those accused of crimes against humanity during the so-called "dirty war," just as it criticized two laws enacted under former President Raul Alfonsín, known as Punto Final (full stop) and Obediencía Debida (due obedience), which had the effect of limiting prosecutions for these crimes. Such laws sanction impunity, undermine democratic institutions, especially the judiciary, and do a disservice to the victims of abuses. They also violate the UN Convention Against Torture, signed and ratified by Argentina, which makes punishment of torture obligatory.1 That opponents of the military government were pardoned for their politically motivated common crimes does not, in our opinion, affect Argentina's obligations to punish those who violate human rights. By the same token, Americas Watch objects to impunity for members of opposition movements who commit such serious crimes as torture, forced disappearance, and kidnapping.

A more recent example of the impunity of Argentine security forces came in the aftermath of the January 23, 1989 attack on a military barracks in the Buenos Aires suburb of La Tablada by members of an armed opposition group. After a fact-finding mission to Argentina, Americas Watch urged President Alfonsín to guarantee a full investigation into the possible execution of five guerrillas after they had surrendered: Díaz, Provenzano, Ramos, Ruiz and Samojedny. Several survivors say that Provenzano and Samojedny surrendered with them and were taken away by military officers. Díaz and Ruiz were last seen on live television as they were being taken away by officers who had captured them. Ramos bore a striking resemblance to a young man shown in a published photograph in the act of surrendering. The burnt bodies of Provenzano and Ramos were identified, and the government claimed that they were killed in combat. The bodies of Díaz, Ruiz and Samojedny remained unaccounted for, although at least six corpses could not be identified.

Americas Watch expressed concern that the judicial investigation into these apparent murders was frozen. In April and May 1989, military officials provided the names of the officers that had taken Díaz and Ruiz into custody upon their surrender. The officers' efforts to exonerate themselves in statements to the court -- they said that they had handed off custody of the two men to a noncommissioned officer who died in combat -- though unconvincing, did not lead to charges against them. Since then, Judge Gustavo Larrambebere, who was conducting the investigation, complained that his court's overcrowded docket impeded his progress in the investigation. Military authorities provided unpersuasive explanations for the lack of clarity as to how these men died and generally refused to cooperate with the judicial inquiry. Nor did the Alfonsín and Menem administrations display any interest in such cooperation.

In the view of Americas Watch, President Menem's insistence during 1990 on expanding the number of Supreme Court judges from five to nine contributed to the destruction of an independent judiciary and thus decreased the likelihood that suspected official abuse of this sort would be scrutinized and punished. In a move designed to have a similar effect, the Secretary of Justice ordered federal prosecutors to abstain from legal challenges to the constitutionality of the presidential pardon of members of the military who were being tried for crimes against humanity. Two prosecutors, Hugo Cañón in Bahía Blanca and Aníbal Ibarra in Buenos Aires, disobeyed those instructions. In Bahía Blanca, the Federal Court agreed with Cañón's position and struck down the pardon. The case was pending before the Supreme Court at year's end. The Secretary of Justice initiated disciplinary proceedings against both prosecutors. Ibarra and another Buenos Aires prosecutor, Mariano Ciafardini, were also subjected to a disciplinary inquiry arising out of their investigation into the whereabouts of children who had disappeared with their parents during the so-called "dirty war." The disciplinary proceedings were pending for over a year at the end of 1990. While Americas Watch recognizes the Secretary of Justice's right to sanction prosecutors for misconduct, these sanctions reflected official efforts to avoid a broad and democratic debate over these important human rights issues.

Following the detention in the United States of Carlos Suárez Mason, former commander of the First Army Zone headquarters in Buenos Aires, Americas Watch represented several victims suing the general for damages under the Alien Torts Claims Act (Title 28, US Code, Section 1350). After his extradition to Argentina in late 1988, a public trial was finally scheduled for August 1990 by the Federal Court of Appeals for Buenos Aires. In July 1990, however, the Supreme Court unexpectedly requested all the case documentation, making it impossible for the Court of Appeals to hold the planned trial. President Menem's year-end pardon mooted the issue. Americas Watch had viewed the Suárez Mason trial as extremely important, given that the former general was the only leader of the "dirty war" whose case had still been pending. The Supreme Court intervention was a further indication of the judiciary's compromised independence and its susceptibility to political manipulation.

On February 26, President Menem promulgated a decree authorizing the intervention of the armed forces in situations of social unrest. Americas Watch viewed the decree as a step backward in the struggle to keep the military in their barracks and to consolidate civilian control over the armed forces. Argentina's recent past shows that allowing the military to undertake internal police duties is an invitation to massive violations of fundamental rights.

In October, Vice President Eduardo Duhalde (acting for the President during a trip abroad by Menem) vetoed an act of Congress which exempted from military service sons and brothers of persons officially recognized as "disappeared" during the last military government. Americas Watch considered the veto to be in open contradiction with the argument that President Menem has used to justify the military pardons -- that they are necessary for "national reconciliation." Far from accomplishing that goal, the veto showed an unwillingness to make amends to the families of the victims of disappearances for their suffering. The vetoed legislation was to be reconsidered by both Houses of Congress during the special session which began in November. Menem endorsed Duhalde's veto by arguing that to uphold the law would be "to establish a privileged status in the Republic of Argentina." This was a surprising statement. Menem obviously believed that exempting young men from the draft whose families had suffered in the hands of those who would be their superiors was an unconscionable "privilege." But he evidently did not think that exempting proven criminals from any punishment created a privileged class of defendants.

Police violence became a front-page issue in the Argentine press in the latter half of 1990. For the most part, the violence took the form of the police shooting suspects in the streets and in poor neighborhoods, torturing suspected criminals in police stations, and covering up their actions. In September, Luis Patti, the deputy police chief of the city of Pilar, 60 miles north of Buenos Aires, was arrested under charges of having tortured two prisoners with electric shocks. In the following weeks, several community marches were organized to support Patti, who many believed had brought security to Pilar. The conservative media focused on the population's fear of the rising crime rate, tacitly justifying the use of torture in police investigations.

Judge Alberto Borrino had ordered Patti's arrest after a medical examination confirmed signs of torture on the bodies of the two prisoners who were pressing charges. For weeks he was subjected to death threats, and was forced to send his young daughters out of the province. President Menem, the Governor of Buenos Aires and the Mayor of Pilar expressed support for Patti as an "efficient policeman," while adding weak statements about letting justice take its course. Americas Watch viewed these ambiguous statements by high officials as a serious effort to interfere with the independence of the judiciary. In this context, it came as no surprise when a court of appeals ordered the case taken away from Judge Borrino on the grounds that he had prejudged it. The new judge assigned to the case promptly released Patti, ruling that the testimony of the two victims was insufficient evidence to warrant preventive detention. The Supreme Court of the Province of Buenos Aires issued an unusual resolution (acordada) supporting Judge Borrino in no uncertain terms, but since the case was not before the Court, the actions of the lower courts stood.

Judge Borrino's actions had heightened expectations that the judiciary would take action against torturers. The statements of public authorities and the decision of the Court of Appeals will undoubtedly be interpreted by other torturers as a legitimation of the practice.

On September 28, shortly after the Patti episode, Andres Alberto Núñez disappeared from his home. Núñez was picked up by men who showed family members police identification from the Investigations Brigade of La Plata, Buenos Aires. Núñez was reportedly last seen in the Brigade jail by another prisoner and was complaining of pain from a beating he had received. The Investigations Brigade denied having detained him. Americas Watch urged the provincial and national government to ensure that a full investigation was carried out into the disappearance, and that the judge who was investigating the case was provided with the necessary protection.

US Policy

The Bush administration maintained the same posture as its predecessor toward the issue of impunity for human rights abuses. It never expressed support for Argentine society's efforts to come to grips with its painful history. Both President Bush and President Reagan did express support for constitutional rule when it was challenged by rebellious factions of the Argentine army, most recently on December 3, 1990, two days before a scheduled visit to Buenos Aires by President Bush. Even then, however, the US government refused to comment on the pardons issue. This attitude, combined with the noticeable US refusal to offer any support when the trials of human rights violators were under way, conveyed the image that the US government was content to allow egregious violators to escape punishment, even when they achieved that result by threatening and weakening democracy.

This US posture was reaffirmed during President Bush's visit to Argentina in early December. Speaking before the Argentine Congress, Bush proclaimed that "the day of the dictator" was over, but found nothing to say about the impending pardons, issued under pressure from the military that had imposed Argentina's last dictatorship.

The Work of Americas Watch

During the course of 1990, Americas Watch was in regular contact with the Argentine ambassador to the United States, Guido Di Tella, and with the Human Rights Department of the Argentine Foreign Ministry, to express concern over the issues mentioned above. Two Americas Watch representatives also met with President Menem during his visit to Washington in early October. An Americas Watch researcher in Argentina continued this dialogue by meeting in Buenos Aires with Ambassador María Regazzoli, Director of Human Rights at the Foreign Ministry, and with Judge Gustavo Larrambebere to request information on the Tablada investigation.

Considerable press attention in Argentina was given to the meeting with President Menem, in which Americas Watch expressed opposition to the pardon of military officers, as well as its concerns about the lack of progress in the Tablada investigation and the stalled trial of Suárez Mason. Americas Watch again appeared in the Buenos Aires newspapers in November as a result of two letters sent to President Menem setting forth its position on the pardon and expressing concern over the handling of the Patti case.

On several occasions, Americas Watch urged members of the US Congress to convey concern to the Argentine government on these subjects. Many Congressmen wrote to and met with President Menem to register the widespread impression in the United States that his pardons for human rights abuses undermined the rule of law and constituted a retreat from the principle that democratic societies must redress those crimes by restoring truth and justice.

1 See Americas Watch, Truth and Partial Justice in Argentina, 1987.
BRAZIL

Human Rights Developments

Violence continued in Brazil in 1990 at the same rate as in the past several years, despite the inauguration of the first president elected by direct popular participation in more than a generation.2 While imprisonment for political reasons has subsided since the transition to civilian rule in 1985, the incidence of torture and killing remains high. Much of the violence is related to the distribution of land in Brazil, with ownership restricted to a small privileged class, leaving millions of Brazilians without the means to subsist. Those who cannot find land or work flee to overcrowded cities or to remote rural areas.

In the cities, high unemployment contributes to a staggering rate of violent crime, which has met a lawless police response -- extrajudicial executions of suspected criminals, including children, and torture. In general, the military police, a uniformed patrol force, are responsible for summary executions, while the civil police, in charge of investigations, are responsible for torture. Summary executions are also committed by off-duty policemen organized as death squads.

The estimated seven million children who live and work on Brazilian streets3 comprise a significant precentage of the victims. Driven to criminal activities to survive, many children are regularly detained and tortured by the police and hundreds have been assassinated by police death squads.

The Rio de Janeiro police department has admitted that half the city's identified death squad members are policemen. Nonetheless, Brazilian officials have failed to take action to stop these death squads and punish those responsible for such abuses.

Americas Watch also remains concerned about the appalling prison conditions in Brazil. In many prisons, detainees are crammed into small, dark, filthy, damp and smelly cells, intended for half, a third, or even fewer occupants than are confined there. Violence by both guards and inmates is rampant. Inmates assault and rape other inmates, and as a form of protest against prison conditions, sometimes murder them. Torture to obtain confessions is common, and corruption and other abuses are also reported. Because of inaccurate record-keeping, some inmates are imprisoned beyond their sentences.

Human rights abuses in rural Brazil are related to the struggle for land. Many landless Brazilians have organized themselves into rural unions and taken to squatting or homesteading on unused land. Their goals are to pressure the government to fulfill its promise of agrarian reform and to claim unproductive land. Prominent rural activists and their supporters have met violent opposition from both the police and private gunmen hired by landowners. The police, with or without a court order of eviction, have used excessive force on numerous occasions, shooting into crowds of farm families, beating them and burning their homes to force them off the land. Sometimes the police are accompanied by gunmen hired by landowners.

This situation is exacerbated by problems of judicial procedure. Court orders of eviction are issued at hearings for which squatters are often given no notice, a practice which is legal in Brazil but fraught with the possibility of injustice.

Private gunmen hired by landowners commit targeted acts of violence and assassinations. Operating anonymously in hit-and-run fashion, they are rarely caught, although they are frequently identified by the local population or the press. This death-squad style violence regularly goes uninvestigated by police or judges. In fact, almost none of the violence directed at the rural workers' movement is investigated or punished. Of the 1,566 assassinations of rural workers, Indians, lawyers and other professionals involved in the struggle for land between 1964 and 1989, as tabulated by the Pastoral Land Commission, only 17 trials and eight convictions resulted through 1989. The convictions occurred when the victims were members of the professional classes (lawyers or priests) or had special international connections (Indians).

Such impunity only encourages those who are guilty of violence. In the northern state of Pará, four men associated with the rural workers union's struggle for land in Rio Maria were assassinated in two separate incidents in April 1990. The same assailants who killed the first pair of activists, feeling no heat from the police, committed the second pair of murders only a few weeks later.

The principal cause of this impunity is a lack of will on the part of the government to pursue these cases. Police investigations are often grossly negligent. Many times there is no investigation at all.

In similar fashion, the police routinely fail to provide protection for rural activists who have been threatened. The December 1988 murder of activist Francisco Alves Mendes Filho, known as Chico Mendes, brought international attention to the plight of the rubber tappers' movement in Brazil. Despite countless reports of death threats and appeals to authorities for protection -- including a petition to the President -- his pleas were largely ignored. 4

On December 15, Darly Alves da Silva and his son, Darcy Alves Pereira, were convicted for Mendes's murder after a four-day jury trial. Both men received 19-year sentences. However, given the enormous pressure generated by the international environmental movement, the conviction is not indicative of an improvement in Brazil's justice system. Rubber tappers continue to receive frequent death threats, and violence against lesser known activists is still not investigated or prosecuted.

Government failure to halt the use of forced labor by large landowners presents another serious human rights problem in Brazil. The practice is found primarily in the inaccessible forests of the northern and western frontier states, where large landowners cut and burn enormous tracts of land to turn the forest into cattle pasture, a practice actively opposed by environmentalists. Poor laborers are brought to estates by deceptive means, held against their will through threats and acts of violence, and compelled to live and work in deplorable conditions. Uncooperative workers are beaten or threatened with death by small private armies of gunmen hired to enforce the appalling wages and working conditions. In several cases, workers have been killed for trying to escape or for protesting their treatment. Although forced labor is used most commonly in the most remote parts of the country, cases have also been reported in the more developed and accessible states of São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro.

Despite Brazilian law forbiding maintenance of private jails and reduction of a person to a "condition analogous to slavery," the police appear almost never to prosecute cases of forced labor, even after the state police have raided offending estates to free workers. Such raids are infrequent, however; most complaints yield no police action.

US Policy

The Bush administration has been conspicuously silent on human rights abuses in Brazil throughout 1990. The President squandered an important opportunity to raise human rights concerns during his visit to Brazil in early December. Instead, he lauded the consolidation of democracy and promoted his plan to create a hemispheric free-trade zone.

State Department officials in Washington claimed that human rights concerns are raised as part of the "regular dialogue" with Brazilian officials, but could not provide a single example of when that had occurred in 1990.

The United States is Brazil's largest trading partner, investor and creditor. But the Bush administration has made no use of this tremendous economic clout to ensure that commercial relations are not built on a foundation of human rights abuse.

The Work of Americas Watch

An Americas Watch delegation spent several weeks in Brazil in June and July. It visited states in the north (Pará), northeast (Maranhão and Paraíba), west (Acre), south (Río Grande do Sul) and southeast (São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro) to investigate government complicity in rural violence, forced labor and related human rights violations. In December, Americas Watch issued two newsletters: one on the status of the Chico Mendes case prior to the trial, and another on forced labor practices. A full report on rural violence in Brazil is scheduled for publication in early 1991.

In conjunction with Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) and the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), Americas Watch organized a mid-October 1990 mission to the municipality of Perus on the outskirts of São Paulo where a team of Brazilian scientists exhumed a mass grave in the Don Bosco Cemetery. Among the 1,500 remains uncovered, at least 25 were those of persons disappeared during the 1970s. In an effort to facilitate determination of responsibility for past human rights abuses in Brazil, the Americas Watch group lent both visibility and technical support to efforts to identify the remains. The delegation was hosted by Brazilian human rights organizations and the Center for the Study of Violence at the University of São Paulo. A report on their findings will be published jointly with PHR and AAAS, again in early 1991.

2 José Sarney, President between 1985 and 1990, was the Vice President who succeeded President Tancredo Neves, who died shortly after his indirect election. In 1990, Fernando Collor de Mello won the first direct presidential election since the 1964 military coup.

3 See Amnesty International, Torture and Extrajudicial Execution in Urban Brazil, June 1990.

4 Bodyguards were assigned to him, but without functioning weapons; they fled at the time of the assassination.
CHILE

Human Rights Developments

On March 11, 1990, Chile returned to democracy with the inauguration of elected President Patricio Aylwin. The celebration of that event ended nearly 17 years of military rule and completed a transitional process that began in October 1988, when Gen. Augusto Pinochet lost a plebiscite on whether he should continue as President. Human rights had been a major issue in the platform of the multiparty coalition headed by Aylwin in the 1988 plebiscite and in the December 1989 Presidential and parliamentary elections. The new government pledged to address the abuses of the past, to achieve truth and justice concerning those abuses, and to create the foundations for ongoing respect for human rights.

However, the government's ability to pursue legal and political reforms was hindered by the military-designed Constitution. Gen. Pinochet retained the right to continue as commander-in-chief of the army. In Congress, the government faced a right-wing opposition bloc that, due to Pinochet's constitutional right to appoint nine senators as well as the unique electoral system devised by the military, enjoyed far greater representation than its percentage of the vote in the 1989 elections. As a result, the parliamentary opposition succeeded in distorting, then delaying, and finally diluting the legislative proposal to pass to civilian courts the pending cases of more than 200 security-related and political prisoners detained or prosecuted under Pinochet. The opposition also negotiated to dilute other legal reforms in return for minimal cooperation.

The new government's good intentions were also frustrated by other hold-over problems from the military regime, such as a Supreme Court historically sympathetic to the military, continuing military prosecutions of journalists for crimes of opinion and expression, lack of access to security-personnel records in the hands of the military, and Pinochet's reluctance to accept civilian authority. The need to establish civilian authority, in particular over the army, was seen in some government quarters as conflicting with the policy of speaking out on human rights abuses of the past.

The government made numerous important gestures toward victims of the military regime. An office to assist returning exiles was established within the Justice Ministry, and a special commission, described below, was appointed to expose past abuses. In addition, victims and their relatives had access to high-level officials to discuss their concerns; a monument to the disappeared was planned; President Aylwin spoke at the belated funeral of former President Salvador Allende -- on the 17th anniversary of his death -- whose remains were finally transferred to a family mausoleum in September; and members of the Cabinet attended funerals for those victims whose remains were discovered in clandestine or unmarked graves. State television aired special programs on exiles and on the discoveries of unmarked mass graves. President Aylwin himself stressed human rights in many speeches.

Not all customs changed so quickly, however. The occasionally brutal force used by the police (carabineros) against peaceful demonstrators was a matter of concern and suggested the continuation of abusive attitudes among some members of the security forces, despite the apparent good intentions of the police leadership. There were also a dozen denunciations of torture at the hands of the police and the detective force (Investigaciones); these are now before the criminal courts. Such abuse did not appear to represent government policy, but drew attention to the abusive legacy of the previous regime. Some denunciations of torture related to police investigations into terrorist actions by armed, extreme left-wing groups. The new government took a firm position against such terrorism while publicly advocating respect for the rights of detainees.

In addition to resolving the prisoner issue and the scope of military jurisdiction, and seeking to reform the practices of the security forces, the Aylwin government, in the first of its four years, faced the challenge of exposing past abuses, which include summary executions, disappearances, torture, exile and internal exile, violation of labor rights, arbitrary individual and mass arrests, violation of the right to free expression, and other abuses of civil and political rights. The discoveries of several clandestine mass graves, starting in March, underscored the need for a full accounting of human rights violations and prosecutions of those responsible. Victims, human rights groups, and members of the governing coalition pressed for such an accounting, and the issue of past abuses was regularly covered by newspapers and television.

In April, President Aylwin created a nine-member Commission on Truth and Reconciliation to document killings and disappearances by the military regime and fatal actions by armed leftist groups opposed to the regime. The commission gathered testimony on more than 3,000 cases from victims and witnesses throughout Chile, and received extensive documentation from Chile's human rights organizations. Its report, due to be published in early 1991, was expected to provide a detailed portrait of the apparatus of repression and its methods in various periods of the dictatorship, to list and briefly describe cases, and to recommend preventive measures and forms of reparation. Because it may not infringe on the authority of the courts, the commission was not expected to name the individual military or secret-police officials responsible for specific cases of murder, torture resulting in death, or disappearance.

At the same time, the Supreme Court consistently reaffirmed military jurisdiction in cases in which military personnel were implicated, including the major new cases launched with the discovery of clandestine graves, such that no effective prosecutions were expected. Similarly, in a landmark case, the Supreme Court once again upheld a 1978 amnesty decreed by the military regime; thus, domestic legal remedies for disappearances that occurred between 1973 and 1978 were exhausted. Prospects for justice in cases of past abuse were therefore remote.

The government's watchword in regard to past abuses was "reconciliation," a concept which took shape over the year to mean a process of truth-telling and vindication of the victims, followed by some form of forgiveness. As noted above, however, justice was not generally expected. By the end of 1990, it was not clear what form the forgiveness would take, although there was speculation about the prospect of a partial amnesty covering the post-1978 period. In the meantime, the President was expected to pardon some security-related prisoners while others would face trial after years of confinement.

US Policy

One case which defied categorization was that of Orlando Letelier and Ronni Moffitt, the former Chilean Defense Minister and his colleague from the United States who were assassinated in Washington in September 1976 on orders from the Chilean secret police DINA, which in turn received its orders from Gen. Pinochet. Although the murders took place during the period covered by the 1978 amnesty, they were specifically excepted from the amnesty. And although military personnel at high levels were implicated, the case or part of it may pass to civilian court. An essential reason for the case's special status is that the US Congress has long required progress in its prosecution as a condition for the renewal of economic and military aid to Chile. Indeed, during the early Reagan years, the Letelier-case conditions were the most important obstacle to renewal of US aid to Pinochet.

In 1990, the US relationship with Chile remained complicated by the Letelier-Moffitt case. The Aylwin government, arguing that its hands were tied and that democracy requires support, resented US insistence on legal progress on the case as a prelude to aid, although it was attempting to achieve the necessary legal reform. Americas Watch supports the Aylwin government's efforts to develop democratic institutions; at the same time, we believe that progress on the Letelier-Moffitt case has not been sufficient to warrant renewal of aid. Thus, when as a prelude to President Bush's visit to Chile on December 7 the US restrictions related to the Letelier-Moffitt case were lifted on November 30, and Chile's military once again became eligible to receive US aid, Americas Watch requested clarification from the Bush administration and members of Congress as to the exact basis on which they considered this change justified. It had received no response by the end of the year.

The United States also renewed certain corollary forms of economic cooperation with Chile, as a signal of support for democracy. On November 28, US Trade Representative Carla Hills recommended that President Bush restore trade benefits for Chile under the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP), in recognition of progress on respect for labor rights. As an adjunct to that change, the US also granted Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) insurance to Chile.

The Work of Americas Watch

Americas Watch continued its close monitoring of human rights conditions in Chile during 1990, through the work of a representative based in Santiago. Given the dramatic improvement, the organization did not have occasion to launch campaigns of public protest against government policies. But in Santiago, Washington and New York, consultations were held with Chilean officials in regard to both internal and external human rights policy; work continued with the US Congress on conditions for the renewal of aid and on cases of military-court harassment of journalists; and information was gathered for publication, in 1991, of an assessment of the Aylwin government's record.

Americas Watch is concerned in particular with the legal obstacles to prosecutions, which impede a full accounting of past abuses, and with speculations in Chile about a possible new amnesty. The Supreme Court's continuing acquiesence in the legal manipulations of the military regime has deprived victims of redress and society of information on the individual perpetrators of gross abuses -- despite the incorporation of international human rights norms into Chile's Constitution by a constitutional-reform plebiscite held in 1989. While Americas Watch does not hold the new government responsible for the actions of a Supreme Court that it did not appoint, the organization would hold the government responsible for any new measure that would close off future possibilities of prosecution.

Consistent with its position on similar transitions from dictatorial to civilian rule, Americas Watch believes that victims of abuse have a right to seek redress before courts of law for the crimes committed against them; that governments have an obligation to facilitate that redress and to promote it through vigorous and impartial investigations; and that those found guilty of crimes against humanity must be punished. The Chilean experience on these issues is being watched closely around the world by those who followed the tragedy of the abuses committed by the military regime. This experience will probably be completed in 1991. While Americas Watch awaits the final outcome of this process, it is encouraged by the firm commitment demonstrated in 1990 by President Aylwin, by democratic sectors in Chilean society, and by Chile's human rights movement, to investigate thoroughly and tell the truth about past abuses.

COLOMBIA

Human Rights Developments

The human rights situation in Colombia took a turn for the worse in late 1989 and the first half of 1990. Contributing to the deterioration were the "war on drug trafficking" launched by President Virgilio Barco in September 1989 with enthusiastic support from the Bush administration, and the political passions aroused by the elections held in March and May 1990.

The specialized police units that conduct operations against the Medillín drug cartel engaged in serious human rights violations. In poor neighborhoods surrounding Medellín, they attacked the civilian population indiscriminately and kidnapped and murdered young people on mere suspicion of involvement in the drug trade. Suspects apprehended on drug trafficking charges or for extradition to the United States were frequently tortured and at times, according to credible allegations, disappearanced.

The operations against the drug cartel were met with a systematic campaign of terror launched against uniformed policemen, the press and certain high-ranking government officials. The drug traffickers were also responsible for indiscriminate terrorist attacks against airplanes and public places and they stepped up their attacks on judges and public prosecutors.

The campaign against drug trafficking overshadowed other forms of political violence that continued to plague Colombia. To a large degree, this other violence was neglected because the Barco government deliberately presented the problems of violence in Colombia as the sole responsibility of the Medellín cartel. Although the cartel played a substantial role in this violence, the government's exclusive focus on it ignored the significant role played by agents of the state in political violence.

The Colombian army stepped up counterinsurgency operations in many rural areas. In the conduct of aerial and ground sweeps, the military frequently fired indiscriminately against civilians and attacked suspected guerrilla positions in complete disregard for the attacker's obligation to minimize collateral harm to civilians. The armed forces also occupied areas and forced the displacement of peasant families without meeting their obligation to receive the war displaced in good care; displacement caused by war has become an increasingly volatile social problem in many areas of Colombia.

Violence by so-called paramilitary groups continued to be the country's most serious human rights problem. These gangs of armed civilians recruited by powerful economic interests were responsible for the largest number of both targeted and multiple killings. Some of the paramilitary squads evolved from "civil defense patrols" organized by the army since 1968. Although President Barco finally outlawed civil defense patrols in 1989, the army continued to organize them in war-stricken areas of the countryside, and force civilians to join them under penalty of being considered "subversive." Whether or not they call themselves "civil self-defense organizations," paramilitary groups are in effect the tool of landowners and other powerful interests in each region. In recent years, prominent members of the Medellín cartel have become the main financial supporters of some of the most active paramilitary gangs. Drug traffickers provided money, recruits, weapons and farms for use as training camps.

The crimes of paramilitary groups could not be committed without the support of well placed members of the Colombian army in the regions where they operate. High-ranking officers provided intelligence for the selection of targets, as well as protection from investigations and prosecution. Those officers often allowed the killers safe passage through heavily militarized areas and provided credentials and weapons permits to some of their members.

As political violence continued to mount, some segments in the Colombian government, including the three most recent Presidents, tried to put a stop to it. But efforts to investigate paramilitary crimes have been successful in only a handful of cases, and then only inisofar as those brought to justice were civilians and not members of the military. When inquiries into violent crimes led to evidence of complicity by army officers, the wheels of justice stopped under pressures from the army high command. While the Barco government's outlawing of self-defense association was an attempt to break this link between the army and paramilitary violence, the government preferred to ignore the vital aid provided directly to paramilitary groups by well placed army officers.

By insisting on blaming the Medellín cartel for all of the country's evils, the government also hurt its own campaign against political violence. Although the government had some temporary success in keeping the cartel leaders on the run, paramilitary violence -- increasingly controlled and directed by powerful interests with attenuated links to drug trafficking -- resumed.

Several guerrilla groups have committed systematic violations of the laws of war. Typical violations included the taking of hostages, generally to collect "war taxes" through their ransom, and the murder of civilians suspected of spying or membership in paramilitary groups. In 1990, the government succeeded in reaching a comprehensive peace agreement with the Movimiento 19 de Abril (M-19) in which this former guerrilla group abandoned armed struggle and joined the political process as a new party. The initial success of the M-19 in 1990, beginning with a respectable placement in the congressional and mayoral elections in March and ending with a strong showing in the elections for an assembly to draft a new Constitution in December, has opened new opportunites for the government to negotiate peace agreements with the three larger guerrilla organizations.

There is also considerable support in Colombia for the proposition that, while fighting goes on, all sides must make strong commitments to respect fundamental rules of international humanitarian law. An important first step in this direction would be to expand the small role allowed the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). In particular, the government should give the ICRC access to all places of detention, including police precincts and military installations, as well as daily lists of those apprehended on security-related grounds. It should also allow the ICRC to develop a large relief program in war-torn areas of the countryside.

After the inauguration of César Gaviria as President in August, the level of violence seemed to decrease. Around that time, the drug kingpins, using their collective name "The Extraditables," offered a unilateral truce in their campaign of terror. In exchange, they requested an amnesty and assurances against extradition. The Gaviria administration vowed not to negotiate with the cartels, but it temporarily suspended extraditions and enacted a decree that grants reduced sentences and immunity from extradition to those who surrender voluntarily and provide evidence against their colleagues. In November, the Extraditables admitted holding several prominent journalists abducted in August and September, and offered to release them in exchange for further assurances for those kingpins who surrendered.

Guerrilla operations were also less numerous beginning in August, following gestures made by the various guerrilla organizations in support of peace negotiations with the new government. The expectations raised by the prospect of the Constituent Assembly that was elected on December 9 to draft a new Constitution also contributed to an atmosphere of reduced violence. For these reasons, the second half of 1990 through the December elections was marked by an important reduction in the number of serious incidents, at least in the major cities. In some rural areas, however, serious human rights violations against peasant communities continued to take place.

This lull in the fighting was broken with a major government offensive beginning at the time of the December 9 elections against the headquartes of the largest guerrilla group, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC). The army offensive orverran the FARC jungle headquarters in Casa Verde, but the guerrillas retreated with their command structure intact. In response, FARC staged a series of bomb and gunfire attacks on police and army targets in several Colombian cities.

At the end of the year, a government spokesman once again declared that the door was open for FARC and another major guerrilla group, the National Liberation Army (ELN), to join the peace process.

US Policy

The United States has not contributed to solving the human rights problems in Colombia. In fact, its public support for a "war" on the drug trade, as opposed to approaching it as a law enforcement problem, objectively contributed to the deterioration of the human rights situation. Drug-interdiction operations and arrests for extradition are perceived in Colombia as spurred by a keen US interest in curbing the flow of drugs. This fact, when coupled with the Bush administration's unwillingness to speak out against human rights violations by government forces in Colombia, means that the US government must share in the responsibility for the escalation of abuses that has taken place in the context of drug interdiction.

The "Andean Initiative" announced by President Bush on September 5, 1989 was the dominant feature of US policy toward Colombia in 1990. Although one of the three stated goals of the initiative was the promotion of human rights in the Andean region, the focus of the initiative in 1990 was entirely on military solutions to the "drug war."

A survey of military assistance to Colombia in 1989 and 1990 reveals the extraordinary military commitment that the United States made to that country. In 1989, Colombia received $7.1 million in military assistance and $65 million in military equipment drawn from US Defense Department stocks. In 1990, Colombia received $71.2 million in military assistance (including $500,000 in military training) and an additional $15 million in military equipment from Defense Department stocks.

For future years, the Andean Initiative proposes large amounts in economic and development aid, but through the end of 1990 the emphasis was exclusively on military solutions. Indeed, Bush administration officials let it be known that economic aid to the Andean countries will be conditioned on "achieving results" in the interdiction program; it is clear, therefore, that Colombia, Peru and Bolivia can aspire to economic aid only if they follow the military prescription preferred by the US government.

The administration reluctantly accepted conditions set by Congress on the military and police aid flowing to Colombia as part of the International Narcotics Control Act (INCA) of 1989. Those conditions simply referred to the long-standing requirements of Section 502B of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, which prohibit military aid to be given to countries which engage in a gross and consistent pattern of human rights violations. However, the 1990 INCA contained stronger and more specific human rights language, including a call for significant progress in protecting internationally recognized human rights, particularly in:

ensuring that torture, cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment, incommunicado detention or detention without charges and trial, disappearances, and other flagrant denials of the right to life, liberty, or security of the person, are not practiced; permitting an unimpeded investigation of alleged violations of internationally recognized human rights, including providing access to places of detention, by appropriate international organizations (including nongovernmental organizations such as the International Committee of the Red Cross) or groups acting under the authority of the United Nations or the Organization of American States....

The President must also make a written determination that "the government of that country has effective control over police and military operations related to counternarcotics and counterinsurgency activities." While the human rights conditions are not as strong as originally proposed by Rep. Ted Weiss, they will help human rights monitors and interested Members of Congress pursue these human rights concerns.

Unfortunately, the Bush administration has taken the position that the government of Colombia is not responsible for violations, and thus that it is eligible for this aid. US officials have been quick to repeat the Colombian government's line that blames all political violence on the Medellín cartel or the guerrillas.

As noted, however, the Colombian armed forces are engaged in a consistent pattern of abuse, through the complicity of many high-ranking officers in paramilitary crimes, through the direct commission of numerous acts of abuse against civilians in the course of counterinsurgency operations, and through the involvement of some uniformed agents in arbitrary arrest, torture, disappearances and murder of suspects. The army high command has done nothing to investigate and punish these deeds, and has obstructed the work of those who try to do so. The civilian authorities may be innocent of such crimes, but they have failed to break the circle of impunity erected by army generals. For that reason, Colombian armed and police forces should be ineligible for US military aid.

The argument is sometimes made that, to make those forces more responsible, the US needs to be actively engaged in their operations, that they need the incentive of US military training, weapons and assistance to respect human rights. In the view of Americas Watch, this argument misreads the clear letter and intent of the human rights legislation. As a condition of providing this aid, the administration must first show that Colombian security forces are not violating human rights, a standard that would be impossible to meet under current conditions. In addition, if the Bush administration has been using the massive influx of aid to do anything to nudge the Colombian military toward greater respect for human rights, no results were visible through the end of 1990. The result was not surprising since, whatever efforts at "quiet diplomacy" were being undertaken were being undercut by the administration's public stance of ignoring army abuses and blaming human rights violations on everyone else.

The administration has a duty to implement the clear human rights conditions set forth in the International Narcotics Control Acts of 1989 and 1990. Since it apparently intends to ignore those conditions, the appropriate committees of Congress should exercise oversight and demand information from the administration on how Colombia is meeting the minimal human rights standards set forth in US law. At the very least, Congress should require the administratipon to certify in detail how the Colombian government is working to end the human rights abuses by its forces. In addition, certain specific steps should be required, such as effective prosecutions of military personnel involved in paramilitary violence, access by the ICRC to timely information about arrests with immediate opportunities to conduct condifential interviews with those detained, and a full accounting on the fate and whereabouts of all disappeared persons.

The Bush administration has publicly pressed for military solutions to the drug trafficking problem even though the Colombian military made clear that it intended to use US aid for their preferred objective of combatting guerrillas. The administration was so interested in bringing the army into the fight that it was willing to overlook this misuse of funds. The result was that US funds were being used to wage a counterinsurgency war which for decades has been fought as a "dirty war."

A report by the House Government Operations Committee harshly criticized the US Drug Enforcement Administration for its failure to reduce coca cultivation and processing in Peru and Bolivia. The report praised Colombia as the only country in which some encouraging results had been obtained from interdiction, and pointed out that the success had been despite the absence of "Operation Snowcap"5 DEA agents in Colombia. The report also noted that the Colombia National Police were responsible for 90 percent of all drug seizures in Colombia, although it received only 16 percent of the initial $65 million in US military and police aid dispatched in September 1989.6 While Americas Watch has long objected to US funding of police forces with their own entrenched history of abuse, the House Committee report shows the futility of pumping million of dollars of aid to an army that is more intent on pursuing its abusive counterinsurgency efforts than in curbing drug trafficking.

The Colombian government has publicly urged the Bush administration to do its part in the war against drug trafficking, beyond pushing for military solutions on foreign soil. For example, Colombian authorities are interested in closer controls of banks that launder drug profits, controls on the export of chemicals used in the production of cocaine, and a ban on the export of automatic and assault weapons from the United States, which the drug cartels buy to arm their hit squads and paramilitary groups. President Bush gave some assurances along these lines at the "drug summit" held in Cartagena in December 1989, but no such steps had been taken by the end of 1990. Americas Watch supports the need for export controls on automatic and semi-automatic weapons, because the unhindered flow of arms from the US market to the drug cartels is having a devastating effect on the human rights situation in Colombia.

The Work of Americas Watch

In 1990, Americas Watch conducted two investigative missions to Colombia, one in May and one in October. In the course of the second visit, Americas Watch released its report, The "Drug War" in Colombia: The Neglected Tragedy of Political Violence. The report received considerable coverage in the Colombian press, including a lively debate about its findings and recommendations. During the May visit, an Americas Watch researcher traveled to the Magdalena Medio region, which is the site of intense counterinsurgency and paramilitary activity. In the city of Barrancabermeja, in Magdalena Medio, Americas Watch received direct testimony from witnesses and victims of violations by the army and paramilitary groups. Americas Watch also visited those who had been displaced from neighboring rural areas because of the conflict.

During the year, Americas Watch sought to inject its findings on Colombian human rights conditions into the debates in the US Congress on military and police aid to Colombia. In April, Americas Watch initiated a Congressional cable protesting the murder of Presidential candidate Bernardo Jaramillo, as well as the alarming increase in the number of attacks against members of his party, the Patriotic Union.

During the Congressional debate about drug policy, Americas Watch also pressed for the need to respect legislative conditions on the delivery of military and police aid. Americas Watch outlined specific steps that the Andean countries should take to show that they were in compliance with human rights conditions in US law and thus eligable to receive aid under INCA. Some of those steps were included as explicit conditions in the 1990 INCA, signed into law by President Bush on November 21.

On June 1, Americas Watch filed a formal complaint about persecution of labor unionists in Colombia with US Trade Representative (USTR) Carla Hills, urging her to investigate labor rights in Colombia to determine whether it remained eligible for trade benefits under the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP). After a cursory examination, the USTR decided not to take up the petition for review.

Americas Watch also maintained close contact with Colombian authorities charged with carrying out human rights policy for Presidents Barco and Gaviria, in addition to engaging them in open debate in the Colombian press. As in other countries, Americas Watch made a special point of defending the right of Colombian human rights monitors to conduct their work free of harassment and persecution. On July 4, Alirio Pedraza, a lawyer with the Committee in Solidarity with Political Prisoners, was abducted from the streets of Bogotá in front of many witnesses. Uniformed policemen who tried at first to intervene stopped after his captors showed them some official credentials. Pedraza has not been seen since, and Colombian authorities have denied holding him. Americas Watch is cooperating with the Andean Commission of Jurists-Colombian Section in pursuing this and several other cases before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States.

5 "Operation Snowcap" is a program to eradicate coca crops and cocaine-processing facilities in Peru and Bolivia.

6 Stopping the Flood of Cocaine with Operation Snowcap: Is it Working?, Thirteenth Report by the House Committee on Government Operations (together with Additional Views), Washington, D.C., August 1990.
CUBA

Human Rights Developments

The Cuban government continued to systematically deny its citizens the right to exercise their fundamental freedoms, including freedom of expression, association and assembly, the right to privacy and due process, and the right to travel. The guarantees written into Cuba's laws do more to hinder than to protect those rights. And in any event, Cuba lacks institutions independent of the government and the governing Communist Party that could ensure respect for basic rights. Although all Cubans are affected by the institutionalized suppression of civil and political rights by the 32-year-old military government of Fidel Castro, the target increasingly has been the fragile "civil society" that began to emerge in 1988 when international scrutiny of Cuba's human rights practices was at its height.

There is no free press in Cuba. All media are state-owned or state-controlled. Nothing is permitted to be published on government-controlled printing presses that is not "in keeping with the objectives of socialist society." Attempts by human rights and other independent activists to distribute newsletters, type-written and reproduced on carbon paper, have been relentlessly suppressed under the law against "clandestine printing."

Cuba is a one-party state. Opposition political parties and independent civic groups are illegal. Cubans are permitted to belong only to officially controlled "mass organizations," which serve as little more than a medium for them to demonstrate their "revolutionary integration." Rights advocacy groups have been repeatedly denied official recognition. Members of such groups are imprisoned for "illegal association."

Freedom of movement is restricted. Only Cubans over a certain age -- 40 for women and 45 for men (recently reduced from 50 and 55) -- are free to travel abroad and return to Cuba. Cubans apply to emigrate at the risk of losing their jobs, belongings, and homes. Those who try and fail to flee illegally by crossing the Florida straits on a boat or raft are imprisoned.

Cuba is also a police state that denies its citizens' right to privacy. Committees for the Defense of the Revolution (CDRs), neighborhood surveillance groups, monitor and report on Cubans at home, at work and at school. The CDRs were created, according to the Cuban press, "with the sacred mission of defending the revolution and blocking the political action of its enemies." As part of this mission, they twice in 1990 organized huge mobs of people to gather at the homes of human rights monitors where meetings were being held, to chant slogans, yell insults and assault those who dared to leave, in a demonstration of their ostensibly spontaneous "repudiation" of "counterrevolutionaries." Cuba lacks an independent judiciary. The judicial branch is subordinate to the executive. In the courts, Cubans are defended by lawyers whose loyalty is to the state, not to their client. Judges upholding "socialist legality" enforce the will of the government. In addition, there is no independent legislature, and no legally recognized independent labor unions or other civic organizations.

Despite these serious constraints on fundamental freedoms, a number of fledgling human rights advocacy and monitoring associations and pro-democracy groups continued to operate during all or part of 1990, even at the risk of persecution and imprisonment. Unofficial groups such as the Cuban Committee for Human Rights, the Cuban Commission for Human Rights and National Reconciliation, the Cuban Human Rights Party, the Association for Free Art, the Movement for Democratic Integration, and the Sendero Verde ecology and peace movement have met, produced newsletters, held press conferences with foreign journalists and made contacts with diplomats. For such activities, the Cuban national and state security police arrested a total of more than 100 members and supporters of those groups in 1989 and 1990, and some 30 were still in custody at the end of 1990 -- serving prison sentences, detained without trial or under house arrest. These detentions had effectively decimated several of the independent groups cited above.

The government's campaign against the independent activists in 1990 was marked by especially draconian reprisals, such as the day-long "acts of repudiation" noted above, at the homes of Gustavo and Sebastian Arcos of the Cuban Committee for Human Rights; prison sentences as high as seven years for purely peaceful dissent, as in the case of Esteban González, one of six imprisoned members of the Movement for Democratic Integration; and attempts to discredit prominent activists by linking them with alleged terrorist groups, as was feared in the case of Samuel Martínez Lara of the Cuban Human Rights Party, who was in his ninth month of state-security detention without trial at the end of 1990.

US Policy

The value of the increasingly reliable human rights reporting being done by the US Interests Section in Havana and the State Department in Washington continued to be undermined by the Bush administration's single-minded campaign against the Cuban government at the UN Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR). Although Cuba is fully deserving of UN criticism for its unyielding human rights repression -- and has shown considerable responsiveness to such criticism in the recent past -- the US-led campaign to condemn Cuba was marred by the administration's widely perceived failure to devote similar energy to comparably abusive US friends. Although the US generally voted in favor of resolutions critical of abusive governments with which it maintains closer relations, it failed to devote anywhere near comparable energies to the behind-the-scenes lobbying that is frequently needed to enact critical resolutions. The result was continuing support for the view that the campaign to condemn Cuba was driven more by ideological than human rights concerns, and a correspondingly reduced inclination on the part of many nations to endorse the sort of firm condemnation that the Cuban government deserved. A weak, though still critical, resolution thus emerged in 1990.

Vice President Dan Quayle even became involved in the lobbying effort at the United Nations. According to the Vice President, in December 1989 he asked UN Secretary General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar to produce a report on his contacts with the Cuban government on human rights matters and to submit it to the UNCHR during the 1990 session, and the Secretary General promised to do so. However, in January 1990, as the administration geared up for the UNCHR annual meeting in Geneva, the Secretary General wrote to the Vice President to inform him that he would submit a report to the UNCHR only if the commission formally and specifically requested it. Quayle then publicly protested to Pérez de Cuéllar for allegedly going back on his word. The resolution adopted by the UNCHR in March 1990, unlike the vaguely worded 1989 resolution, now explicitly calls on the Secretary General to report on his contacts with the Cuban government during the 1991 UNCHR session.

Much of the blame for the one-dimensional focus of the US delegation to the UNCHR lay on Ambassador Armando Valladares, the former long-term prisoner of the Castro government, whose concern with human rights seemed rarely to extend beyond his native island and virtually never reached US friends. In June, Ambassador Valladares reinforced his image as an ideologically driven advocate of human rights by attacking an initiative by a leading Cuban human rights activist simply because it reflected a method of promoting Cuban human rights that was not premised on the overthrow of the Castro government. Gustavo Arcos Bergnes, a former political prisoner who is head of the independent Havana-based Cuban Committee for Human Rights, had released a statement calling for dialogue among Cubans -- including the Cuban government and the Cuban exile community -- about the future of Cuba. "Compatriots," he said, "the Cuban Committee for Human Rights once again and despite the abuses and harassment to which we are subjected...reiterates its willingness to debate."

To this appeal, Ambassador Valladares responded, "the statements of the Committee [for Human Rights], made by its leader Gustavo Arcos Bergnes and supported by its representatives in exile, are based on false suppositions and alterations of Cuban reality that benefit the dictatorship of Fidel Castro, and constitute treason to those who struggled, died and still remain for almost thirty years in prison" [emphasis added]. Ambassador Valladares concluded by stating, "with the same enthusiasm that I offered support to these groups when I considered it useful to the cause, I now withdraw it totally for considering the contrary." The comments caused an uproar among Cubans in the United States and shocked the beleaguered human rights community in Cuba, much of which had considered Valladares its principal defender abroad.

Ambassador Valladares's comments came at a time when the Cuban government was intensifying its repression of human rights and other independent activities. Only three months earlier, Gustavo Arcos and his brother Sebastian had been subjected to the above-mentioned "acts of repudiation" which were staged, ironically and undoubtedly intentionally, during the week of March 5, precisely the time when Ambassador Valladares was at the UNCHR in Geneva campaigning for a resolution on human rights in Cuba.

This was not the first time that Ambassador Valladares had criticized Cuban activists. As he noted in his statement against Arcos, "already on one occasion I had to publicly discredit the statements of the head of the Movement of National Reconciliation," referring to his criticism of Elizardo Sánchez, head of the Cuban Commission for Human Rights and National Reconiliation. In one instance in January 1989, Ambassador Valladares estimated the number of political prisoners in Cuba to be close to 10,000. He used this figure to refute a statement by Sánchez that the number of political prisoners, including those convicted of attempting to leave the country illegally and conscientious objectors, was 600 or 700. Sánchez's estimate was in fact more closely supported by the most reliable figure of 395 (which does not include conscientious objectors) reported in 1988 by the ICRC, at a time when it had access to Cuba's prisons. Sánchez was arrested in August 1989 and is now serving a two-year prison sentence for "dissemination of false news."

Armando Valladares languished in Cuban jails for 22 years and, understandably, must hold great personal resentment for the Castro government. However, he did a disservice to efforts to promote human rights in Cuba when, as an appointed and highly visible spokesman for the US government on human rights issues, he gave vent to personal feelings on matters that were perceived to be within his official competence. The comments on Arcos, if taken as a statement of US policy, suggested that Arcos was no longer of concern to the US government, and thus encouraged Cuban authorities to impose on him the same fate as his imprisoned colleagues. Fortunately, the State Department took steps publicly to distance itself from Valladare's comment. It issued a statement on June 15 noting that Valladares acted as US ambassador to the UNCHR only during its annual six-week session, and was free to express his personal opinions at all other times. But this fine distinction was understandably lost on many, particularly since Ambassador Valladares has been used as an official spokesman on other occasions, as in his September 20, 1989 testimony on human rights in Cuba before the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere, and on July 12, 1990 before the Congressional Human Rights Caucus.

More important, the State Department's statement made no specific reference to Arcos. To blunt the potential danger emanating from the Valladares attack, the State Department at minimum should have publicly recognized the importance of the work being done by Arcos and the Cuban Human Rights Committee.

Valladares put an end to the dispute over his statement by resigning in late December, despite administration urgings that he stay on. The resignation provides an ideal opportunity for the administration to launch a more balanced campaign at the UN, matching the effort on Cuba with a similar effort against a comparably abusive US friend.

Just as the Cuban government curtails the right of Cubans to travel freely, the US government also restricts the right of its citizens to travel. As a signatory of the 1975 Helsinki Final Act, the United States vowed to "facilitate wider travel." However, the US continues to limit travel to a number of countries, including Cuba, for ideological reasons. The limits on travel to Cuba -- justified under the economic embargo imposed by the US in 1962 -- are the strictest of these restrictions. Only certain categories of travelers are authorized by the US Treasury Department to visit and spend money in Cuba: US or foreign government officials or officials of any intergovernmental organization of which the US is a member; those with family members in Cuba; academics and researchers with Cuba-specific expertise; and news media personnel. Ordinary Americans who wish to visit Cuba as tourists, and others, are not permitted to do so. These restrictions, of concern in their own right, also impose a significant cost on efforts to monitor human rights in Cuba by significantly limiting the number of visitors to the country.

The 1988 trade bill which lifted embargo restrictions on the importation of informational materials, such as Cuban books, films and records, was an important step in the campaign for free trade in ideas. Unfortunately, the Treasury Department under the Bush administration has excluded travel from its interpretation of the law, even though the legislation's sponsor, Rep. Howard Berman, maintains that Congress had acted the law "with the understanding that travel would in many instances be essential to arranging such trade" in informational materials.

The Work of Americas Watch

Two Americas Watch representatives traveled to Havana in September to attend for the Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders. While in Cuba, they met with members of the beleaguered human rights community and collected information on human rights conditions. Their requests for meetings with Cuban government officials went unanswered. In May, Americas Watch also spent several days in Miami interviewing former political prisoners who had recently been released from prison.

In addition to several press releases on human rights in Cuba in 1990, Americas Watch issued two newsletters: "Jailing the Human Rights Movement, August 1989 - March 1990," and "Pro-Democracy Activists to Stand Trial, June 1990." Americas Watch plans to issue a follow-up newsletter on the continuing imprisonment of Cuban dissidents, to be published in January 1991, in time for the UNCHR meetings in Geneva.

On March 13, Americas Watch testified at joint hearings held by two House Foreign Affairs subcommittees on US-imposed restrictions on Americans' right to travel to certain countries, including Cuba. On July 12, Americas Watch testified on human rights in Cuba before the Congressional Human Rights Caucus. And on October 2, Americas Watch testified on the same subject before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States.

Early in 1990, Americas Watch's 1989 report, The Need to Sustain the Pressure, was published in Spanish translation.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

Human Rights Developments

The Dominican Republic continued to rely on forced labor by Haitians to sustain its state-run sugar industry during the 1990 harvest. With the cooperation of the Dominican military, the State Sugar Council (CEA) operated an abusive system combining unfair recruitment practices and restrictions on freedom of movement to compel Haitians to cut sugarcane for the duration of the harvest season.

The Dominican state sugar industry is entirely dependent on Haitian field labor. Because living conditions for cane cutters are so poor, and pay for the arduous work is so low, Dominicans refuse to cut cane; those employed by the sugar industry insist on working in mills or in oversight and managerial jobs on the plantations. To supplement the part of the Haitian workforce that willingly cuts Dominican cane season after season, the CEA each year must secure thousands of additional cane cutters to harvest the crop before it spoils. Since the pay that it offers is not enough to attract and maintain a sufficiently large force of voluntary labor, the CEA resorts to forced labor.

Usually, the CEA hires recruiters to lure Haitians from their villages and towns in Haiti with false promises of high pay and easy work. Recruiters are paid by the head -- as much as $15 to $30 -- for each Haitian delivered. The CEA then seizes the recruits at the Haitian-Dominican border with the help of armed Dominican border guards, and holds them until they are transported under guard to CEA plantations.

There are some variations on this pattern. In a few cases, Haitians are effectively kidnapped in Haiti by armed, CEA-employed recruiters and brought forcibly to the border. Some local Haitian authorities -- such as section chiefs and border guards -- have at times played a role in this forcible recruitment, either by demanding protection payment from recruiters or by conducting their own round-ups of Haitians for transport to Dominican plantations. In other cases, Haitians in Haiti are offered and given less arduous work, such as clearing beanfields, on the Dominican side of border; they are then arrested on the job by Dominican soldiers and brought forcibly to CEA plantations to cut cane.

Once paid for and in military custody, the Haitians are no longer free to return to Haiti, to choose their place of work in the Dominican Republic, or to select the type of labor they would perform, until the end of the harvest. On the CEA plantations, they are told by their supervisors that if they try to leave, they will be picked up by the military and returned to the plantation. On at least one plantation in 1990, CEA supervisors took away the clothing and personal belonging of the Haitians as a method of confining them to the plantation. Once compelled to stay on the plantations, the Haitians are obliged to work to make enough money to feed themselves. The only work available to them is cutting cane.

Typical conditions on the portions of CEA plantations where Haitians are forced to live -- the bateys -- include no running water, no latrines, no electricity, no kitchen facilities and no medical facilities. First-time Haitian cane cutters live in barracks-style concrete housing, with four to six men in a dark, bare room no larger than eight by ten feet. They sleep on two-inch foam mats, on the floor or on thin metal cots or bunkbeds.

The work day can last from 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. or longer. Wages are extremely low, leaving most cane cutters unable to save more than $25 to $50 at the end of eight months of work. Pay is determined on the basis of the amount of cane cut. A new recruit who is unaccustomed to cutting cane cannot cut enough to maintain himself, since one pound of beans bought from the CEA stores on the bateys can cost a full day's earnings; such newcomers are dependent on the charity of more experienced workers to survive.

No protective gear is offered for the back-breaking and dangerous work. Medical attention is often unavailable for the frequent, work-related injuries. Time-off is dictated by the necessities of the cane harvest rather than by the needs of the workers. Child labor is widespread.

This exploitive system is deeply entrenched. Successive Dominican governments have lacked the will to protect Haitian sugar-industry workers. Despite numerous investigations and reports of abuse by a variety of sources over the years -- including the International Labor Organization (ILO), and a devastating study commissioned by the CEA itself -- the CEA has disregarded domestic and international pressure to increase wages and improve working and living conditions, preferring to depend on the less expensive use of deceptive and forced recruitment and coerced labor. President Balaguer has treated the issue as a public relations problem, claiming that reports of human rights violations constitute "unjust propaganda,"7 and are merely part of a campaign by enemies of the Dominican government. The government's typical response to reports of abuse has been to deny summarily that violations exist, and to cite laws that it claims to uphold but does not.

On October 15, 1990, however, the Balaguer government announced a major policy shift aimed at improving the employment conditions of Haitian cane cutters on CEA plantations. The announcement was the first time in recent years that the Dominican government acknowledged any abuses in the sugar industry -- if only implicitly -- and promised to take steps to mitigate them.

President Balaguer instructed the state labor department to implement individual employment contracts containing specific terms of employment for the cane cutters, including the right to leave and change employment. He also directed the labor department to promote respect for the human rights of Haitian workers, and to monitor and report to him and to the ILO on its progress. In addition, President Balaguer vowed that hsi government and particularly the CEA would take steps to improve living conditions on the bateys. The Dominican President also promised that the immigration status of seasonal or temporary Haitian workers, especially cane cutters, would be legalized.

The announcement was an important first step, which should be implemented. However, it stopped short of directly acknowledging the foundation of the abuses on CEA plantations -- the use of force to compel Haitians to cut cane. Specifically, it failed to acknowledge the Dominican military's involvement in guarding and transporting the cane cutters, and conducting arbitrary arrests and round-ups of Haitians. It also did not explain why the Dominican government had refused to allow an ILO mission to investigate worker rights in early October 1990, particularly since the government has now pledged to report to the ILO.

US Policy

As the Dominican Republic's largest trading partner and the largest consumer of Dominican sugar, the United States is in a position to exert significant pressure on the Dominican government to respect worker rights in its state-run sugar industry. In 1990, some important preliminary steps were taken to use this leverage to put an end to the use of forced labor.

Sugar is the main Dominican export to the United States, which continues to allocate the largest segment of its sugar quota to the Dominican Republic. The US sugar quota for the Dominican Republic, which is set by the US Department of Agriculture, was increased on September 12, 1989 from 185,328 tons for the twelve months of 1989 to 333,035 tons for the 21 months from January 1, 1989 to September 30, 1990, a 2.7 per cent increase. It was increased again on April 25, 1990 to 460,997 tons for the same 21-month period ending September 30, 1990, or a 38 per cent increase. This share represents 16 percent of the total US sugar quota.8

In addition, the United States purchases approximately 75 per cent of Dominican exports, having granted the Dominican Republic trade benefits not only under the Generalized System of Preferences, but also under the Caribbean Basin Initiative and the so-called 9802 program (formerly the Sections 806-807 program). The Bush administration also requested from Congress some $53 million in bilateral aid for fiscal year 1991; about $2 million of this was military aid, $12 million was Economic Support Funds, $11 million was development assistance, $23 million was a food grant under PL480, and the remainder was for the Peace Corps.

Despite its substantial interest in the Dominican sugar industry, and its considerable economic leverage over the Dominican government, the US government took little interest in the plight of Haitians forced to work on Dominican sugar plantations until quite recently. Only in the summer of 1989, in response to a petition filed by Americas Watch challenging Dominican use of forced labor, did US Trade Represenative (USTR) Carla Hills begin a review of Dominican labor practices, pursuant to a law that bars trade benefits under the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) to nations that violate internationally recognized labor rights.

The results of this review were published in April 1990. For 15 pages, the USTR listed a series of unrefuted reports of extremely serious violations of workers rights, including a submission from the ILO expressing "extreme concern over the situation of Haitian workers"; a quote from a 1984 book by President Balaguer describing the "new form of denigrating slavery which is practiced at the present time in the Dominican sugar ingenios"; as well as reports from Americas Watch and Dominican groups such as the National Union of Dominican-Haitian Workers and Immigrants.

Despite this compelling evidence of forced labor, the USTR avoided reaching the logical conclusion that GSP benefits should be denied. Instead, she decided to postpone for another year any decision on the suspension of trade benefits and to continue a further review of Dominican labor practicies during that period. The USTR's excuse for not denying GSP benefits was that she had investigated only the sugar industry without examining labor practices in other Dominican industries. The USTR never explained how practices in other industries, where comparable abuses are not alleged, could absolve her of the duty to deny GSP trade benefits to the Dominican Republic until coercive practices in the sugar industry ceased. There is nothing in US law to support the USTR's approach,9 and it is all the more inappropriate in light of the Dominican government's dominance of the sugar industry. Nevertheless, even the decision to extend formal review for another year, with the threat of a GSP cutoff at the end, maintained considerable pressure on the Dominican government to address its use of forced labor.

Further pressure came from Congress. In June 1990, the US House of Representatives gave serious consideration to legislation sponsored by Rep. Joe Moakley which would have linked the Dominican Republic's sugar quota to the government's good faith efforts to upgrade working conditions of Haitian cane cutters, end the use of force in their recruitment, and respect freedom of movement and association. Rep. Moakley withdrew the bill from consideration after he received specific assurances from the Dominican Ambassador to the United States, the former head of the CEA, that the Dominican government would respond to his concerns. Rep. Moakley assured the human rights community that he would revisit the question in 1991 if considerable progress had not been made.

The State Department added somewhat to this pressure. Improving on its traditional neglect or understatement of the problem of forced labor in the chapter on the Dominican Republic in its annual Country Reports on Human Rights Practices, the State Department, in its report covering 1989 (published in February 1990), devoted greater attention to the issue, frequently citing a report issued in 1989 by Americas Watch, the National Coalition for Haitian Refugees, and Caribbean Rights. Still, however, the State Department had little to say in its own voice to confirm that violations were being committed.

Apart from the country report, the Bush administration issued no public statements on Dominican rights abuses in 1990. A US embassy official in Santo Domingo justified this silence by claiming that it would be inappropriate to comment publicly while Dominican labor practices are under review by the USTR. In the view of Americas Watch, however, a country with sufficiently abusive labor rights practices to warrant formal USTR review should hardly win an exemption from critical public comment once that review is under way.

In mid-August, then Secretary of Labor Elizabeth Dole, who attended the inauguration of President Balaguer as the Bush administration's representative, visited Batey La Mula on the CEA's Boca Chica sugar plantation, just outside Santo Domingo. According to one Dominican press account, Secretary Dole, accompanied by US Ambassador Paul Taylor, spoke with cane cutters and their families about working conditions and child labor. She also encountered a guarda campestre -- a CEA-employed guard armed with a rifle -- and asked how many cane cutters were on the batey. The visit was an important symbol of concern over conditions on CEA plantations. Again, however, its significance would have been enhanced if Secretary Dole or the US embassy had reinforced the message with a public statement.

At the end of August, Ambassdor Taylor met with the newly appointed Dominican Labor Secretary, Washington de Peña. Although at least one Dominican newspaper reported that Ambassador Taylor used the meeting to express US concern over reports of abuses in the Dominican sugar industry, the embassy maintained that the meeting was simply a courtesy visit.

Despite the shortcomings in many of these steps, the cumulative effect may have played a role in prompting President Balaguer's October 1990 announcement of a program to ameliorate conditions for Haitian cane cutters. The apparent cause and effect -- the announcement came just before the opening of the first harvest season following these actions, and coincided with a Dominican submission to the USTR -- highlights the considerable potential that the US government has to encourage respect for workers rights in the Dominican Republic. Particularly important in this regard, in light of the futility of past efforts simply to condemn Dominican labor practices, is the potential denial of GSP or other trade benefits, and the potential reduction of the US sugar quota, if the use of forced labor continues.

The Work of Americas Watch

As part of its ongoing efforts to monitor conditions on the CEA sugar cane plantations, Americas Watch, the National Coalition for Haitian Refugees and Caribbean Rights, sent an investigative mission to the Dominican Republic in February 1990. The researchers interviewed dozens of Haitian cane cutters, primarily those who were in the Dominican Republic for the first time and thus had most recently experienced Dominican recruitment practices. These Haitians provided first-hand accounts of the forced and dishonest recruitment methods used by the CEA, the restrictions on the Haitians' freedom to leave the plantations, and the subhuman working and living conditions. Interviews were conducted on the bateys at five of the ten sugar mills run by the CEA, in three different regions: Ingenios Consuelo, Porvenir and Santa Fe in San Pedro de Macoris; Central Barahona in Barahona; and Central Río Haina near Santo Domingo. For contrast, the researchers also briefly visited the privately owned Central Romana in La Romana, where comparable abuses have not been reported.

The preliminary findings of the mission were reported to the USTR on March 1 and these findings were reiterated in testimony before the USTR on September 27. The preliminary findings were also submitted to the UN Human Rights Committee, which held hearings on March 29 and 30 to assess the Dominican Republic's compliance with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. In April and May, several major US newspaper published articles about Haitian cane cutters in the Dominican Republic, based in part on the mission's research. On May 14, a mission participant also published in The Nation, "A Bitter Harvest for Haitians". In June, the findings of the mission were included in the three organizations' second published report on the Dominican Republic, Harvesting Oppression: Forced Haitian Labor in the Dominican Sugar Industry.

7 Geraldino González, "Califica injusta denuncia haitianos," Listin Diario, November 10, 1989.

8 The next largest portion of the US sugar quota, 412,850 tons, or 14.5% of the quota, is allocated to the Philippines, followed by Brazil at 379,798 tons (13.5%) and Australia at 217,401 tons (7.5%).

9 See Section 502(b)(8) of the Trade Act. It is worth noting that the legislative history of Section 502 (b)(8) indicates that Congress intended that countries must be taking steps to afford all five of the internationally recognized labor rights cited in the Trade Act: the right of association, the right to organize and bargain collectively, the right to be free of any form of forced or compulsory labor, the right not to be sent to work before a minimum age, and the right to acceptable conditions of work with respect to minimum wages, hours of work and occupational safety and health. In other words, meeting one or even four of the labor rights criteria is not enough to prevent a suspension of benefits if at least one of the five standards is not met.
EL SALVADOR

Human Rights Developments

The year 1990 ended much as it began in El Salvador -- with a great deal of uncertainty about the country's prospects for peace after more than a decade of violence and bloodshed. On November 20, the guerrillas of the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN) launched a series of attacks against military and strategic targets throughout El Salvador. The FMLN, which termed the attacks a "limited military operation," claimed that it launched the operation to "punish" the Salvadoran military and "accelerate" the peace negotiations, which had bogged down principally over the issue of military reform. At least in the short run, however, the assault, which the FMLN declared on December 31, may have weakened the prospects for peace.

According to initial reports, the FMLN's year-end offensive resulted in hundreds of dead and wounded combatants as well as scores if not hundreds of civilian casualties. Near the start of the offensive, Auxiliary Bishop Gregorio Rosa Chávez stated in a November 25 homily that "both sides did what they could to avoid harming civilians." It, indeed, appeared that international scrutiny following the guerrilla offensive of November 1989, in which both sides engaged in clear violations of the laws of war, as well as a human rights accord signed by the government and the FMLN in July 1990, heightened the sensitivity of both sides to the need to protect civilian lives. However, the number of civilian casualties -- both dead and wounded -- suggested that both sides had put noncombatants into the line of fire.

Prior to the FMLN military operation, the human rights situation in El Salvador during 1990 was characterized by a discouraging increase in death squad killings; continuing setbacks in the investigations of major human rights cases; lingering FMLN abuses including summary executions; and a continuing practice of disappearance following arrest on the part of the armed forces. In addition, in July, the Salvadoran governmental Human Rights Commission protested to the armed forces the "truly alarming frequency" of human rights violations by civil defense units, including murder, assault and rape. Statistics compiled by the Archdiocesan human rights office Tutela Legal through the end of September showed that the vast majority of targeted assassinations of civilians continued to be carried out by the army, security forces and death squads associated with them.

The marked increase in the number of death squad killings is particularly troubling. Although death squad assassinations declined steadily in early and mid-1989 (following a disturbing upswing in 1988), they climbed sharply throughout 1990, and they were, as of the third quarter of 1990, occurring at a rate approximately double that of the comparable period in 1989. The roller-coaster statistics on death squad murders indicated that little had changed in the structures that permit such abuses to occur.

On the positive side, there was a limited, yet hopeful, accord on human rights between the government and the guerrillas signed in July 1990, and a tentative reopening of political space which had all but evaporated following the FMLN's November 1989 offensive.

To the government's credit, following the lifting of the state of siege in April 1990, there was greater freedom of expression and association than in the earlier months of the year. Yet, during the year-end offensive, there were increased reports of searches, harassment, and ransacking of humanitarian organizations' offices by the army and security forces. The National Revolutionary Movement also denounced the government for having made accusations on radio and television blaming leftist politicians Guillermo Ungo and Rubén Zamora for the FMLN attacks; the government later privately apologized for the accusations.

There were other notable exceptions to the reopening of political space. On July 3, government soldiers raided the San Salvador office of the Social Christian Popular Movement (MPSC) and later blamed the incident on common crime. Two MPSC activists were also detained in Santa Ana, and an activist of the National Democratic Union, a small leftist party, was found murdered. Serious threats were received by leaders of the UNTS (National Unity of Salvadoran Workers) and UNOC (National Union of Workers and Peasants) labor coalitions following their ubmission of petitions charging labor rights violations to US Trade Representative Carla Hills. Paid advertisements taken out by the ruling ARENA party appeared in Salvadoran newspapers in September labeling the unions' actions traitorous.

As in years past, Salvadoran civilians, often repatriates, suffered from indiscriminate attacks by both the Salvadoran air force and the FMLN guerrillas. On February 11, in Corral de Piedra, Chalatenango, two rockets fired from a Salvadoran air force helicopter hit a house in which 21 civilians had taken refuge, killing five and wounding sixteen. Four of the five killed were children under the age of 10; eleven of the wounded were children between four months and twelve years of age. Throughout the year there were reports of indiscriminate army fire in populated areas during or following FMLN attacks; army sources have insisted that their fire was aimed at rebel positions, an assertion contested by local villagers.

There were several cases of indiscriminate attacks by the FMLN in 1990 as well. On October 23, the rebels attacked the Defense Ministry compound in San Salvador, launching a homemade explosive which missed its intended target and hit a nearby house, killing two children and wounding two women. (On February 27, 1989, long before this attack, the FMLN had announced the suspension of the use of these devices, which are homemade and unreliable. Americas Watch reiterates its call for the FMLN to abandon the use of such inaccurate devices in civilian areas, a practice which violates the laws of war.)

Americas Watch also received reports of indiscriminate FMLN attacks and attacks in which insufficient efforts were made to avoid collateral civilian injuries. Often, these involve FMLN ambushes of soldiers as they entered or left towns, resulting in combat in populated areas which endangers civilians. In one case, the FMLN and Salvadoran armed forces engaged in two hours of fighting around a school where 40 children were trapped. Miraculously, the children suffered no injuries. In a case of apparently indiscriminate fire in September, an eight-year-old girl in San Agustín, Usulután was shot and killed by the guerrillas as she ran toward her home. The mother surmised that the guerrillas killed her daughter because "she looks pretty old, and they might have thought she was armed."

The Salvadoran government and FMLN guerrillas participated in seven rounds of United Nations-mediated peace talks beginning in Geneva in April. In late November, it was reported that the UN negotiating team had taken a more active mediating role, preparing a confidential proposal which was submitted to both sides. The plan reportedly called for far-reaching military reforms which the leadership of the armed forces had so far resisted. Among the proposals were the establishment of an independent commission to investigate and dismiss military officers found guilty of human rights abuses, and the dismantling of the armed forces' intelligence branch and two of the country's three security forces. At the end of 1990, it appeared unlikely that the two sides would come to a peace agreement soon. Yet one hopeful sign was the absence of calls by either side to withdraw from the peace talks following the FMLN military offensive of mid-November.

In July, in the first concrete achievement of the peace process, the Salvadoran government and the FMLN signed a broad human rights accord. The agreement set out obligations for both sides in the conflict to avoid practices that endanger lives, and provided for the establishment of a UN mission to verify human rights practices following a ceasefire. As movement toward a ceasefire slowed late in the year, the UN nonetheless began preparations for a verification group to start operating before a ceasefire.

Many, if not most, of the obligations assumed under the accord pertain to the Salvadoran government. They cover the rights of detainees, the displaced, and repatriated refugees, as well as guarantees of freedom of expression. Many of these obligations are already contained in the Salvadoran Constitution as well as in international human rights conventions to which El Salvador is a signatory. The accord was thus mainly a broad statement of good intentions, a promising first step in the protection of human rights in El Salvador. Immediately following the accord, both sides appeared to reaffirm their good intentions by reducing violations in some categories. The government also established additional judicial mechanisms to determine the whereabouts of detainees. But by October, prior to the launching of the FMLN year-end offensive, the rate of violations had returned to the pre-accord pace.

The investigation into the November 16, 1989 murder of six Jesuit priests, their housekeeper and her daughter proceeded at a snail's pace during 1990,10 and was tainted by allegations that the High Command both had prior knowledge of a plot to kill the priests and had conspired to cover up the crime. On January 13, President Alfredo Cristiani ordered the detention of Col. Alfredo Benavides Morales of the Military Academy and eight other soldiers for the murders. (One of the accused is still at large.) Later in the year, Judge Ricardo Zamora ordered the arrests of additional soldiers, including a lieutenant colonel charged with destruction of evidence.11

In a judicial system already fraught with problems -- such as the provision of Salvadoran law which prohibits testimony of one co-defendant against another -- Judge Zamora must also overcome obstacles such as the destruction and fabrication of evidence by members of the armed forces and false testimony by Salvadoran soldiers. While recognizing the difficult circumstances in which Judge Zamora must function, Americas Watch is deeply concerned that his intention announced on December 8 to move the case to trial will definitively halt further investigation of the role of other senior officers in the murder conspiracy. We fear that his decision stems from a political imperative felt by Salvadoran, as well as US, officials to get the case behind them as quickly as possible. Jesuit Provincial José María Tojeira said that the judge's decision could lead to a "mockery of justice" by failing to identify the intellectual authors of the crime.

Even after widespread international condemnation of the Jesuit massacre, Jesuit priests in El Salvador continued to face harassment from the armed forces. In mid-August, Fathers Jon Cortina and Nicolás Alvarenga were fired upon several times by an army sniper in the northern town where Cortina is pastor. One bullet missed Father Cortina's head by several inches while he was attempting to move a vehicle widely known to belong to the Jesuits; two other shots fell directly in front of him as he attempted to leave his vehicle and deliver a letter to some nuns in the town. Father Cortina reported that before the attack a group of soldiers from the Bracamonte Battalion had entered a nearby town, saying that they were going to suck the blood of the priests that work in the zone.

The lack of thorough investigation and prosecution in the Jesuit case was not unique in El Salvador. In fact, 1990 was notable for the number of important human rights cases that were dismissed wholly or in part. The cases included the following two in which the United States had pressed hard for an investigation and prosecution of those responsible:

San Sebastián: On September 21, 1988, Salvadoran soldiers, commanded by the head of military intelligence of the Fifth Brigade, Maj. Mauricio Beltrán Granados, summarily executed ten captured peasants in the hamlet of San Francisco, San Vicente, staging the executions to look like a guerrilla ambush. The Bush administration, and particularly Ambassador William Walker, made resolution of the case a top US priority. During a trip to El Salvador in February 1989, Vice President Dan Quayle warned Salvadoran officials that US aid would be threatened if the killers were not brought to justice. Following Quayle's visit, nine Salvadoran soldiers were arrested for the crime.

In February 1990, however, charges were dismissed against seven of the nine military defendants in the case. The judge ruled that the case should proceed against Maj. Beltrán and Sub-Sgt. Rafael González Villalobos. Then, in May, an appeals court in San Vicente reversed the decision to try Sub-Sgt. González Villalobos, and affirmed the dismissal of charges against the remaining defendants. Only Maj. Beltrán remained in detention.

The court reasoned that the principal evidence against González -- his confession and the testimony of another soldier -- was inadmissible because it had been taken by the US-funded Special Investigative Unit (SIU), which El Salvador's criminal procedure code does not designate as an auxiliary organ of the judiciary with power to provide evidence to the courts. At the end of 1990, the case against Maj. Beltrán was scheduled to proceed to jury selection, although many doubted he would ever actually stand trial.

Although the Salvadoran judicial system is not based on precedent, it is alarming to contemplate the ramifications of a ruling that SIU-gathered evidence is inadmissible. In future cases, including that of the Jesuits, defendants may invoke the irregularities of Salvadoran criminal procedure to ensure that incriminating evidence gathered by the SIU cannot be considered. The decision also raises serious questions about the wisdom of US funding of the SIU.

Kidnapping-For-Profit: Between 1982 and 1985, rightists and members of the armed forces posing as leftist guerrillas kidnapped wealthy Salvadorans and ransomed them for profit. In April 1990, kidnapping and robbery charges were dismissed for lack of evidence against all but two of the eight defendants in the kidnapping-for-profit case. The court also dismissed robbery charges against the two remaining defendants, including National Guard intelligence officer Rodolfo Isidro López Sibrián, who had also been implicated in the 1981 murder of two US agrarian reform advisers and the head of the Salvadoran land reform agency. López Sibrián remained in detention, but his father-in-law, Luis Orlando Llovera Ballete, had been released in March 1989 after a controversial court ruling. To his credit, President Cristiani instructed the Attorney General to appeal the dismissal of charges.

In an encouraging move, the Bush administration quietly suspended $2 million in US aid to the Salvadoran judicial system because of setbacks in the prosecution of the San Sebastián and the kidnapping-for-profit cases.

Americas Watch was also disturbed by the lack of serious investigation, either in El Salvador or Guatemala, of the murders of two Social Democratic leaders, Salvadoran Héctor Oquelí Colindres and Guatemalan Gilda Flores. Oquelí was under-secretary general of the National Revolutionary Movement and secretary of the Committee for Latin America and the Caribbean of the Socialist International; Flores was a Guatemalan lawyer and activist of the Social Democratic Party. The two were abducted early in the morning of January 12, 1990 on their way to the Guatemala City airport. Their bodies were found later that day.

In July, after undertaking an investigation and producing two reports on the murders, the Guatemalan government charged ARENA leader Roberto D'Aubuisson and two businessmen, Orlando and Fernando de Sola, with masterminding the murders. Two prominent US human rights lawyers asked by the Socialist International to investigate the killings found both Guatemalan reports on the murders seriously flawed. They concurred, however, that the assassinations were most probably carried out on behalf of, if not by, Salvadoran rightists, and added that Guatemalans, including members of the security forces, were probably involved as well.12 Salvadoran President Cristiani denied that any Salvadoran was involved in the murders. The case remained unsolved at year's end.

US Policy

The Bush administration went on record throughout 1990 in favor of a negotiated settlement in El Salvador, supporting President Cristiani's call for peace talks to end the war. Yet like its predecessor, the Bush administration was unwilling or unable to pressure the Salvadoran armed forces to make necessary reforms, or to admit that the absence of such reform posed the central obstacle to the talks.

In addition, despite months of insistence that a satisfactory investigation of the Jesuit murders was a central objective of US policy, administration officials withheld key evidence from both Salvadoran and US congressional investigators. Administration officials also opposed efforts in Congress to punish the Salvadoran government for its lack of progress in investigating the murders by witholding military aid.

The year began inauspiciously when on January 2, US Ambassador to El Salvador William Walker told Rep. Joe Moakley, head of a House task force on the Jesuit murders, that the priests might have been killed by guerrillas dressed up in military uniforms. That same day, Maj. Eric Buckland, a US adviser in El Salvador, went to a superior with information that a Salvadoran colonel had confessed his role in the crime. The head of the US military group in El Salvador, Col. Milton Menjivar, then took the information to Col. René Emilio Ponce, then head of the Salvadoran High Command. Menjivar named Buckland's source -- his counterpart in psychological operations in the Salvadoran army, Col. Carlos Avilés. In the view of the Moakley Task Force, Menjivar's action led to many of the important breakthroughs in the investigation; but the "burning" of Col. Avilés sent a powerful message that others with knowledge of the crime should not dare to share it with the US embassy.13

Buckland was also the source of other explosive information regarding the Jesuits. In a second affidavit given to the FBI in mid-January, he implicated Col Benavides in a plot to kill the Jesuits ten days before the murders were carried out (and before the guerrillas' November 1989 offensive). According to Buckland, whose statement was also videotaped by the FBI, Col. Benavides was threatening to kill the priests; upon learning of Benavides's intentions, Col. Ponce sent Col. Avilés to meet with Benavides to deter him from committing the crime. After providing this information to the FBI, Buckland recanted his affidavit, apparently under intense pressure to do so. According to one account, he was "grilled and grilled" until "finally he cracked," and was an emotional "wreck" following three days of interrogation and polygraph tests. US officials were quoted in the press as saying that the information in Buckland's second affidavit was 100 percent correct.14

The information in Buckland's second affidavit was shared with the US embassy in San Salvador and with the State Department. Over a ten-month period, senior US officials withheld Buckland's testimony about the plot to kill the priests from the Salvadoran judge presiding in the case, from the SIU, and from the Moakley Task Force. When the information was finally leaked to Rep. Moakley, he insisted that the affidavit and videotape be turned over to Salvadoran Judge Ricardo Zamora. By withholding the information, the Bush administration delayed for ten months the investigation of this prior threat against the Jesuits, as well as of Col. Ponce's role in covering up for Col. Benavides after the murders took place.

Throughout the winter and early spring, the tone of congressional debate over aid to El Salvador was set by the investigation, or lack thereof, into the Jesuit murders. The Moakley Task Force played the preeminent role in shaping congressional opinion. On April 30, the Task Force released its first report, stating that "the murders of the Jesuits reflect problems within the Salvadoran armed forces that go far beyond the actions of a particular unit on a particular night." The report stated that the investigation and preparations for prosecuting the case were at a "virtual standstill," and noted that investigators had made little effort to determine whether senior military officers other than Col. Benavides, who was detained in January, might have played a role in ordering or covering up the crimes.15

The release of the Moakley report gave impetus to efforts in Congress to cut military aid to El Salvador. That, in turn, prompted the administration to attempt to get the investigation moving. Ambassador Walker appeared on Salvadoran television on May 1 to complain that the Jesuit case needed more investigation. (Just one week earlier, Ambassador Walker had stated on CBS's 60 Minutes that the case was solved.) One week after Ambassador Walker's appeal, State Department spokesman Richard Boucher quoted President Cristiani as saying that the SIU had resumed a serious investigation and that the case would come to trial within 90 days. When asked by a reporter when the investigation had concluded so that it could be resumed, Boucher responded: "I think there was something of a lull."

On May 22, the House of Representatives voted 250 to 163 to reduce military aid to El Salvador by 50 percent. The amendment was sponsored by Rep. Moakley and another member of the Task Force, Rep. John Murtha, a long-time supporter of aid to El Salvador. Although the underlying piece of legislation containing the Moakley-Murtha amendment was defeated on final passage, the vote on May 22 represented an overwhelming repudiation of administration policy, reflecting widespread revulsion over the Jesuit murders and the Salvadoran government's failure to investigate.

In June, the Bush administration intensified its focus on the Senate, which was considering companion legislation offered by Senators Christopher Dodd and Patrick Leahy. The administration offered privately to cut military aid to El Salvador by 15 to 30 percent of the proposed $85 million. The discussions broke down when senators and administration officials could not agree over the mechanisms for restoring the full amount of aid.

Meanwhile, the findings of the Moakley Task Force continued to feed sentiment in Congress for an aid cut. In a statement released on August 15, Rep. Moakley charged that the Salvadoran Army High Command was "engaged in a conspiracy to obstruct justice" in the Jesuits' case. Moakley said that Salvadoran military officers had "withheld evidence, destroyed evidence, falsified evidence and repeatedly perjured themselves in testimony before the judge." He stated that the military's goal "from the beginning" had been "to control the investigation and to limit the number and rank of the officers who will be held responsible for the crimes."

As the Senate prepared to vote on its aid-cut legislation in October, Secretary of State James Baker, Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger, and Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Bernard Aronson made a last-minute lobbying effort to get the Senate to water down the Dodd-Leahy legislation. Publicly, administration officials supported a military aid reduction. But behind the scenes, administration officials sent personal letters and made phone calls urging senators to vote against the legislation. Officials complained that the Dodd-Leahy bill would punish the Salvadoran government and favor the FMLN in peace talks. The administration supported an amendment by Senators Bob Graham and John McCain which would have allowed the administration to restore aid to the Salvadoran government if there were no cease-fire within 60 days. Because the UN-sponsored talks envisioned that a ceasefire would grow out of prior political accords between the government and the FMLN, the proposal for a ceasefire in 60 days was simply a way of ensuring a swift restoration of aid as the peace talks remained bogged down.

On October 19, Congress finally parted ways with administration policy on El Salvador. The Senate voted 74 to 25 to endorse the earlier House decision to cut military aid to El Salvador by one-half in fiscal year 1991. It also rejected, 58 to 39, the Graham-McCain amendment supported by the administration. For the first time in a decade, both Houses of Congress voted in freestanding aid bills that became law to cut military aid to El Salvador on human rights grounds. The waning of the Cold War, and with it fears of Soviet penetration in the hemisphere, surely provided the backdrop for the congressional decision.

The final legislation approved by Congress provides half of the original military aid request, $42.5 million, which can be restored in full if President Bush determines that the FMLN: is not negotiating in good faith; refuses an active meditation role by the UN; refuses to accept a plan by the UN Secretary General for a settlement to the conflict, including a ceasefire; acquires significant lethal arms shipments from outside the country; launches an offensive jeopardizing the survival of the government; or engages in violence against civilian noncombatants.

All military aid is to be terminated if the President determines and reports in writing to Congress that the Salvadoran government: fails to negotiate in good faith; refuses an active mediation role by the UN; refuses to accept a plan by the UN Secretary General for a settlement to the conflict, including a ceasefire; fails to conduct a serious and professional investigation into, and prosecution of, the November 16, 1989 killings of the Jesuits and their associates; fails to actively seek and encourage a law enforcement service from outside El Salvador, such as Scotland Yard or INTERPOL, to accompany and monitor investigators in the Jesuit murders; or if the military or security forces engage in violence directed at civilian targets. On November 5, President Bush signed the fiscal year 1991 foreign aid bill, including the El Salvador restrictions.16 In response to the late November guerrilla offensive, the Bush administration announced on December 6 that it was accelerating delivery of military aid in the pipeline and from the 1991 appropriation.

In an encouraging move, on October 27, Congress passed the Immigration Act of 1990, which includes a provision granting Salvadoran refugees an 18-month stay of deportation. The bill mandates that Temporary Protected Status (TPS) be granted to Salvadorans who were in the US before September 19, 1990. TPS is granted only for a period of 18 months, although it could be renewed by Congress or the Attorney General. The stay of deportation is an important mechanism for ensuring at least temporarily that Salvadorans whose petitions for asylum have been rejected by a deeply biased review system or who have failed even to apply for asylum in light of the near futility of doing so under the current system are not returned to their country to face political persecution. Refugee assistance groups have noted the danger, however, that Salvadorans registering under the new law could provide the INS with information that could lead to deportation and persecution if the 18-month period is not extended.

The Work of Americas Watch

Americas Watch devoted considerable resources to El Salvador in 1990, maintaining (since 1985) an office in San Salvador, producing several studies, and providing information to congressional offices and the press throughout the year. In March, Americas Watch published A Year of Reckoning: El Salvador A Decade After the Assassination of Archbishop Romero. The report documented human rights abuses by both the Salvadoran government and the FMLN during 1989, and included a review of a decade of US policy in El Salvador. In May, Americas Watch issued a report on summary executions of several hundred captured civilians carried out by the FMLN since the early 1980s. The study rejected rebel assertions that its executions were carried out following trials which met international standards of due process. In September, Americas Watch released a study of eight major human rights cases in El Salvador, illustrating the impunity still enjoyed by military officers and death squad members for their crimes.17

On August 22, Americas Watch presented a brief to the Inter-American Human Rights Commission of the Organization of American States on the Jesuit case, highlighting the Salvadoran military's falsification of testimony, destruction of evidence, and refusal to cooperate with judicial initiatives. Because the Salvadoran government failed to respond to an initial request from the Commission for information concerning the case, Americas Watch requested that the Commission formally accuse the government of violating the right to life and due process (Articles 4 and 8 of the American Convention on Human Rights) and bring the case to trial before the Inter-American Court on Human Rights.

In addition, on September 28 and 29, US Trade Representative (USTR) Carla Hills held hearings on labor rights violations in El Salvador at which Americas Watch testified. The hearings were to determine whether El Salvador's labor rights practices precluded it under US law from receiving trade benefits under the Generalized System of Preferences. Representatives of Salvadoran trade unions -- the National Union of Workers and Peasants (UNOC) and the National Federation of Salvadoran Workers (FENASTRAS) -- and US human rights and labor organizations, including Americas Watch and the AFL-CIO, also submitted petitions earlier in the year about extensive labor rights violations. If the USTR decides that the Salvadoran government is not guaranteeing labor rights, trade benefits must be terminated. A decision is expected on April 1, 1991.

10 For an overview see Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, The Jesuit Case a Year Later: An Interim Report, November 15, 1990.

11 During the November 1990 fighting, army intelligence officer Capt. Carlos Herrera Carranza was reportedly killed by a sniper's bullet. According to court documents, Capt. Herrera Carranza initiated the search of the Jesuit residence three days before the massacre. It has also been reported that Capt. Herrera Carranza entered a senior intelligence meeting early on November 16 to report that Rev. Ignacio Ellacuría, one of the six murdered priests, had been killed. Capt. Herrera Carranza claimed that he had heard the news of the Jesuit massacre on the radio, but it appeared that his announcement came before any station began broadcasting news of the massacre. He was the second captain involved in the Jesuit case to have been killed in 1990.

12 Tom Farer and Robert Goldman, The Assassination of Lic. Gilda Flores and Dr. Hector Oquelí: An Evaluation of the Investigation and Reports Prepared by the Government of the Republic of Guatemala, September 1990, pp. 23-25.

13 Salvadoran retired Col. Sigifredo Ochoa stated on CBS's 60 Minutes in April that "the American officer [Col. Menjivar] put the informant in a very difficult situation, so dangerous that he [Avilés] could have been killed." Yet Ambassador Walker defended the handling of Avilés and said that, "Unlike, you know, newspapermen, who feel they'd rather die than reveal a source, we're not in that same game." See "Troublesome Priests," Village Voice, May 22, 1990.

14 "Cracking the Major," Newsweek, November 19, 1990. Maj. Buckland was the second witness in the Jesuit case to have recanted after being interrogated by the FBI. The first, Lucía Barrera de Cerna, recanted her eyewitnesses testimony following several days of intensive, incommunicado interrogation at the hands of the FBI and a Salvadoran army officer. She later stated that she felt pressured into recanting by the threatening and intimidating manner in which she was interrogated.

15 Speaker's Task Force on El Salvador, Interim Report, April 30, 1990, pp. 6-7.

16 In fiscal year 1991, the Bush administration requested $180 million in Economic Support Funds (ESF) and $85 million in military aid. The law (PL 101-513) halves the military aid, but does not set a specific level for ESF. Up to $1.5 million of ESF may be made available to assist the Special Investigative Unit, but only after congressional committees receive a report from the Secretary of State transmitting a plan and timetable for the Salvadoran government to transfer the unit from military to civilian control. Ten percent of the withheld military aid may be used to assist in carrying out judicial reform, and $5 million of military aid may not be made available until all investigative action is concluded in the 1981 murder of two US labor advisors and the head of the Salvadoran agrarian reform agency, and until that case, the 1988 San Sebastián case, the case of the October 1989 bombing of the FENASTRAS (National Federation of Salvadoran Workers) offices and the November 1989 Jesuit case are fully prosecuted. In addition, during FY91 and 92, the US and Salvadoran governments shall jointly program $10 million worth of ESF for retiring the debt owed by the Jesuit-run University of Central America to the Inter-American Development Bank.

17 News From Americas Watch, "Impunity Prevails in Human Rights Cases," September 1990.
ASIA WATCH OVERVIEW

Asia witnessed a few triumphs and many more setbacks for human rights in 1990. One notable triumph was the success of the pro-democracy movement in Nepal, inspired in part by events in Eastern Europe, which managed to curb the powers of the King, replace a repressive government with a multiparty parliamentary system, and promulgate a new Constitution guaranteeing civil and political rights. In Cambodia and Afghanistan, the US-Soviet rapprochement led to progress in efforts to settle long-standing wars, although by the end of the year, the fragile agreement of the four parties to the Cambodian conflict on a UN-led transition authority had run into serious trouble, and fighting was escalating with the onset of the dry season. The Soviet Union's waning interest in supporting Afghan President Najibullah led the latter to embark on a program of reform which, if properly implemented, could lead to significantly greater freedoms of expression, association and assembly.

Those were the bright spots in an otherwise gloomy picture. Singapore's Lee Kuan Yew, one of the world's longest serving heads of state, turned over his prime minister's post to Goh Chok Tong in November but no one believed he had really relinquished power or that Singapore's intolerance of political opposition and freedom of expression would alter. The Chinese government announced the release of some 881 prisoners but thousands were believed to remain in custody, and the trials of the "black hands" of the 1989 demonstrations were being prepared at year's end.

Democratic governments such as Sri Lanka and India were torn apart by civil strife, partly of their own making, and reacted to opposition abuses by committing serious human rights violations themselves. Newly elected governments, such as those in Pakistan and the Philippines, proved increasingly unable to assert civilian control over unruly or uncooperative militaries. The government of South Korea, also recently elected, proceeded with its "Nordpolitik" at the highest levels while cracking down on those who tried to visit or contact counterparts in North Korea, and suppressing organizations such as trade unions suspected of being influenced by the left.

Political dissenters continued to be imprisoned in Indonesia and East Timor, China and Tibet, and Burma, where the ruling State Law and Order Restoration Council failed to turn over power to an opposition overwhelmingly elected to the National Assembly on May 27.

Freedom of expression was in short supply throughout the region. In China and Tibet, dissent continued to be punished with arrest and imprisonment; students who took part in the 1989 demonstrations in Tiananmen Square had the fact noted in their personnel files, perhaps endangering their job prospects for the rest of their lives. In Indonesia, a student who criticized government policies was sentenced to eight-and-a-half years in prison on subversion charges. In Burma, monasteries were shut down as monks took a prominent role in protests against the military leadership. In Cambodia, senior government officials including a Cabinet minister were arrested for advocating a multiparty system. In Sri Lanka, a member of parliament was stopped at the airport en route to Geneva, and documents he was carrying to bring to the United Nations Working Group on Disappearances were confiscated. Further restrictions on the press were imposed in Singapore. If there was one overriding abuse in a continent marked by a crazy quilt of political systems and conflicts, it could well be the lack of freedom of expression, from which many other abuses followed.

Bush administration policies toward human rights violators in the region were contradictory and inconsistent. Administration officials castigated Burma and appeased China; talked with the Soviet Union about settling the Afghan conflict while supporting an abusive guerrilla offensive against Kabul; spoke of determination to prevent the Khmer Rouge from returning to power while supporting the Khmer Rouge's military allies.

Nowhere were the contradictions more obvious than on China. The administration lobbied against congressionally imposed sanctions even though prisoner releases, the safe passage of Fang Lizhi and his family out of China, and the lifting of martial law in Tibet and China were carefully timed efforts by the Chinese authorities to maintain trading privileges and ease the resumption of loans. Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs Richard Schifter went to Beijing in December to hold discussions on human rights, but only after the administration had effectively lifted all sanctions but one (the ban on military sales) in exchange for Chinese cooperation in the Persian Gulf. By seeing Foreign Minister Qian Qichen at the White House in November and allowing the World Bank to resume loans of a nonhumanitarian nature, President Bush sent a strong signal to Beijing that differences over human rights were over. That signal may have made the Schifter visit possible; it also may have rendered it irrelevant by removing any remaining leverage that the US had to force concessions.

On Cambodia and Afghanistan, the Bush administration worked toward conflict resolution through a formula of setting up a transition authority leading to general elections. At the same time, however, it continued supporting the non-Communist resistance in both countries rather than pressing for a ceasefire in the belief that to strengthen the resistance would wrest further concessions from the governments of Hun Sen and Najibullah. That policy risked backfiring. In Cambodia, the lack of discipline by non-Communist forces operating in "liberated zones" in northwest Cambodia made the Khmer Rouge look good by comparison. In Afghanistan, the anger over civilian deaths caused by the mujahedin rocketing of Afghan cities could only have benefited the government.

On Sri Lanka and especially Burma, the Bush administration was outspokenly critical of abuses but did not back up the criticism with concrete actions. Sanctions or other economic measures were required by law to be imposed if the Burmese government had not released political prisoners or begun moves to hand over power to the popularly elected Assembly by October 1. By the end of the year, no action had been taken.

In much of the rest of the region where abuses were rampant -- Indonesia, the Philippines, South Korea -- human rights were simply not on the Bush administration's foreign policy agenda.

Because of the scale of abuses there and the cowardice of the Bush administration's response, China continued to receive the greatest share of Asia Watch's staff time and resources. Asia Watch issued three reports and maintained the most comprehensive list available of political arrests and releases. Asia Watch helped shape the congressional debate over sanctions, testifying in Congress nine times during the year on China, particularly with regard to the debate over whether to extend Most Favored Nation trading status for China.

Asia Watch also engaged governments directly in debate. It was the first human rights organization invited to undertake a mission by the Hun Sen government in Cambodia and by the Najibullah government in Afghanistan. Both visits were opportunities to discuss human rights concerns at length with senior government officials, including, in Afghanistan, a two-hour meeting with President Najibullah. A mission to South Korea in June led to a continuing exchange of letters with the Korean government over labor rights and imprisonment under the National Security Law. In September, Asia Watch met with Indonesian Foreign Minister Ali Alatas to discuss issues ranging from abuses in East Timor to the use of the anti-subversion law to detain political opponents. Even in countries that Asia Watch cannot officially visit, such as China, it was clear from government denunciations of our reports that our allegations were reaching their intended target.

In general, the higher our profile in a particular country, the greater the interest of local human rights organizations in sharing information and working together. Publicity about our concerns as expressed in reports and press releases thus strengthened our relationships with local human rights monitors, particularly in East and Southeast Asia. Asia Watch benefited from extensive press coverage in the Bangkok and Hong Kong newspapers of its work on China, Tibet, Burma, Cambodia, Indonesia and Japan.

Japan deserves a special mention. During the year, Asia Watch made a concerted effort to build contacts with Japanese organizations and individuals with the aim of encouraging Japan to use its enormous economic and political leverage in Asia for promoting human rights. Toward that end, Asia Watch staff visited Japan in June and convened a meeting of Japan specialists in Washington to discuss opportunities for influencing the policy-making process. We also joined with Japanese organizations in protesting the treatment of Chinese dissidents in Japan.

As in earlier years, Asia Watch, given its limited resources, was forced to be selective about the countries on which it worked. There was little work done on Bangladesh, Brunei, Malaysia, North Korea, Pakistan, Singapore or Taiwan. Afghanistan, Burma, Cambodia, China, India, Indonesia, Nepal, the Philippines, South Korea, Sri Lanka and Vietnam received most of our attention in 1990.
AFGHANISTAN

Human Rights Developments

Constitutional reforms in Afghanistan held out hope in 1990 for improved respect for civil liberties, although it was too soon to say whether the reforms had been put into practice. Fighting between government troops and resistance forces, or mujahedin, continued at a lower level of intensity than before, although violations of the laws of war continued to be committed by all sides.

In May, the government of President Najibullah in Kabul convened a loya jirga, or Supreme Council, to ratify constitutional changes proposed by the government. Among those changes were a commitment to political pluralism, a guarantee of the rights to counsel and fair trial, fewer restrictions on freedom of association and assembly, and a partial relaxation of controls on freedom of the press. In June, the ruling People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) renamed itself Watan, or Homeland, and renounced its historical commitment to Marxism.

As part of the effort to refurbish its image, the government allowed greater access to the country by human rights and humanitarian agencies. In July, Asia Watch became the first human rights organization allowed to conduct a fact-finding mission in Afghanistan since the Soviet withdrawal, including visits to the central prison in Kabul, Pol-e Charkhi, and the main detention and interrogation center, Sedarat. As of December, the International Committee of the Red Cross was still not authorized to visit persons under interrogation or those awaiting trial and held on order of the Ministry of State Security.1 Instances of torture during interrogation were reported from Kabul and other cities.

Some 644 people were arrested following a coup attempt in March, according to the government. According to sources interviewed by Asia Watch in Kabul, the total may have been higher. By July, the government said, over 200 had been released and the others tried. None of the defendants is believed to have had access to counsel. No executions have been carried out since 1989, according to the government; Asia Watch could not verify that assertion.

Developments on the civil liberties front were encouraging, but it was difficult to assess the impact of the 1990 reforms, as wariness and continuing fear prevented people from seriously testing the new freedom for political parties or demonstrations. There was less cause for optimism on the war front, where international laws of war designed to protect civilians were violated by all sides. All sides continued to use methods of warfare which result in indiscriminate killing. Government bombardments of villages were reported from the areas of Jalalabad and Khowst, largely in reprisal for guerrilla assaults or to protect strategic routes. At the same time, certain mujahedin commanders, backed by the Pakistani Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), continued to launch rocket attacks against Kabul and other cities, resulting in widespread civilian casualties. The UN Special Rapporteur on Afghanistan, Felix Ermacora, reported a claim by the Afghan government that 4,771 civilians had died in these attacks between March and October 1990.

Land mines continued to maim civilians throughout Afghanistan, and major de-mining efforts were underway, both by the United Nations and private agencies. All sides in the Afghan conflict laid fewer mines in 1990, according to experts interviewed by Asia Watch, but unexploded mines laid before the Soviet troop withdrawal constituted a major hazard. These mines, including the PMN, PMD and POMZ-2 anti-personnel mines, were not always placed to serve military objectives, nor were they always marked. The Afghan government stopped dropping the lethal "butterfly mine" which Soviet forces together with their Afghan allies had aerially disseminated by the thousands. Mujahedin commanders made no attempt to map areas where their forces laid mines.

During the year, the government employed paramilitary forces from various tribal groups to supplement regular troops. In Qandahar, Faryab and Badghis, these militias robbed returning refugees, looted property, including a hospital, arrested young men to serve in the army and illegally detained prisoners. The government took no measures, to Asia Watch's knowledge, to prevent these abuses.

Asia Watch received one unverified report from a mujahedin commander of a mass execution by government forces in Mahalajat, outside Qandahar, in June.

Mujahedin elements continued to execute prisoners summarily. In one incident in October, some 95 government soldiers who surrendered to the mujahedin in Tarin Kot were immediately shot. Two weeks later, according to diplomatic and guerrilla sources, 125 soldiers were executed after surrendering at Qalat in Zabul province.2 Numerous killings which Peshawar residents interviewed by Asia Watch attributed to the mujahedin also took place in Pakistan during the year. One victim, shot in July, was Dr. Mohammad Nasim Ludin, a refugee physician who operated several clinics in Peshawar. According to Asia Watch sources who requested anonymity, he had received previous threats and may have been targeted for execution by the Hezb-e Islami of Yunus Khales.

Mujahedin factions continued to operate prisons inside Pakistan. Torture was reported from a prison in Shamshatoo refugee camp, outside Peshawar, run by the Hezb-i Islami of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. No international organizations had access to mujahedin prisons in Pakistan.

US Policy

The Bush administration continued to negotiate with the Soviet Union over a transition administration for Afghanistan, the process for holding free elections, the establishment of a ceasefire and the cessation of weapons supplies. The sticking points were the powers that the transitional body would have and the role of President Najibullah. Both sides continued to provide aid to their respective clients, and the US continued to profess support for the Afghan Interim Government (AIG), an artificial coalition government-in-exile composed of warring mujahedin factions. As negotiations progressed, strains developed between the United States and the Pakistani ISI, which favored the abusive fundamentalist mujahedin faction of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar.

The ISI, operating without restraint after the dismissal of the government of Pakistani Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto on August 6, reportedly planned in September to make Hekmatyar defense minister of a reorganized Afghan Interim Government, but US opposition scuttled those plans. In late October, as Congress began for the first time to cut back the administration's already-reduced requests for aid to the resistance, the US Central Intelligence Agency and the Pakistani ISI encouraged the mujahedin to open a coordinated offensive in several parts of the country.

US diplomats on the ground, conceding that the offensive never had a chance of overthrowing the Kabul government, had hoped that it would shake the Soviet negotiating position and lead to a diplomatic agreement between the superpowers. By the end of October, the offensive had failed, at a cost of countless civilian lives.

The mujahedin's failure to deliver a victory appeared to be the reason for the $50 million congressional aid cut, the first since the war began, and for the decision to condition release of half of the remaining $250 million on another vote in 1991. The administration initially argued against an aid cut (which as originally proposed in Congress was far more substantial), saying that it would send the wrong signal at a time when negotiations toward a settlement were making progress.

On November 30, President Bush vetoed the 1991 intelligence authorization bill which had included the congressional restrictions on aid to the mujahedin. The ostensible reason for the veto was the President's dissatisfaction with a provision of the bill related to the Iran-contra scandal, which limited the executive's opportunities to solicit third-country support for covert operations. Congressional sources said that the Bush administration opposed as well the congressional language on Afghanistan, Angola and Cambodia also contained in the bill. The House and Senate Select Intelligence Committees tentatively scheduled reconsideration of the bill for late January 1991, when they are expected to offer legislation which modifies the Iran-contra provision, but retains the provisions on covert operations in Afghanistan and other countries.

The administration's decisions on aid to the resistance did not take into consideration human rights practices of some of the mujahedin factions. In written responses submitted for a hearing before the House Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs on July 18, the State Department stated that civilan deaths resulting from the mujahedin's attacks on the cities were "the regrettable result of attacks on militarily significant targets." In fact, the military impact of the rocketing of the cities was negligible, in part because of the notorious inaccuracy of the US-supplied SAKR rockets used by the mujahedin and the inadequate training of resistance troops. Again, in written responses submitted for a hearing before the House Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs on November 2, the State Department excused these attacks on the grounds that the "military installations" targeted were "located in or near residential areas" and that the mujahedin "express deep regret for civilian casualties." The administration should have used the opportunity of the hearings to call upon the mujahedin, and Pakistan, to desist from practices which incur such heavy civilian casualties.

At the November 2 hearing, the State Department also stated that "reports of human rights violations" by the mujahedin are brought "to the attention of Resistance leaders." Regrettably, such expressions of concern have not been made public, diminishing their force. The administration also acknowledged, in statements submitted for the November 2 hearing, reports of human rights abuses within mujahedin prisons. The administration's assurances that these reports were being investigated were welcome. However, statements calling for access to these prisons by international humanitarian organizations would go further toward ending these abuses.

The State Department made at least one other attempt to raise the issue of human rights with the resistance forces. In mid-November, a letter was sent to six of the mujahedin factions by the US Special Envoy to the Afghan Resistance, Peter Tomsen, regarding the massacre of government soldiers at Tarin Kot and other incidents. The State Department strongly condemned the execution of prisoners under any circumstances, calling such executions gross violations of the laws of war.

US officials made no public attempt to pressure Pakistani authorities to investigate the abuses reportedly committed by mujahedin leaders in Pakistan and to prosecute those responsible for torture and murder. In written responses submitted for the July 18 congressional hearing, the State Department went so far as to credit the Pakistani authorities with conducting "a serious investigation" into the 1988 murder of Professor Sayd Majrooh. In fact, the Pakistani police resisted following credible evidence implicating Gulbuddin Hekmatyar's faction in the murder. Dozens of similar murders have been carried out with impunity by elements of the mujahedin.

The Work of Asia Watch

In mid-1990, Asia Watch delegations traveled to Pakistan and Afghanistan to examine violations of the laws of war by all parties to the conflict, and to evaluate the human rights reforms undertaken by the government of President Najibullah.3

In Afghanistan, the delegation met President Najibullah and discussed the government's reforms and Asia Watch's concerns about the war, including indiscriminate attacks on civilians. A report on the Asia Watch missions is scheduled for publication in early 1991.

In October, Asia Watch representatives met with Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs John Kelly and other officials to discuss human rights concerns and US policy. Asia Watch staff also had discussions in Washington with Peter Tomsen, US Special Envoy to the Afghan resistance, regarding abuses committed by the mujahedin.

1 ICRC Bulletin, December 1990.

2 Associated Press, "Kabul Rebels Reported to Kill 200 Soldiers," New York Times, November 11, 1990

3 Requests by Asia Watch and Helsinki Watch to send missions in 1984, 1985 and 1988 were not granted.
AFGHANISTAN

Human Rights Developments

Constitutional reforms in Afghanistan held out hope in 1990 for improved respect for civil liberties, although it was too soon to say whether the reforms had been put into practice. Fighting between government troops and resistance forces, or mujahedin, continued at a lower level of intensity than before, although violations of the laws of war continued to be committed by all sides.

In May, the government of President Najibullah in Kabul convened a loya jirga, or Supreme Council, to ratify constitutional changes proposed by the government. Among those changes were a commitment to political pluralism, a guarantee of the rights to counsel and fair trial, fewer restrictions on freedom of association and assembly, and a partial relaxation of controls on freedom of the press. In June, the ruling People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) renamed itself Watan, or Homeland, and renounced its historical commitment to Marxism.

As part of the effort to refurbish its image, the government allowed greater access to the country by human rights and humanitarian agencies. In July, Asia Watch became the first human rights organization allowed to conduct a fact-finding mission in Afghanistan since the Soviet withdrawal, including visits to the central prison in Kabul, Pol-e Charkhi, and the main detention and interrogation center, Sedarat. As of December, the International Committee of the Red Cross was still not authorized to visit persons under interrogation or those awaiting trial and held on order of the Ministry of State Security.1 Instances of torture during interrogation were reported from Kabul and other cities.

Some 644 people were arrested following a coup attempt in March, according to the government. According to sources interviewed by Asia Watch in Kabul, the total may have been higher. By July, the government said, over 200 had been released and the others tried. None of the defendants is believed to have had access to counsel. No executions have been carried out since 1989, according to the government; Asia Watch could not verify that assertion.

Developments on the civil liberties front were encouraging, but it was difficult to assess the impact of the 1990 reforms, as wariness and continuing fear prevented people from seriously testing the new freedom for political parties or demonstrations. There was less cause for optimism on the war front, where international laws of war designed to protect civilians were violated by all sides. All sides continued to use methods of warfare which result in indiscriminate killing. Government bombardments of villages were reported from the areas of Jalalabad and Khowst, largely in reprisal for guerrilla assaults or to protect strategic routes. At the same time, certain mujahedin commanders, backed by the Pakistani Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), continued to launch rocket attacks against Kabul and other cities, resulting in widespread civilian casualties. The UN Special Rapporteur on Afghanistan, Felix Ermacora, reported a claim by the Afghan government that 4,771 civilians had died in these attacks between March and October 1990.

Land mines continued to maim civilians throughout Afghanistan, and major de-mining efforts were underway, both by the United Nations and private agencies. All sides in the Afghan conflict laid fewer mines in 1990, according to experts interviewed by Asia Watch, but unexploded mines laid before the Soviet troop withdrawal constituted a major hazard. These mines, including the PMN, PMD and POMZ-2 anti-personnel mines, were not always placed to serve military objectives, nor were they always marked. The Afghan government stopped dropping the lethal "butterfly mine" which Soviet forces together with their Afghan allies had aerially disseminated by the thousands. Mujahedin commanders made no attempt to map areas where their forces laid mines.

During the year, the government employed paramilitary forces from various tribal groups to supplement regular troops. In Qandahar, Faryab and Badghis, these militias robbed returning refugees, looted property, including a hospital, arrested young men to serve in the army and illegally detained prisoners. The government took no measures, to Asia Watch's knowledge, to prevent these abuses.

Asia Watch received one unverified report from a mujahedin commander of a mass execution by government forces in Mahalajat, outside Qandahar, in June.

Mujahedin elements continued to execute prisoners summarily. In one incident in October, some 95 government soldiers who surrendered to the mujahedin in Tarin Kot were immediately shot. Two weeks later, according to diplomatic and guerrilla sources, 125 soldiers were executed after surrendering at Qalat in Zabul province.2 Numerous killings which Peshawar residents interviewed by Asia Watch attributed to the mujahedin also took place in Pakistan during the year. One victim, shot in July, was Dr. Mohammad Nasim Ludin, a refugee physician who operated several clinics in Peshawar. According to Asia Watch sources who requested anonymity, he had received previous threats and may have been targeted for execution by the Hezb-e Islami of Yunus Khales.

Mujahedin factions continued to operate prisons inside Pakistan. Torture was reported from a prison in Shamshatoo refugee camp, outside Peshawar, run by the Hezb-i Islami of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. No international organizations had access to mujahedin prisons in Pakistan.

US Policy

The Bush administration continued to negotiate with the Soviet Union over a transition administration for Afghanistan, the process for holding free elections, the establishment of a ceasefire and the cessation of weapons supplies. The sticking points were the powers that the transitional body would have and the role of President Najibullah. Both sides continued to provide aid to their respective clients, and the US continued to profess support for the Afghan Interim Government (AIG), an artificial coalition government-in-exile composed of warring mujahedin factions. As negotiations progressed, strains developed between the United States and the Pakistani ISI, which favored the abusive fundamentalist mujahedin faction of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar.

The ISI, operating without restraint after the dismissal of the government of Pakistani Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto on August 6, reportedly planned in September to make Hekmatyar defense minister of a reorganized Afghan Interim Government, but US opposition scuttled those plans. In late October, as Congress began for the first time to cut back the administration's already-reduced requests for aid to the resistance, the US Central Intelligence Agency and the Pakistani ISI encouraged the mujahedin to open a coordinated offensive in several parts of the country.

US diplomats on the ground, conceding that the offensive never had a chance of overthrowing the Kabul government, had hoped that it would shake the Soviet negotiating position and lead to a diplomatic agreement between the superpowers. By the end of October, the offensive had failed, at a cost of countless civilian lives.

The mujahedin's failure to deliver a victory appeared to be the reason for the $50 million congressional aid cut, the first since the war began, and for the decision to condition release of half of the remaining $250 million on another vote in 1991. The administration initially argued against an aid cut (which as originally proposed in Congress was far more substantial), saying that it would send the wrong signal at a time when negotiations toward a settlement were making progress.

On November 30, President Bush vetoed the 1991 intelligence authorization bill which had included the congressional restrictions on aid to the mujahedin. The ostensible reason for the veto was the President's dissatisfaction with a provision of the bill related to the Iran-contra scandal, which limited the executive's opportunities to solicit third-country support for covert operations. Congressional sources said that the Bush administration opposed as well the congressional language on Afghanistan, Angola and Cambodia also contained in the bill. The House and Senate Select Intelligence Committees tentatively scheduled reconsideration of the bill for late January 1991, when they are expected to offer legislation which modifies the Iran-contra provision, but retains the provisions on covert operations in Afghanistan and other countries.

The administration's decisions on aid to the resistance did not take into consideration human rights practices of some of the mujahedin factions. In written responses submitted for a hearing before the House Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs on July 18, the State Department stated that civilan deaths resulting from the mujahedin's attacks on the cities were "the regrettable result of attacks on militarily significant targets." In fact, the military impact of the rocketing of the cities was negligible, in part because of the notorious inaccuracy of the US-supplied SAKR rockets used by the mujahedin and the inadequate training of resistance troops. Again, in written responses submitted for a hearing before the House Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs on November 2, the State Department excused these attacks on the grounds that the "military installations" targeted were "located in or near residential areas" and that the mujahedin "express deep regret for civilian casualties." The administration should have used the opportunity of the hearings to call upon the mujahedin, and Pakistan, to desist from practices which incur such heavy civilian casualties.

At the November 2 hearing, the State Department also stated that "reports of human rights violations" by the mujahedin are brought "to the attention of Resistance leaders." Regrettably, such expressions of concern have not been made public, diminishing their force. The administration also acknowledged, in statements submitted for the November 2 hearing, reports of human rights abuses within mujahedin prisons. The administration's assurances that these reports were being investigated were welcome. However, statements calling for access to these prisons by international humanitarian organizations would go further toward ending these abuses.

The State Department made at least one other attempt to raise the issue of human rights with the resistance forces. In mid-November, a letter was sent to six of the mujahedin factions by the US Special Envoy to the Afghan Resistance, Peter Tomsen, regarding the massacre of government soldiers at Tarin Kot and other incidents. The State Department strongly condemned the execution of prisoners under any circumstances, calling such executions gross violations of the laws of war.

US officials made no public attempt to pressure Pakistani authorities to investigate the abuses reportedly committed by mujahedin leaders in Pakistan and to prosecute those responsible for torture and murder. In written responses submitted for the July 18 congressional hearing, the State Department went so far as to credit the Pakistani authorities with conducting "a serious investigation" into the 1988 murder of Professor Sayd Majrooh. In fact, the Pakistani police resisted following credible evidence implicating Gulbuddin Hekmatyar's faction in the murder. Dozens of similar murders have been carried out with impunity by elements of the mujahedin.

The Work of Asia Watch

In mid-1990, Asia Watch delegations traveled to Pakistan and Afghanistan to examine violations of the laws of war by all parties to the conflict, and to evaluate the human rights reforms undertaken by the government of President Najibullah.3

In Afghanistan, the delegation met President Najibullah and discussed the government's reforms and Asia Watch's concerns about the war, including indiscriminate attacks on civilians. A report on the Asia Watch missions is scheduled for publication in early 1991.

In October, Asia Watch representatives met with Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs John Kelly and other officials to discuss human rights concerns and US policy. Asia Watch staff also had discussions in Washington with Peter Tomsen, US Special Envoy to the Afghan resistance, regarding abuses committed by the mujahedin.

1 ICRC Bulletin, December 1990.

2 Associated Press, "Kabul Rebels Reported to Kill 200 Soldiers," New York Times, November 11, 1990

3 Requests by Asia Watch and Helsinki Watch to send missions in 1984, 1985 and 1988 were not granted.
BURMA

Human Rights Developments

The military government in Burma, known as the State Law and Order Restoration Council, or SLORC, intensified political repression in the wake of the opposition's landslide victory in elections for a new National Assembly held in May 1990. Soon after taking power in September 1988, following an unprecedented nationwide uprising against the 26-year-old rule of General Ne Win and his Burma Socialist Programme Party in which security forces are believed to have killed an estimated 3,000 to 10,000 protestors, SLORC promised to deliver power to a civilian government as soon as elections could be organized.

In May, the first multiparty elections in Burma in thirty years were held, with the main opposition party, the National League for Democracy (NLD), winning an overwhelming majority. Although the balloting itself is thought to have been relatively free and fair, tight martial-law restrictions prevented any real campaigning by political parties, and many party activists reported constant harassment by military authorities. SLORC also refused to consider releasing Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and U Tin U, the NLD's top leaders, who had been arrested in July 1989 and were later barred from contesting the elections.

Despite the government's initial promise of a rapid transfer of power, SLORC soon backtracked and insisted that a new constitution would first have to be drafted and approved in a general referendum -- a process which some say may take several years. The NLD, in a resolution adopted in late July by its elected representatives, called for an immediate transfer of power under an interim constitution. SLORC responded to this challenge by arresting the NLD's acting leader, U Kyi Maung, and other senior party officials.

SLORC continues to rule through martial law, having abolished the 1974 Constitution and established military tribunals with sole jurisdiction over suspected political offenders and violations of martial-law regulations. Gatherings of more than four people are banned. Travel overnight beyond one's own township must be reported to township military authorities. Political freedom is virtually nonexistent, with the written press, television and radio owned and controlled by the military, and perceived anti-government activities punishable by one of three sentences: three years' imprisonment, life imprisonment or death. Fearing renewed unrest, the government has kept all universities and most secondary schools closed for the third year in a row. The total number of prisoners held for peaceful opposition to SLORC is unknown, but diplomats in Rangoon have put the number conservatively at over 3,000, with other estimates running as high as 30,000. SLORC is reported to be building or to have built a large detention camp in the Putao Valley, near the Tibetan border, for new political prisoners. In 1989, a leaked cable from then US Ambassador Burt Levin noted that one group of political prisoners had been chained together and marched from the town of Taunggyi into the jungle; it was later reported that the group had been taken to work in government-owned mines.

Torture of political prisoners is believed to be routine and has included severe beatings, electric shock, immersion in water for long periods, sleep deprivation, peeling off skin by rubbing wood or bamboo repeatedly against a person's shins, and applying salt or curry powder to wounds made with a knife or bayonet. On at least two occasions in 1990, political prisoners died shortly after being released from custody. In May, the family of a student who had been beaten to death was reportedly not allowed to see his body because of its mutilated condition. In November, U Maung Ko, a senior NLD official, was believed to have been beaten to death shortly after being arrested. Although authorities claimed that he had committed suicide after interrogation, his family stated that they doubted the official story and that his body bore marks of torture.

On August 8, the second anniversary of the 1988 uprising, large crowds demonstrated in Rangoon and several other towns for a transfer of power and the release of all political prisoners. In Mandalay, security forces fired on protestors, killing at least four people, including two Buddhist monks. Buddhist monks in Mandalay and other towns responded by refusing to perform religious services for members of the armed forces or their families. In mid-September, SLORC began to crack down on dissident monks, arresting hundreds and raiding over a dozen monasteries in Mandalay alone. At the same time, NLD offices in Rangoon and elsewhere were shut down and over 20 senior officials of the NLD, including elected National Assembly representatives, were arrested and imprisoned.

In late 1989 and early 1990, well over 500,000 people were forcefully evicted from their homes in Rangoon and other large towns and moved to isolated tracts in the countryside, for the most part areas without electricity, running water or proper sanitation. They were given short notice of the move, compelled to move to designed areas and often not given any compensation. It was widely believed that these forced relocations reflected SLORC's attempt to lessen the possibility of renewed unrest in urban areas.

In the meantime, SLORC continued efforts to achieve a military victory in the Burmese army's 40-year war against ethnic minority rebels. In early 1990, the army overran a number of rebel bases along the Thai border, sending 20,000 new refugees into Thailand. The Burmese army was reported to have killed, tortured or raped numerous civilians in ethnic minority areas during the 1989-1990 cold-weather offensive, but no accurate statistics were available. The Burmese army also forcefully rounded up hundreds and perhaps thousands of civilians to use as porters, carrying army supplies without adequate food or water, or as human minesweepers, walking ahead of army troops.

The new influx of Burmese refugees in Thailand brings the total to over 40,000, including 2,000 Burmese students who had fled Rangoon and other towns after the 1988 crackdown. In addition, there are believed to be tens of thousand of other Burmese "illegal immigrants" in Thailand whose reasons for leaving Burma are not know but who have been routinely repatriated by Thai immigration authorities. Thailand on at least five occasions, in March, June, July, September and November, forcefully repatriated a total of at least 2,000 refugees and "illegal immigrants." On all five occasions, it is believed that many or all of the returned people were arrested by Burmese security forces and may then have been used as porters or human minesweepers during army operations.

US Policy

The Bush administration has continued its policy of suspending all assistance to Burma until power is transferred to an elected government, as well as of speaking out against human rights abuses. Calling SLORC a "xenophobic know-nothing group that maintains itself in power through sheer force," the administration has made clear its support for democratic change.

Prior to August 1988, the US government provided modest assistance of approximately $10 million annually, mostly for antinarcotics programs, including helicopters and herbicides.

In the wake of the crackdown, the United States not only suspended assistance but also actively encouraged other countries to do the same, especially Japan, Burma's largest donor. In addition, since September 1988, the US embassy in Rangoon has tried to minimize high-level contacts with the Burmese government, while lodging numerous private protests over human rights abuses. The United States has also tried quietly to discourage countries from selling arms to Burma and has itself imposed a de facto embargo on arms sales.

In early 1990, the chapter on Burma in the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices focused attention on the forced relocation of hundreds of thousands of people from Rangoon and other towns to the countryside, and the US embassy worked to collect information on the condition of the resettled communities.

The administration spoke out on several occasions against the repressive conditions surrounding the May election campaign and the continued detention of NLD leaders U Tin U and Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. For example, on January 25, the State Department announced that the banning of leading opposition candidates coupled with "continuing human rights abuses including restrictions on political activities and debate all disturbingly point to the regime's intention to control the elections it has so repeatedly promised would be free and fair."

Nevertheless, the administration welcomed the final election results and expressed hope that SLORC would respect the opposition victory and transfer power. The State Department stated that the Burmese people "are to be congratulated for their courage and determination in the face of oppression" and warned that any refusal to transfer power was "bound to intensify the regime's domestic difficulties and international isolation."

In October, the Burmese government suddenly withdrew its agreement to accept the appointment of Frederick Vreeland, who was to have succeeded Burton Levin as US ambassador to Burma. The Burmese change of heart followed some controversy within the United States about Vreeland's career as a covert CIA official and, particularly, the White House's initial decision not to reveal his CIA background. Nevertheless, it appeared that the Burmese decision not to accept Vreeland's nomination was based on his testimony during his confirmation hearings in which he expressed support for a strong line against human rights abuses in Burma and said that US economic sanctions seemed "inevitable" in light of continued repression. By the end of 1990, the White House had not yet nominated anyone else to the post, effectively reducing the US presence in Burma to the level of chargé d'affairs.

In August, Congress passed legislation calling on the administration to impose sanctions on Burma if, by October 1, a transfer of power, a release of all political prisoners and other conditions had not been met. The legislation, sponsored by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, does not, however, require the administration to impose sanctions, and leaves to the administration's discretion the sort of sanctions to impose. In October, at a press briefing, the State Department said that it was "considering an embargo" but has not given other details. The US has reportedly tried to interest other countries in sanctions, particularly Japan and the EEC countries, but their response was unclear at year's end.

The US embassy in Bangkok demonstrated increased concern in 1990 over the situation of Burmese asylum-seekers in Thailand. Nevertheless, the embassy did not publicly criticize a number of forced repatriations -- some without any judicial proceeding -- which took place during the year. Furthermore, the US embassy has, by and large, limited its concern to Burmese students seeking asylum in Thailand and not to the much larger group of refugees in Ranong, in southern Thailand, including ethnic minority villagers and Burmese workers, who have been handed over to Burmese security forces and reportedly have faced severe mistreatment, including detention or forced porter service. Given the refugees' increasingly precarious situation in Thailand and the lack of a strong Thai government position on their situation, increased US attention could be very important for ensuring the protection of Burmese asylum seekers in Thailand.

Although antinarcotics assistance was suspended together with all other assistance in 1988, the US Drug Enforcement Agency as well as others in the administration are reported to have recommended a limited resumption of aid related to antidrug efforts. Resuming such assistance would send an unfortunate message of support to the Burmese government at a time when its human rights record is significantly worsening. There are also increasing reports of official Burmese complicity in drug production and trafficking.

The Work of Asia Watch

In March, Asia Watch issued a newsletter condemning continuing Burmese human rights abuses, particularly the banning of opposition leader Daw Aung San Suu Kyi from the May elections and ongoing restrictions on freedom of speech and assembly. The same month, Asia Watch circulated a letter to the Burmese government from parliamentarians of several countries, including the US, Japan and India, condemning a wide range of human rights violations.

In May, on the eve of the general elections, Asia Watch issued a detailed report of human rights conditions in Burma, based on an investigative mission into Burma and to the Thai border areas. The report concluded that whatever took place on election day itself, the complete lack of political freedom in the country and the harassment and detention of political activists called into doubt whether the elections could be considered "free and fair."

Asia Watch called on the Burmese government to release all political prisoners; establish impartial investigations into all reports of torture, disappearance and other gross abuses, and prosecute those responsible; abolish the practice of incommunicado detention and establish safeguards against torture; suspend the use of military tribunals; withdraw all restrictions on basic civil liberties; abolish the use of forced porters for the army; establish independent investigations into reports of army abuses in the border conflict; and permit international organizations that operate confidentially and international relief organizations the full range of their protection activities.

In August, Asia Watch released another newsletter on the continuation of human rights abuses after the elections. It noted that SLORC had made no significant move toward a transfer of power to the elected National Assembly and that the human rights situation had deteriorated even further, with the shooting deaths of several demonstrators on August 8. Asia Watch again called on SLORC to respect the results of the May elections and immediately release all political prisoners.

In June, an Asia Watch press release drew attention to the forced repatriation of approximately 300 Burmese refugees from Thailand to Burma's Myawaddy township, and to the reported detention and mistreatment of these refugees upon their return by Burmese security forces.

Asia Watch has repeatedly called on the United States to continue to support human rights in Burma and, in particular, to impose economic sanctions in line with the Moynihan amendment. Asia Watch believes that sanctions could only help quicken the process of democratic change in Burma, especially if the US mobilized its allies to participate as well. After the Vreeland nomination was withdrawn, Asia Watch urged the Bush administration to ensure that the next nominee for ambassador to Burma would be someone equally committed to human rights concerns.

Throughout the year, Asia Watch worked in support of efforts to denounce Burmese human rights abuses before the United Nations General Assembly in New York and the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva. In particular, Asia Watch expressed its strong support for the appointment by the Human Rights Commission of a special rapporteur or independent expert to investigate the human rights situation in Burma. When the Commission did appoint an expert, Sadako Ogata, the Burmese government allowed her into the country in November but tried to deny her access to all but government-appointed sources. Asia Watch issued a public statement criticizing SLORC for obstructing the mission. Asia Watch also helped lobby for passage of a resolution, sponsored by Sweden at the General Assembly, expressing concern over the Burmese government's failure to transfer power to elected representatives, calling for a release of all political prisoners, and asking the Secretary General to report on the situation. Action on the resolution was deferred until the 1991 General Assembly session.
CAMBODIA

Human Rights Developments

Despite major advances in international efforts to bring about a settlement to the Cambodian conflict, including an important shift in US policy, the war continued, and with it, human rights abuses by all sides. The State of Cambodia based in Phnom Penh and the armed forces of the three resistance factions, the Khmer People's National Liberation Front (KPNLF), the Sihanouk National Army (ANS) and the Khmer Rouge, were all responsible for avoidable civilian deaths, some caused by deliberate targeting, some by the choice of indiscriminate weaponry. The government, the Khmer Rouge and the ANS engaged in arbitrary forced conscription, and the latter two forced noncombatants living in camps under their control in Thailand to "porter" ammunition and supplies into Cambodia, thereby turning the civilian porters into military targets. Both the Khmer Rouge and the ANS were reported to use children under the age of 15 in the war effort, frequently as porters. Relief workers reported the torture of captured prisoners by all parties to the conflict. The access of these prisoners to some kind of fair judicial process appeared to be nonexistent or minimal on all sides.

Severe restrictions on political and civil liberties remained in Cambodia, where important legal reforms made in 1989 were stalled in their implementation. Controls on freedom of opinion and expression were highlighted in May and June with the arrest of at least six senior officials for their alleged advocacy of a multiparty system and the sacking of Khieu Kanarith, the editor of Kampuchea Weekly known for his pragmatic and sometimes critical political stance. Abuse of detainees and substandard prison conditions remained cause for concern in Cambodia.

Displaced Cambodians in Thailand faced an array of human rights violations, from lack of fundamental freedoms inside the guerrilla-controlled camps to being forced back into Cambodia against their will. A plan announced by the Thai government in April to provide some measure of protection for the refugees by establishing a "neutral" camp inside Thailand -- administered by the United Nations rather than the resistance factions -- was moribund by September. With the five permanent members of the UN Security Council and the four parties to the conflict apparently reaching agreement on a framework for peace in September, repatriation of the refugees seemed like a real possibility. By December, however, hopes for peace were dimming and, with the onset of the dry season in Cambodia, the war had resumed.

The war was the context for serious violations by all sides. The year began with a major guerrilla offensive already underway to capture towns in northwest Cambodia as part of an effort to expand and hold the "liberated zone" there. As part of that offensive and under pressure from the Thai military, thousands of Cambodians (30,000, according to one estimate in the Thai press) were moved from camps inside Thailand to new sites across the border in Cambodia. Many of these appeared to have been moved against their will. In one notorious case, the United Nations Border Relief Operation (UNBRO) sent trucks in late January to move all residents of the "closed" Khmer Rouge camp in Borai to the Site K camp where they would have access to UN services. Instead, UNBRO officials found that the Khmer Rouge had secretly moved 4,000 of the 4,400 residents across the border to secret Khmer Rouge camps around the mining town of Pailin.

All parties failed to take measures to protect civilians during the fighting, in violation of international humanitarian law. Cambodian government forces used long-range artillery to try to dislodge the KPNLF from the towns of Svay Chek and Thmar Puok, apparently without warning the population to evacuate and without choosing specific military targets. The result was unnecessary civilian casualties, destruction of homes and schools, and thousands of displaced residents. (The towns were retaken by the government in February; an attempt by the guerrillas to recapture them in April failed.)

In May and June, intense fighting between Khmer Rouge guerrillas and government forces took place around Kompot, Kompong Speu, Kompong Chhnang and Kompong Thom. The government again engaged in indiscriminate shelling. Attacks on civilians by the Khmer Rouge were more targeted: the Khmer Rouge reportedly executed local political officials and, on July 15, attacked a train in Kompong Chhnang, killing 53 and wounding over 100.

In an effort to strengthen its defensive capability, the government organized and armed a civilian militia but failed to provide adequate training or supervision. Members of the militia were given antipersonnel mines which they laid around bridges and roads to keep out the Khmer Rouge but failed to keep track of; civilian casualties were one result. Militia members also used their weapons to engage in petty extortion along Cambodian highways.

There were widespread reports during the year of arbitrary conscription by the government's regular forces. Young men were picked up off the streets or in video parlors in Phnom Penh and other cities.

The level of fighting diminished during the height of the rainy season but resumed again as the dry season approached. In late September and continuing through October, government forces attacked the Khmer Rouge stronghold of Pailin, and many Khmer Rouge fighters reportedly tried to flee to the nearby KPNLF-controlled camp of Sok Sann in Thailand. Reuters reported that the Sok Sann commanders refused to take in the escapees, for fear of offending the KPNLF's Khmer Rouge allies -- despite the severe punishment, including torture and possible execution, that would await the men if they were caught by their own officers after having fled combat.4 The renewed fighting led to further forced relocations of refugees from Thailand into Cambodia.

It was difficult to assess how the different parties treated prisoners captured in combat. International agencies had no access to such prisoners held in camps on the Thai side of the border. In September, the government in Phnom Penh granted the International Committee of the Red Cross access to those it termed "prisoners of war." There were unconfirmed reports of torture meted out to captured Vietnamese nationals near or in Site 2, the largest KPNLF camp.

The Khmer Rouge routinely denied residents of camps they controlled access to food and medical care, sometimes as a method of forcing compliance with orders to porter supplies or move into Cambodia, sometimes as an effort to prevent exposure to Western influence. When Phnom Penh government forces in January shelled hidden Khmer Rouge camps inside Thailand on the northern border with Cambodia, wounding scores of noncombatants, the Khmer Rouge did not permit the International Committee of the Red Cross to evacuate the victims.

In addition to violations of the laws of war, all sides also engaged in violations of political and civil rights. In Cambodia itself, a new Constitution passed in 1989 included important limits on detention and guarantees of the rights of the accused, and a committee of the National Assembly reviewed cases of all those detained without trial since 1979, releasing most of them. But real progress was prevented by a combination of factors: a legal system that was just beginning to be rebuilt after the destruction of the Khmer Rouge period; an almost total absence of trained lawyers and judges who had survived that period; and resistance to the reforms on the part of hardliners in the Ministry of the Interior. As of an Asia Watch visit in late May, the Supreme Court had not held a single formal hearing.

Freedom of expression, association and opinion continued to be tightly controlled. While some articles on corruption or the abuses of the civilian militia were allowed to appear in the United Front newspaper Kampuchea Weekly, or the state news service, direct criticism of the government remained off limits. The May arrest of senior government officials, including Ung Phan, the Minister of Transport, Communications and Posts, for trying to form an independent party called the Liberal Social Democratic Party was an indication of the limits that were still in place. At least six people and perhaps several dozen were arrested in the crackdown; all six were believed still in detention at the end of the year. Shortly after these arrests, Khieu Kanharith, editor of Kampuchea Weekly and a member of the National Assembly whom many believed to be sympathetic to efforts to open the political system, was fired.

Freedom of religion, by contrast, made significant gains. Buddhism was much more openly practiced and the authorities allowed younger men to become monks. On Easter, the first Catholic mass was celebrated since 1975.

Violations of civil liberties also occurred in the resistance-controlled camps in Thailand. None of the camps allowed residents the freedom to move to a different camp, so each faction effectively had a captive population under its control. By the end of the year, there was a rudimentary justice system in place in the largest KPNLF and ANS camps to handle criminal cases, but abuses by camp commanders, police and the Thai military were beyond its capacity to handle. The absence of civil liberties was most notable in the Khmer Rouge camps, where even marriage was controlled by the camp commanders.

US Policy

US policy on Cambodia took a dramatic turn on July 18 when Secretary of State James Baker announced in Paris that the United States would no longer support the seating at the United Nations of the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea -- composed of the three resistance factions -- and that the Bush administration would permit $5 million in humanitarian aid voted by Congress to be given to the Phnom Penh government. The US also inched toward opening direct talks with the Phnom Penh government, with contacts in September between the US chargé d'affairs in Vientiane and his Cambodian counterpart and between US Ambassador to Indonesia John Monjo and Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen during negotiations the same month in Jakarta. At the same time, the Bush administration, torn between the hawks of the National Security Council staff and a more pragmatic State Department, announced that aid to the non-Communist factions (the KPNLF and ANS) would continue despite strong pressure from some congressional leaders to cut it.

The shift in policy was related more to the progress of the talks on Cambodia among the five permanent members of the Security Council than to the situation on the ground, but Secretary Baker acknowledged for the first time the seriousness of the military threat posed by the Khmer Rouge. Likewise, US attention to human rights in Cambodia focused more on the future than the present. The Bush administration supported the broad and vaguely worded section on human rights in the "Perm 5" agreement signed on August 28 in Paris but made little attempt to address ongoing abuses by the parties to the conflict that were receiving US aid or to take steps to ensure that there was no military cooperation between the non-Communist forces and their Khmer Rouge allies.
CHINA

Human Rights Developments

The Chinese government in 1990 intensified and institutionalized its repression of the democracy movement, now dubbed "the counterrevolutionary rebellion." In the wake of the bloody crackdown of June 4, 1989, thousands remained detained without charge, often in abysmal prison conditions and often subject to torture. The number of arrests and trials of pro-democracy activists and sympathizers mounted throughout 1990, and at least one new execution was reported, bringing the total officially announced since June 4 to 49. The government reimposed state controls over all aspects of free expression, adopted measures to monitor its citizens overseas, and tightened restrictions on religious and ethnic groups within the country. The effect of these measures was to nullify the tentative liberalization of the previous decade, and reassert the firm ideological control of the conservative wing of the Chinese Communist Party.

This internal campaign of repression proceeded in tandem with the government's attempts to project to the world a picture of renewed domestic harmony and tolerance. Adopting a stance of "outward relaxation, internal intensification" (neijin, waisong), the Chinese leadership strove to close the book on the 1989 movement and return to business as usual with international partners. It assiduously courted foreign investment and the lifting of sanctions, most prominently through cooperation in the United Nations Security Council with US positions on the Persian Gulf crisis. All the while, behind-the-scenes purges of government critics (real or imagined) moved forward, culminating in November in charges against leading figures of the democracy movement for sedition, a capital offense.

With a view toward heading off further sanctions by the West, the Chinese government formally lifted martial law, in Beijing in January and in Lhasa in May. The substance of martial law remained, however, with the maintenance of a massive, armed security force in both cities.

The Chinese authorities also announced a series of releases of pro-democracy detainees over the year, totaling 881 persons. But the government named only a handful of those said to have been released, and there has been no independent verification of the number or names of the others.

The announcements of releases were skillfully timed to influence US policy on China. The first 573 releases were announced in January, days before a key vote in Congress on legislation to protect the more than 40,000 Chinese students in the United States against involuntary return to China. Another release of 211 was announced in May, on the eve of President Bush's decision not to withhold Most Favored Nation trading status from China. Shortly before a meeting of the world's industrial nations at which loan policy to China was discussed, the Chinese government on June 26 allowed Fang Lizhi and his wife, Li Shuxian, to leave the US embassy in Beijing for England, and made its last announcement of 97 prisoner releases.

Release from detention did not end the ordeal for all who were government targets. Wang Ruowang, the prominent writer and government critic, was released on October 29 after 16 months' detention without charge. At year's end, however, he remained under investigation, was required to report on his activities twice per week, and was prohibited from leaving Shanghai without police permission. Following her release in May 1990, the well known journalist Dai Qing (who published a favorable account of her treatment in custody in Beijing) was followed by a police escort, even when visiting relatives. The academic Li Honglin, also incarcerated in Beijing, was placed directly on an airplane to Fuzhou upon his release in May and not permitted to visit his wife in their Beijing home. He is also believed to be under surveillance, and his stepdaughter was denied permission to visit relatives in the United States.

During the latter half of 1990, Chinese government spokesmen insisted that a mere 355 post-June 4 detainees remained in prison, but this was widely believed to be a gross underestimate, taking into account neither the prisoners held outside Beijing and Shanghai, nor those held in other forms of administrative detention, nor most of the ordinary workers who bore the brunt of government repression.

Ordinary workers, who turned out in massive numbers to support the students and intellectuals of the pro-democracy movement and to protest the June 4 crackdown, suffered the severest government retaliation. In an effort to quash politicization of the workforce (termed the "Polish disease"), the government characterized these detainees as "thugs" and charged them as common criminals. Workers comprised the majority of those tried and convicted, frequently drawing heavy prison terms in the 10-to-15-year range. Workers and peasants accounted for all officially announced executions through the end of 1990.

By year's end, no labor leaders active in the pro-democracy movement had yet been released. Han Dongfang, the 27-year-old organizer of the Beijing Workers Autonomous Federation -- China's first independent trade union since 1949 -- had been in solitary confinement since June 1989, despite deteriorating health which required him to be hospitalized at least six times. He had yet to be charged, although he had been told he would be tried as a common criminal.

Asia Watch documented several dozen reports of trials of pro-democracy activists during 1990, although the true numbers were believed to be much higher. It was unlikely that these trials met international standards for fairness given Chinese criminal procedure practices. The presumption of innocence is overlooked by judicial panels, which are told how to decide cases by Party committees in advance of sensitive trials. The accused are pressured to confess from the moment they are first detained, and under the best circumstances they do not receive counsel until days before trial. Defense lawyers, for the most part, confine themselves to arguing for lenience in sentencing.7

The practice of charging workers as common criminals, rather than as political criminals, permits the application of summary procedures that in effect remove the right to present a defense or appeal a death sentence.8 On the other hand, defendants facing political charges reportedly are limited in their choice of counsel to senior-ranking lawyers who are Party members. Two directives issued by the Ministry of Justice reportedly barred lawyers from defending pro-democracy activists without the Ministry's prior approval, and barred lawyers from entering a plea of "not guilty" for such clients without prior notification of the Ministry.9

Many others detained since June 1989 were denied the chance to enter any plea whatsoever; instead, they were simply convicted by the public security organs (the police) without benefit of any court appearance or hearing. Persons may be sentenced without a trial to as much as three years of so-called "labor reeducation," one of several official euphemisms in China for forced labor under arbitrary detention. Another example of administrative detention without trial is so-called "shelter and investigation," a widely used method of incarceration for which there exists no basis in Chinese legislation. Under this practice, the police on their own authority and without supervision by the courts or procuracy hold suspects in conditions similar or worse than those for convicted criminals for months at a time. Both of these punitive measures, which are applied against hundreds of thousands (and perhaps millions) of Chinese citizens every year, violate the prohibition in international law against arbitrary detention and the right to be presumed innocent until found guilty in a court of law.

In the spring of 1990, the Chinese government launched a massive nationwide campaign to "crack down on serious crime." According to the official China News Service, as many as 986,000 people were arrested by public security authorities at all levels between May and September. Of those arrested, a large number were executed -- estimates varied from 500 to several thousand. This campaign, similar to a major crime sweep of late 1983, was launched ostensibly to "clean up" society in advance of the Asian Games, which Beijing hosted from September 22 to October 7.

The "anti-crime" campaign appeared to have provided cover for an intensified round of suppression of pro-democracy groups and individuals. The police chief of Guangdong Province reported in November that in his province alone (which was relatively free of pro-democracy demonstrations in the spring of 1989), the authorities had uncovered and dealt with "20 instances of counterrevolution" in the course of the anti-crime campaign.10

A primary concern of the Chinese government was to prevent any public protests of the 1989 military crackdown. In addition to the anti-crime campaign, the authorities imposed stringent security measures and limited access to cities during important holidays and anniversaries. Beijing sealed off Tiananmen Square and prohibited all unofficial public signs of mourning during Qing Ming Festival on April 5. This traditional holiday to honor the dead is also the anniversary of a 1976 incident in which militia and police beat to death dozens of demonstrators in the Square who had gathered to honor the memory of Chou Enlai as a protest against the Gang of Four. Similar security measures were adopted in advance of the June 4 anniversary. For the Asian Games, the authorities set about plastering over bullet holes left over from June 1989, instituted roadblocks and citizens' patrols, and instructed citizens to limit contacts with foreigners.

The clearest signal of Beijing's efforts to close accounts on the 1989 democracy movement was the wave of charges brought against leading students and intellectuals in October and November 1990. Taking advantage of the public relations gains made by cooperation with the West in the Gulf crisis, the Chinese government picked Wang Juntao and Chen Ziming to blame as the ringleaders of the 1989 movement. Veterans of the 1978 protests against the Cultural Revolution, Wang and Chen established in the 1980s a number of unofficial associations to promote reform within the system. In 1989, both were instrumental in building a coalition that linked students and intellectuals with workers. Their families were formally notified on November 24, 1990 that the two would be charged with spreading counterrevolutionary propaganda, a crime that can draw five years' imprisonment or more, and plotting to overthrow the government, a capital offense.

Also reported to face charges of counterrevolutionary propaganda and instigation were Liu Suli and Chen Xiaoping, law professors who advocated the supremacy of the constitution and the rule of law over Party authority; Liu Xiaobo, a literary critic who participated in a brief hunger strike in Tiananmen Square just before the massacre; Ren Wanding, a worker-intellectual who in 1979 founded the first organization to protect human rights in the People's Republic; Lü Jiamin, a professor and participant in the Democracy Wall movement of 1978-1981; and Bao Zunxin, a philosopher and leading intellectual. Student leaders of the movement who headed the "most wanted" lists, such as Wang Dan, Zhang Ming, Zhou Yongjun and Liu Gang, reportedly faced similar charges, and Zhang Ming and Zheng Xuguang, also student activists, were tried in mid-November, although their sentences were not announced. None of these individuals used or advocated violence; to the contrary, some were known to have specifically urged protesters to disarm and act peacefully.

The wretched prison conditions and frequently brutal treatment meted out to the post-June 4 detainees showed no signs of amelioration during 1990, according to reports by those released. Conditions in local jails and detention centers were the worst. However, even in facilities such as Beijing's Qincheng Prison, where leading intellectuals are held, illness and abuse were reported to be widespread.

Yao Yongzhan, a student leader from Hong Kong who was imprisoned for ten months in Shanghai No. 1 Detention Center, described his experience to Asia Watch shortly after his release in June 1990. He was kept with 12 other prisoners in a cell measuring 13 to 14 square meters. Sleep was difficult as the lights were kept on all night; there were no beds, so the prisoners had to lie on the wooden floor. The cells were infested with fleas and bugs, and 80 to 90 percent of the prisoners had infectious skin diseases. During his entire period of incarceration, he was let out of his cell for fresh air and exercise only once, for about half an hour. He reported that persons accused of ordinary crimes were often tortured with electric batons, kicking and beatings.

In 1990, several long-term political prisoners, such as Wei Jingsheng and Xu Wenli, began their tenth year behind bars for having dared to publish their proposals for peaceful democratic reform during the Democracy Wall movement. In November, Xu's wife told a foreign reporter that her husband, who like Wei had been held in solitary confinement throughout his incarceration, had developed serious medical symptoms consistent with a diagnosis of lymphatic tuberculosis. In addition, Xu had undiagnosed lumps on his neck and suffered from malnutrition. "They shouldn't treat a human being this way," said his wife.11 Like the 1989 activists awaiting trial, Xu and Wei had been charged and tried for "counterrevolution."

The right of free expression was severely curtailed by the government in the course of 1990 in its effort to whip journalists back into their role as the loyal "tongue and throat" of the Party. The government enacted nationwide controls and restrictions on the rights of assembly and public demonstration and reasserted tight control over publishing and the news media, decimating the ranks of journalists, publishers and distributors. A major campaign against pornographic and "illegal" publications was frankly acknowledged by a deputy director of the Party's Central Committee Propaganda Department to be a means of combatting "bourgeois liberalization" and the spread of "Western capitalist values and decadent ideas."12 Concerned with the "negative influences" spread by foreign cable broadcasts, the state also promulgated new regulations requiring all satellite dish owners to apply for licenses by January 1, 1991, after which unlicensed owners might be penalized.

As a result of the "anti-pornography" campaign, fully ten percent of all publishing houses in China were to be closed, according to a December 6, 1989 report in China Daily. By the end of August 1990, a total of 80,000 persons had been punished and 780,0000 contraband publications seized. Printing facilities were limited to 500 houses nationwide, and distribution outlets were likewise forced to reregister and, in the process their numbers were limited. On October 25, the National People's Congress approved a draft resolution calling for life imprisonment for those producing, publishing or selling pornographic materials, and the death penalty for those who use pornography to carry out criminal activities. These massive efforts at censorship and control notwithstanding, a further "antipornography" drive was slated for the end of 1990 and the beginning of 1991.13

On November 14, the New China News Agency revealed that no less than 155,000 persons had been stripped of official press credentials during a recent government campaign to reissue press cards. At least 13 Chinese journalists detained after June 4, 1989 were still behind bars at the end of 1990. Among them were Zhang Weiguo, Beijing bureau chief for the pioneering World Economic Herald.

The foreign press corps was also subjected to a level of surveillance and intimidation greater than any it had experienced since the Cultural Revolution. Several foreign journalists were beaten and detained around the first anniversary of the June 4 massacre. Access to the People's Republic was tightly restricted for journalists from Hong Kong and Macau under regulations banning telephone interviews and requiring them to apply for permission to enter China 15 days in advance. In Beijing, the government reportedly established a new office to dispense rewards of access to friendly journalists.14

Pro-democracy academics and intellectuals who avoided being imprisoned during the June 4 crackdown continued to experience serious harassment and worse at the hands of Party officials. The case of Professor Wen Yuankai of Hefei University of Science and Technology, a close associate of the exiled dissident Fang Lizhi, was an example. Initially stripped of his Party membership and confined to campus, he was reported in November to have been placed in detention, unable to communicate with or be visited by his family.15 A report at the end of the year said that Wen had been released from confinement but had not yet received word when he could return to his teaching and research. He was quoted as saying, "I hope I'm not going to end up working as a cashier at the university canteen."16

Zhang Wei, the former director of the city of Tianjin's Foreign Economy and Trade Committee and Party Secretary for the Tianjin Foreign Affairs Office, was not a participant in the democracy movement, but after the June 4 bloodbath denounced the government's use of military force and resigned his positions and Party membership. In a telephone interview in November 1990, he reported that since then the authorities had bugged his telephone, canceled his driver's license, required him to report on his daily activities, and followed him everywhere (which made moving about "very safe," he quipped.)17

In an effort to forestall any future student unrest of the type that led to the 1989 protest movement, the government on November 7, 1990 issued sweeping new restrictions on free speech and political activity on China's campuses. Speeches that "run against the basic rules of China's Constitution and education policy, or that spread superstition or religious activities" were forbidden, as were "unauthorized organizations, illegal publications and broadcasting on campus."18

The policy of retaliation extended to Chinese students abroad. Xu Lin, an official of the Chinese embassy in Washington who defected in May, released documents, including one signed by Premier Li Peng, from a high-level meeting in Beijing held in March 1990. The documents set out a program for controlling Chinese students in the United States and Canada. Dividing students into five classes, from Party loyalists to "reactionary core elements" (i.e., dissident leaders and participants in "anti-government" activities), the policy called on embassy officials to discredit and punish the latter by canceling their scholarships, revoking their passports, and forbidding them family visits. Students in both Japan and the United States reported receiving harassing telephone calls, and said that Chinese consular officials had grilled them on their political views and associations, threatening them with cancellation of their passports and scholarships.

Government repression of ethnic and religious groups showed no sign of easing in 1990. The surge in Tibetan independence activism which began in Lhasa in October 1987 was countered by what China's security chief Qiao Shi described in July 1988 as a policy of "merciless repression." The hardline policy was reiterated by Jiang Zemin, the Party General Secretary, when on July 29, 1990 he ordered a "tough new crackdown on the independence movement in Tibet."19

Martial law in Lhasa, imposed in March 1989 after violent clashes between demonstrators and security forces that resulted in an unknown number of deaths, was formally lifted on May 1, 1990. However, the Tibetan quarter of Lhasa remained under effective siege by a massive deployment of the paramilitary People's Armed Police. On June 2, the authorities initiated an intensive program of so-called "population screening" -- a euphemism for night-time house searches and arrests of separatists. One Tibetan described the situation as being "martial law without the checkpoints."

Asia Watch recorded several dozen arrests and trials of peaceful Tibetan demonstrators and independence activists from late 1989 through the end of 1990. This figure probably represented only a fraction of the total number, given the restricted access to Tibet and the severe censorship of news. It included the cases of Loye, a monk at the Potala Palace, sentenced on December 6, 1989 to 15 years' imprisonment for "counterrevolution" and "espionage";20 a Tibetan businessman reportedly sentenced on March 22, 1990 to seven years' imprisonment for putting up independence posters; and a 14-year-old sentenced to two years in an adult jail for allegedly distributing independence leaflets at school.21

In late October and early November 1990, Chinese authorities permitted a US State Department official and four Scandinavian diplomats to visit the notorious Drapchi prison near Lhasa, one of several Tibetan prisons in which political detainees were held. The diplomats sighted Yulo Dawa Tsering, a 60-year-old monk sentenced in January 1989 to ten years in prison for "colluding with foreign reactionaries to overthrow the government." They reported that he appeared to be in "fairly" good health, but stressed to Chinese officials the need for an improvement in the human rights situation in Tibet and more humane treatment of political prisoners.22

A Lhasa police spokesman, in a reversal of previous official denials that there were any political prisoners in Tibet, informed the diplomats that Drapchi prison held 56 political prisoners, all of whom had been tried and sentenced, and that 63 others were held in "labor reform" camps in the region. However, a list copied from an official government roster named 77 political prisoners held in Drapchi Prison as of September 1990.

Religious freedom in Tibet was further curtailed in 1990. Three weeks after it lifted martial law, the Chinese government enacted regulations forbidding any political or religious assembly to be held without prior official approval. Monks and nuns of the Tibetan Buddhist order were subjected to "screening" procedures designed to weed out those supporting independence. Some monasteries and nunneries were closed; others were decimated by expulsions of their members.

Another ethnic minority area, the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region in China's extreme northwest, experienced serious unrest in April 1990. According to official reports, 22 were killed and 13 wounded during an uprising. Reports from foreign travelers suggested the true death toll may have reached 60. The short-lived rebellion, which occurred in the town of Baren in the autonomous prefecture of Kizilso Kirghiz, near Kashgar on the ancient "Silk Road," was supressed by Chinese troops and security forces on April 5 and 6. The official press blamed the uprising on a small group of so-called "splittists."

Subsequently, a detailed plan to limit the number of mosques and religious schools in the region was published. Strict limitations were placed on proselytizing23 and religious education, and the official press reportedly declared that Chinese Muslims "must choose between Marx and Allah."24

In mid-September, the Xinjiang regional government adopted a draconian set of regulations banning Muslim clerics from meeting foreigners or foreign religious organizations, espousing separatism, opposing the Communist Party or using religion to challenge China's birth-control policy. The new regulations, published in the Xinjiang Ribao, also applied to Tibetan monks and to clergymen in China's state-sponsored Catholic and Protestant churches in the region. Under the regulations, clerics "shall not propagate the history of holy war and incite ethnic hatred under any circumstances."25

Practicing Catholics and Protestants who refused to join government-sponsored church organizations were in recent years subjected to increasing persecution. The government broke up unauthorized congregations, sometimes violently, and made widespread arrests. Beginning in late 1989, dozens of priests, bishops and laypersons belonging to the underground Roman Catholic church in northern and western China were arrested. The underground church remained loyal to the Vatican, which recognizes Taiwan and does not have diplomatic relations with China. There were signs that the government linked Vatican loyalists to the pro-democracy movement, such as accusations that underground Bishop Hou Guoyang incited a small group to demonstrate in Sichuan and collected money "to support the turmoil."26

US Policy

In 1990, the Bush administration continued its policy from 1989 of attempting to strengthen relations with China, largely on China's terms. But the administration's hopes that "constructive engagement" with China would yield significant human rights gains were sorely disappointed. Congress strongly opposed the administration's efforts to maintain normal trade relations and to block legislation protecting Chinese students in the United States. But Iraq's invasion of Kuwait and the US desire to enlist China's support for the international isolation of Saddam Hussein dramatically weakened the US position toward sanctions. While the Bush administration retained certain economic sanctions, such as the prohibition on military sales, and on World Bank loans for other than "basic human needs," it abandoned its earlier commitment to limit high-level contacts with China.

In early January, President Bush stated: "Some people think the best way to make changes for human rights in China is isolation: don't talk to them, try to punish them by excommunication. I don't feel that way."27 President Bush and State Department officials took this position further by continuing their role as apologists for China throughout the first quarter of the year. At Senate hearings on February 8, for example, Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger appeared to chastise senators for their preoccupation with Tiananmen Square and its aftermath, saying, "In the real world, we need to see that China is less completely charming than the land of panda bears and the Great Wall and also less completely evil than a night in June when the Goddess of Democracy was crushed by tanks in Tiananmen."28

The administration was particularly congratulatory when China announced cosmetic human rights improvements in early 1990 in an effort to influence US policy. On January 12, while human rights groups voiced skepticism that the lifting of martial law in China was anything more than a cosmetic gesture, President Bush praised the measure, saying, "there's no way you can look at that and not say it is positive."29 Similarly, when China claimed to release some 573 prisoners later in the month (although the government released no names and permitted no inspection of jails and prisons), the President rushed to describe it as "a kind of amnesty."30 Vice President Quayle even went so far as to proclaim that the lifting of martial law was a "dividend" of the President's policy toward China.31

The administration rewarded the lifting of martial law with more than words. On January 11, the White House announced that the administration would support "basic human needs" loans to China at international financial institutions, but continue to discourage "project loans."32 Although State Department spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler insisted that the change in loan policy was not linked to the lifting of martial law one day earlier, most observers believed that the two were clearly linked.

The result of the change in US policy was a $60 million loan for poverty relief and $30 million for earthquake relief by February. On a more positive note, however, the US opposed World Bank consideration of a $150 million loan for road improvements, and the loan did not come up for formal consideration at the World Bank. Later loans did have US support, such as a $300 million loan for tree planting approved in May. By November, the World Bank appeared prepared to remove all restrictions on loans to China, and announced that it would consider a $110 million loan for technological improvement of rural industry in early December.33 To its credit, the Bush administration opposed the loan when it came up for formal consideration. However, because the United States has less than a 20 percent voting share at the World Bank, the loan went forward over US objection, with the support of Japan and the European Community. Congressional leaders have said that the administration must work behind the scenes to prevent loans from being considered, as it did for the first six months after June 4, 1989. Some feared that while the US was opposing loans when they came up for a vote, it had abandoned efforts to prevent such loans from being considered in the first place.

The administration also maintained its policy of refusing to license sales of military equipment to China, and took the unusual step in February of ordering a Chinese government corporation to sell a company it owned in Seattle.34 Other positive aspects of US policy toward China were the administration's outspokenness on the question of China's harassment of Chinese students in the United States, and the US embassy's refusal to send a representative to "Army Day" events in Beijing on August 1. The administration also signed a proclamation making May 13 a national day in support of human rights in China.

Unfortunately, these positive actions by the administration were outweighed by competing tendencies, the worst of which came from President Bush himself. One example was President Bush's "pocket" veto in late 1989 of congressional legislation which would have provided safe haven for Chinese students in the United States. When Congress returned to Washington in January 1990, the first item on its agenda was to override the President's veto. The administration pulled out all the stops to undermine the effort, including predictions that if the bill were enacted China would retaliate by ending all student exchanges with the United States.

The administration also attempted to persuade Congress that legislation was not needed because the President would issue an executive order providing the same protection. But Rep. Stephen Solarz spoke for many in Congress when he stated, "If the President can send some of the highest foreign policy officials in his administration to Beijing at the same time as he is telling the American people that he has suspended all high-level contacts, then he cannot be relied upon not to rescind the executive order at some time in the future."35 In a firm repudiation of the Bush administration's policy, the House of Representatives voted 390 to 25 to override the President's veto on January 24.

The President then turned his attention to the Senate, where administration officials engaged in a desperate, last-minute campaign of arm-twisting to prevent an override of the veto there. He barely prevailed. On January 25, sixty-two senators voted against the President, but the total was four votes short of the two-thirds majority required to override the veto. In a statement following the vote, President Bush tried to claim that the Senate action vindicated his China policy, stating, "The thing I like about it [the vote], given the mournful predictions of some a few months ago, is that it gives me the confidence that I'm going to go forward the way I think is correct here."36

Despite President Bush's claims, Congress remained at odds with the administration on its China policy. The wide divergence between the executive and legislative branches was seen in the debate on Most Favored Nation (MFN) trading status for China. MFN (i.e., normal trading relations) is renewed for Communist countries on a yearly basis. It is conditioned by law on the beneficiary country's compliance with human rights conditions relating to its citizens' right to emigrate.37

The administration was required by law to submit a request to continue MFN for China by June 3, and few doubted that the President would do so. Nonetheless, the Bush administration could have helped achieve progress on human rights in China by encouraging a sense of suspense about its intentions on MFN. But in the months preceding the announcement, neither the White House nor the State Department issued any public statement about the kind of human rights progress that would by required of China if the renewal was to be requested, and so far as the public record shows, the Chinese had little reason to fear that President Bush would not proceed with the request.

Nonetheless, Chinese authorities were extremely concerned about the possible loss of MFN and took actions on the human rights front which were clearly aimed at influencing the debate on MFN. In late April, for example, martial law was lifted in Lhasa, and on May 10, Beijing announced the release of some 211 prisoners.38

On May 24 the administration submitted its request to Congress, and President Bush held a news conference to defend the action. He justified the decision on economic grounds, stating that failure to continue MFN would result in a loss of American exports and jobs. He also hailed recent actions by China (such as the lifting of martial law in Tibet and the release of political prisoners), stating that "211 detainees were recently released and then their names provided for the first time." The President was in error in stating that the names of those said to be released had been provided; it had the effect of crediting the authorities with something they had not done.

More helpful to the human rights cause was a May 24 White House statement, revealing that, "He [the President] is personally disappointed that the Chinese government has not taken more decisive steps to demonstrate a commitment to internationally accepted human rights," and indicating that the lifting of martial law and the release of prisoners were "modest" and "clearly inadequate."39

From May through October, the MFN issue was debated in Congress and dominated US relations with China. Throughout the period, Beijing periodically announced releases of prisoners.40 Notwithstanding the administration's efforts, however, opposition to MFN status for China grew in Congress, and by July, several bills to limit or end MFN were under active consideration in the House.

Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger issued a letter to Congress commenting on one of these initiatives on July 11. The letter noted:

[O]ur most immediate concern is the bill's effect on progress on human rights and other issues important to the United States. Our current sanctions have already sent a powerful message to China's leaders. Some positive steps have resulted, including the release of almost 900 political detainees....

The administration thus uncritically accepted Beijing's claims of having released a number of prisoners which was almost entirely unverified.

Congress was apparently unmoved by the administration's opposition to repeal or limits on MFN for China. In a series of dramatic votes on October 18, the House enacted a resolution to repeal MFN for China by a vote of 247 to 174. Legislation to maintain MFN but with strict human rights conditions passed even more dramatically in a 383 to 30 vote. Such a margin indicated near-universal displeasure with the administration's policy on China and a willingness to end MFN if human rights did not improve significantly. The Senate did not take up the measure before the 101st Congress adjourned, but Senate leaders announced their intention to revisit the question in 1991.41

US relations with China improved dramatically following the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait on August 2. The US effort to organize international sanctions against Iraq at the United Nations required China's cooperation. That cooperation was secured by a series of high-level meetings with Chinese government officials, beginning with a meeting between Secretary of State James Baker and Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen in Cairo on November 6. According to the State Department,42 Secretary Baker raised the subject of human rights with Foreign Minister Qian at that time (although nothing was said publicly) and a list of human rights cases prepared by Asia Watch was delivered to a senior official at the Foreign Ministry in Beijing.

On November 27, Foreign Minister Qian was invited by Secretary Baker to visit Washington for talks on the Persian Gulf. The Foreign Minister was the highest ranking Chinese official to visit the United States since the June 4 crackdown. The US invitation was proffered just three days after two pro-democracy activists, Wang Juntao and Chen Ziming, had been charged with the capital offense of plotting to overthrow the Communist regime. No public mention of these or any other cases was made by the administration during the Foreign Minister's visit, although President Bush reportedly raised human rights concerns to the Foreign Minister in an impromptu meeting at the White House.43 When asked about the meeting, National Security Advisor Gen. Brent Scowcroft stated that one of the reasons Secretary Baker had invited the Chinese Foreign Minister to the United States was to "personally" make it clear to the Chinese government that "there was no forgetting Tiananmen Square" and "no let-up for sanctions," although, he noted, the Secretary did call attention to "the fact that we could cooperate on issues of global importance."44

Notwithstanding Gen. Scowcroft's remarks, the visit by the Chinese Foreign Minister was clearly a reward for China's abstention at the Security Council on a critical resolution on Iraq, and formally ended the administration's previous position of limiting high-level contacts with China. While it was clear that the United States had important interests to pursue with Beijing, it was a shame that human rights were the trade-off in securing China's acquiescence to US policy in the Gulf. This trade-off was particularly regrettable in that it occurred precisely at a time when human rights conditions in China were deteriorating badly.

From December 17 through 19, the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Richard Schifter, held talks in Beijing with Chinese officials from the courts, police, and other departments on human rights conditions. At a press conference at the conclusion of his talks, Assistant Secretary Schifter told reporters that he had called on China to release all dissidents held for nonviolent political offenses and that he had presented a list of 150 representative detainees. The list included well-known students, workers and intellectuals jailed for participation in the 1989 democracy movement (including Wang Juntao and Chen Ziming), prisoners from prior democracy movements (including Wei Jingsheng), Tibetan independence activists, and Catholic and Protestant clergy. The Assistant Secretary also warned Chinese government officials that Congress might not renew MFN status in 1991, and requested that the US embassy be permitted to send observers to political trials.45

The State Department refused to make the entire list of detainees public, citing at various times a range of concerns, from avoiding increased danger to those political prisoners not listed, to encouraging a response from China through a quiet approach. China's immediate response, however, was far from encouraging. A Foreign Ministry spokesman characterized the talks as an "exchange of views on Sino-US relations and other issues,"46 and rebuffed Schifter's request to visit a jail.47 A commentary in the official Communist Party newspaper was even less delicate, lambasting "gentlemen making a living out of human rights" who lecture other countries about their internal affairs.48

The Schifter press conference represented the most pointed criticism that the administration had made in months, and revealed a new willingness on the part of the Chinese government to at least listen to human rights complaints. There were no indications, however, that Chinese officials were ready to do more than listen. To the contrary, the Foreign Ministry spokesman noted that "[t]o exchange views on human rights is one thing and to interfere in internal affairs under the pretext of human rights is another," adding that China had no plans to free jailed intellectuals.49 The administration's failure to publicize the names of all whose release Schifter demanded hinders efforts to hold China accountable for their fate, and to measure the Bush administration's policy toward China in light of Chinese responsiveness.

Despite these shortcomings, the US embassy in Beijing, under the leadership of Ambassador James Lilley, appeared to take a strong interest in human rights. The State Department's annual Country Report on Human Rights Practices, issued in February 1990, contained a detailed and unapologetic condemnation of human rights in China.50 And the embassy welcomed Chinese human rights leader Fang Lizhi and his wife when they sought refuge following the Tiananmen Square crackdown. Fang and his wife stayed in the embassy fully 13 months while Ambassador Lilley and his staff worked with Chinese authorities to resolve the impasse over the terms on which the couple could leave.

The year 1990 was a bad one for human rights in China, and the Bush administration's policy of muffling human rights criticisms did not result in improvements, despite the administration's repeated promises that it would. The situation deteriorated badly, but administration statements did not reflect that trend. Indeed, the executive branch was virtually silent on such issues as the execution of more than 500 suspected criminals in the month preceding the Asian games in September, the tightening of already repressive controls on freedom of speech and press, and the trials of student leaders in November.

Fortunately, Congress remained outraged by Tiananmen Square and its aftermath, and the important policy dispute over Most Favored Nation status put China on notice that President Bush is not the only actor in Washington on such questions. The policy dispute also provided an important opportunity to publicize continuing abuses.

The Work of Asia Watch

Asia Watch's work on China in 1990 aimed at publicizing human rights abuses in China and Tibet and generating pressure on the Chinese government from a variety of different sources, most significantly from the US government. Asia Watch testified nine times in Congress on human rights in China in the context of the debate over economic sanctions.

Asia Watch produced three major reports in 1990. Punishment Season, published in March, described human rights violations in China since the imposition of martial law in May 1989 and included what was then the most comprehensive list available of people reported detained in connection with the pro-democracy movement and its aftermath. "Merciless Repression", published in May, documented human rights abuses in Tibet. And Repression in China since June 4, 1989, released in September, was an updated list of some 800 people believed still to be in detention for political activities.

Those reports, shorter newsletters on torture and prison conditions, and a lengthy article published by Asia Watch in The Nation on June 11, 1990, provided the basic data for advocacy work and campaigning. Asia Watch requested permission to visit China twice during the year, once in March and once in November for trial observation. Neither request received a response. To ensure continued access to up-to-date and reliable information from China, Asia Watch opened an office in Hong Kong at the end of October.

Much of the advocacy work concerned US policy on sanctions. Discussion in Washington in January over how to force China to make concessions on human rights led Asia Watch to formulate a position advocating a calibrated sanctions package, many elements of which were later adopted in proposed congressional legislation. In support of sanctions, Asia Watch representatives appeared in a number of public debates, including one in May at the Library of Congress where Asia Watch debated the head of the US China Business Council. Beginning in March, as discussion heated up over whether to extend MFN benefits, Asia Watch took the lead in formulating a position that would allow MFN to be extended only if human rights conditions were imposed which China would have to meet by 1991.

Asia Watch also took the lead in drawing attention to the plight of Chinese workers, virtually ignored as Americans focused instead on imprisoned students and intellectuals. In a campaign to publicize the case of Han Dongfang, a founder of the Beijing Autonomous Workers Federation who was arrested in June 1989, Asia Watch dubbed him the "Chinese Lech Walesa" and enlisted the help of colleagues in Helsinki Watch to have Solidarity in Poland take up his cause. In April, Asia Watch arranged a trip to Washington by another founder of the federation, Lu Jinghua, to introduce her to members of Congress and to interest the AFL-CIO in campaigning for the release of Chinese workers. Ms. Lu was honored by Human Rights Watch in December 1990 for her efforts on behalf of imprisoned labor activists.

In April and May, Asia Watch, together with the Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Foundation for Human Rights, worked with Soviet dissident Yuri Orlov to initiate a campaign of scientists on behalf of dissident astrophysicist Fang Lizhi, who was then trapped in the US embassy in Beijing. The scientists agreed to boycott international scientific conferences in China until Fang and his family were allowed safe passage out of the country. After they were permitted to leave in June, the campaign continued on behalf of other imprisoned scientists.

In time for the anniversary of the June 4 crackdown, Asia Watch launched another appeal, this time to every Catholic bishop in the United States, on behalf of Catholic priests and layworkers in China imprisoned during a wave of arrests in late 1989 and early 1990, mostly in northwest China.

Asia Watch also worked with counterparts in Japan to pressure the Chinese government on human rights issues (see chapter on Japan, infra).

In November, an Asia Watch representative met with Ambassador Lilley and briefed Assistant Secretary Schifter before his much-publicized trip to China.

7 These practices have drawn extensive criticism within China as well. See, e.g., Xiong Jiquian, "We Must Overcome the Practice of 'Passing Verdict Before the Trial,'" Faxue (Law Science Monthly), No. 4, 1990, pp. 31-32; Li Shaoping, "Change the Practice of 'Decide First and Then Hold the Trial' to One of 'First Hold the Trial and then Decide,'" Faxue Yanjiu (Law Studies Journal), No. 2, 1990, pp. 39-43; Bai Zhuolin, "Taking Issue with 'Adjudication Committees are Trial-Conducting Bodies,'" Faxue Yu Shijian (Law Studies and Practice), No. 2, 1990, p. 27.

8 "Decision of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress Regarding the Procedure for Rapid Adjudication of Cases Involving Criminal Elements Who Seriously Endanger Public Security," September 2, 1983. These regulations suspend the requirement that defendants be notified of the charges against them and their right to counsel at least seven days before trial, and shorten the time for appeal of a death sentence from ten to a mere three days.

9 See Charlene Fu, "Lawyers Barred From Defending Pro-Democracy Movement Participants," Associated Press, November 13, 1990.

10 Yangcheng Wanbao, November 8, 1990.

11 Associated Press, November 29, 1990.

12 Beijing Xinhua Domestic Service, October 22, 1990, in FBIS, October 24, 1990.

13 Renmin Ribao editorial, October 27, 1990, in FBIS, October 29, 1990.

14 "Office to `reward' journalists," South China Morning Post (Agence France-Presse), November 21, 1990.

15 Hong Kong Standard, November 28, 1990.

16 Associated Press (Hong Kong), December 24, 1990, quoting article in Ming Pao Daily News.

17 Fang Zhiyuan, "Jiang Wei: `I am under surveillance,'" China Spring, January 1991.

18 "Campus curbs cited -- link to Tiananmen denied," South China Morning Post, United Press International, November 8, 1990.

19 Reuters, July 29, 1990.

20 Tibet Radio, December 7, 1989, in FBIS, December 20, 1989.

21 Ibid.

22 South China Morning Post, November 19, 1990.

23 Reuters, April 11, 1990.

24 Lillian Craig Harris, "China: The Choice Between Marx and Allah," Middle East International, July 6, 1990.

25 "New controls on clerics," Hong Kong Standard (Agency France-Presse), October 30, 1990.

26 Reuters, June 28, 1990.

27 "Bush's Statements and Excerpts from News Conference," Washington Post (Associated Press), January 6, 1990.

28 Robert Pear, "US Official Urges 'Real World' View of China," New York Times, February 8, 1990.

29 Robert Pear, "Bush Hails Thaw in China; Congress Is Skeptical," New York Times, January 12, 1990.

30 "Excerpts from President's News Conference on China and Other Matters," New York Times (as recorded by CNN), January 26, 1990.

31 Robert Pear, "Martial Law Ends in China's Capital; US Eases Curbs," New York Times, January 11, 1990.

32 Before the announced change, the US had opposed all loans to China at the World Bank, and had worked behind the scenes at the bank to prevent loans from coming up for consideration.

33 Nayan Chanda, "World Bank Is Preparing to Lift Curbs On China Loans, Despite US Opposition," Wall Street Journal, November 13, 1990.

34 The action was taken pursuant to the so-called "Exon-Florio" provision in US law, which requires foreign governments that would gain access to secret US technology through their companies in the United States to divest those companies.

35 Thomas Friedman, "Bush Is Set Back by House Override of Veto on China," New York Times, January 25, 1990.

36 In April, the press revealed that the President had failed to issue an executive order to protect the students. Despite his repeated claims of having done so, it appeared that he had merely issued a directive, which was not formally published in the Federal Register. Following an embarrassed flurry of activity at the White House, the formal order was issued on April 11.

37 Section 402 of the Trade Act stipulates that the President may not designate as an MFN recipient any Communist country which "denies its citizens the right or opportunity to emigrate." If a country is not in compliance with this condition, the President may waive it if such a waiver would "lead substantially to the achievement of the objectives of this section," i.e., freedom to emigrate and the advancement of human rights.

38 These gestures, while they indicated a willingness to respond to US concerns, were disappointing since, as noted, the lifting of martial law in no way lessened repression and abuse in Tibet. Similarly, the authorities named only six prisoners of the 211 allegedly released, and permitted no inspection of its jails and prisons to verify the releases and the number of prisoners remaining. Moreover, these gestures were outweighed by a deterioration in human rights in the period from December 1989 to February 1990, which saw the arrests of dozens of priests, bishops and laymen belonging to the underground Catholic church.

39 However, a more unfortunate aspect of the statement was the insistence that the United States "pays tribute" to the victims of the Tiananmen Square crackdown "by continuing to sustain as high a level of people-to-people contact and commerce as we can." Certainly, the Chinese authorities saw the unconditional renewal of MFN as a message of US support for themselves, not for the pro-democracy demonstrators. The statement was also flawed by its failure to describe the significant new limits on the freedom to emigrate and travel imposed after the Tiananmen Square crackdown.

40 A Chinese diplomat who defected to the United States made available a secret memorandum prepared by the Chinese government. The document stated that the government intended to use the release of political prisoners as a "card" to influence American policy toward China. Fox Butterfield, "Beijing Aims Jail Releases at Influencing US," New York Times, May 11, 1990.

41 The legislation, sponsored by Rep. Don Pease, would have made MFN conditional on a number of human rights conditions. The ease with which it passed the House encouraged the bill's sponsor to bring it up again in 1991.

42 Letter to Asia Watch from Kent Wiedemann, Director of Office of Chinese and Mongolian Affairs, US State Department, November 16, 1990.

43 Al Kamen, "Bush Warns China on Its Human Rights Record," Washington Post, December 1, 1990.

44 CBS "Face the Nation," Interview with Gen. Brent Scowcroft.

45 Sheryl WuDunn, "American Official Presses China to Free Captives," New York Times, December 20, 1990; Associated Press, December 19, 1990.

46 Reuters, December 21, 1990.

47 Associated Press, December 19, 1990.

48 Susumu Awanohara and Tai Ming Cheung, "Abusive Treatment," Far Eastern Economic Review, January 3, 1991.

49 Sheryl WuDunn, "China Keeps Door Closed on Dissent," New York Times, December 23, 1990.

50 The country report on China was prepared by embassy staff and edited by the State Department's Human Rights Bureau.
INDONESIA AND EAST TIMOR

Human Rights Developments

The human rights situation in Indonesia and East Timor took a sharp turn for the worse in 1990. The Indonesian military tortured and summarily executed detainees in the course of counterinsurgency efforts along the Irian Jaya-Papuan New Guinea border, in Aceh in northern Sumatra, and in East Timor. Elsewhere, at least 12 criminal suspects and probably many more were shot dead by police, and others died in custody, apparently as the result of torture. Four men in their 60s, accused of involvement in the 1965 coup attempt, were executed by firing squad outside Jakarta on February 16 after almost 25 years in prison. Freedom of expression was sharply curtailed, with newspapers banned, plays cancelled, journalists blacklisted and critics of the government sentenced to heavy prison terms. New "screening" procedures designed to uncover supporters of leftist organizations in the 1960s constituted a serious infringement on freedom of opinion and privacy. A community legal aid organization in Sumatra and a new labor federation in Jakarta confronted restrictions on freedom of association, and peaceful political demonstrations were broken up in Dili, East Timor and Yogyakarta. The independence of lawyers, already limited, suffered further setbacks. It was not a good year.

Military actions against pro-independence activists in Aceh, Irian Jaya and East Timor resulted in serious human rights abuses. In Aceh, attacks on police and soldiers by an armed opposition group, the Aceh/Sumatra National Liberation Front, more commonly known as Aceh Merdeka, led to massive retaliation by combined troops of the regular army, the mobil brigade of the police, the special forces (Kopassus) and units of the air force. Suspected supporters of the group were rounded up, held incommunicado, and often tortured to obtain information. Asia Watch was able to document six disappearances but the true figure is believed to be far higher. The death toll on both sides since January, according to one army doctor, may be as high as 1,000. A growing number of unidentified corpses found along roads, rivers and plantations in three districts of Aceh led to speculation that the military was executing prisoners and dumping their bodies in areas where they would not be known. No inquests were conducted and international humanitarian organizations were denied permission to provide services in Aceh.

In early June, over 100 people from Irian Jaya, some of them activists with the armed independence organization Organisasi Papua Merdeka, or the Free Papua Movement, fled across the border into Yapsei, Papua New Guinea. Indonesian troops followed them across the border, where at least two noncombatant refugees from Irian Jaya were reported killed at point-blank range.

Human rights abuses in East Timor were committed against peaceful demonstrators, many of them students. On January 17, troops used excessive force to break up a small demonstration in front of the hotel in Dili where US Ambassador John Monjo was staying. On September 4, a demonstration involving an estimated 10,000 people took place to mark the 50th anniversary of the diocese of Dili. A group of students reportedly held up a flag of the armed independence organization Fretilin. While there were no immediate arrests, masked men on motorcycles, some of whom were reportedly police, began appearing on Dili streets after dark in what residents believed was a campaign of intimidation. Several demonstrators were reportedly taken in for questioning and beaten.

A series of arrests took place in East Timor beginning on October 1 after an Indonesian solider was badly beaten by East Timorese youths. On October 8, four pupils at a junior high school in Dili were arrested for jeering at the public prosecutor, an Indonesian official, and the school was occupied by troops for three days. On October 15-16, several students at the Sao Jose Externatao high school in Dili were arrested after anti-Indonesian graffiti appeared on the walls. By the end of October, over 100 arrests, most of them short-term, had taken place, many of them students who were tortured during interrogation with electric shocks, lighted cigarettes and severe beatings.

Human rights violations also continued to stem from actions by the Indonesian military following a coup attempt in 1965 which the army blames on the since-banned Indonesian Communist Party (PKI). On February 16, four former members of President Sukarno's palace guard, sentenced to death for their alleged involvement in the murder of six generals on the night of the coup attempt, were executed by firing squad after almost 25 years in prison. Yohanes Surono, Norbertus Rohayan, Satar Suryanto and Simon Petrus Sulaiman were believed to have had unfair trials, and their appeals process was a travesty.

Increasing limitations were placed on freedom of expression. In October, Bonar Tigor Naipospos, 29, a student, was convicted of subversion and sentenced to eight-and-a-half years in prison for leading a study group which discussed how the Suharto government's policies were not benefiting the poor. He was also accused of circulating books about Marxism and allegedly helping to sell novels by Pramoedya Ananta Toer, a well known writer and former political prisoner.

In November, performances of a play by Riantiarno about presidential sucesssion, called Suksesi, were cancelled in Jakarta. Another play by the same author, The Cockroach Opera, about poverty, was also banned on the grounds that it could give rise to social unrest. (In mid-December, the ban was lifted, but security forces said Riantiarno would be held responsible for any unrest that might occur.)

The publishing permit for a tabloid newspaper called Monitor was withdrawn and the editor arrested in November after the Christian-owned paper published a survey of its readers' views on the world's most influential people, and the Prophet Muhamad placed only eleventh. Shortly thereafter, the publisher of another newspaper owned by the same company withdrew his paper from publication after a letter to the editor was printed about a dream that the writer had had about Muhamad. The letter was accompanied by an artist's rendering of the Prophet, in violation of the Islamic ban on such portrayal. At the end of 1990, the police said they were still hunting for the writer of the letter.

Also in November, the police banned the public reading of two poems by the poet W.S. Rendra, claiming that they could give rise to ethnic or religious tensions. The newsweekly Tempo then printed both poems in full, without repercussion from the military, but a journalist from a paper called Media Indonesia who wrote about the banning was reportedly fired after the editor received a warning from the Ministry of Information.

Steven Erlanger, the Southeast Asia correspondent for the New York Times, was blacklisted on November 24 after an article he wrote on the Suharto family's business interests appeared in the November 12 edition of the International Herald Tribune. The Herald Tribune's distributor in Indonesia "voluntarily" suspended all sales of the newspaper. By December, a Singapore-based agent was reportedly taking on distribution in Indonesia.

Limits were also placed on freedom of association. In August, the local military in North Sumatra banned a community development organization, KSPPM, which had assisted villagers affected by the operations of a large pulp and rayon factory to use legal channels to protest land expropriation and destruction by the factory. The ban was issued on the grounds that KSPPM had not registered under the "Social Organizations Law" when in fact it was not covered by that law because it had no mass membership. The real reason for the ban was believed to be military unhappiness with the organization's legal aid activities. After domestic and international pressure, the ban was lifted at the end of October.

In mid-November, the human rights lawyer H.J.C. Princen announced the formation of a new independent labor federation, Solidarity, and scheduled its first meeting for December 17. The coordinating minister for politics and security immediately declared the union illegal. Its establishment drew attention to the complete absence of worker rights in Indonesia, including the right to form independent unions.

US Policy

An article in the Far Eastern Economic Review in April began, "Indonesia has seldom been, and is not today, a country which is foremost on the minds of Washington officials and politicians, or of the general American public." The Bush administration did nothing to disprove that observation in 1990.

The administration in Washington generally refrained from public condemnation of Indonesia's human rights record, and with great fanfare sent top-ranking officials to the opening of the Festival of Indonesia, a two-year series of cultural performances and exhibits stretching over some 200 US cities.

Ambassador Monjo, by contrast, played a constructive role. In January, following the demonstration in East Timor, he publicly expressed regret that the nonviolent assembly had been broken up, urging Indonesian officials not to arrest anyone, and visiting the injured participants in the hospital.

Despite urging from Asia Watch and other human rights organizations, the US failed to protest the executions of the four long-term prisoners in February, on the grounds that protest would be inappropriate because the US itself retains the death penalty. The administration ignored arguments that more than capital punishment was at issue, eschewing the fair trial and humanitarian questions at stake.

In April 1990, US Trade Representative Carla Hills rejected a petition filed in 1989 by the AFL-CIO seeking to revoke trade benefits granted Indonesia under the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) because of violations of the right to freedom of association and the absence of collective bargaining in Indonesia. Indonesian officials lobbied intensively against the petition. The AFL-CIO received a 49-page document justifying the decision, which went through a point-by-point refutation of the AFL-CIO's claims. The cause of labor rights in Indonesia would have been better served if the administration had engaged in such a dialogue with the AFL-CIO in public.

Concern about human rights violations was more apparent in Congress than in the executive branch. In May, Rep. Ted Weiss called for an inquiry by the House Select Committee on Intelligence after allegations by investigative journalist Kathy Kadane that US embassy officials and CIA staff had compiled lists of PKI members to give to the Indonesian army following the 1965 coup attempt, when the army was systematically hunting down such people for arrest or execution. By the end of 1990, preliminary investigations were stalled because of the Persian Gulf crisis. In December, a letter from over 200 members of Congress protesting human rights abuses in East Timor was circulated.

The Work of Asia Watch

Asia Watch published two major reports on Indonesia during the year, Injustice, Persecution, Eviction in March, covering arrests and trials of nonviolent government critics, violations of freedom of expression, deaths in custody, and civil rights violations during land disputes; and Prison Conditions in Indonesia in August. Both reports were based on a mission in December 1989. An article in the Economist about the prison report led Indonesian journalists to undertake their own investigation of prison conditions in more remote areas of the country, resulting in an article in the leading newsweekly.

Following the executions in February, Asia Watch sent telexes to nine heads of state, including the leaders of the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain and Japan, urging them to condemn the killings publicly. Asia Watch also sent a letter to Ambassador Monjo explaining the unfairness of the men's trials and appeal process, and issued a press release noting that the men had been imprisoned almost as long as Nelson Mandela.

In May, Asia Watch called on Secretary of State James Baker to investigate the Kadane allegations. In August, Asia Watch presented a statement on human rights violations in East Timor to the United Nations Special Committee on Decolonization. Both statements were noted in the Indonesian press.

In September, Asia Watch representatives met with Indonesian Foreign Minister Ali Alatas in New York to discuss a wide range of human rights issues. The Minister said that Asia Watch would be allowed access officially only when it stopped "taunting" the Indonesian government.

Asia Watch also issued news bulletins during 1990 criticizing the "screening" process used to root out former leftists from the civil service and the banning of KSPPM in Sumatra. A newsletter on human rights abuses in Aceh was issued in December, following an investigative mission to Indonesia the previous month.
JAPAN

Human Rights Developments

Asia Watch focused on only one aspect of human rights in Japan in 1990, the treatment by the Japanese government of Chinese dissidents who were in Japan at the time of the military crackdown in Beijing on June 4, 1989, or who fled to Japan after the crackdown.

During the year, the Japanese government forcibly repatriated some Chinese claiming to be dissidents, most notably Zhang Zhenhai, a participant in the demonstrations in Tiananmen Square who hijacked an airplane to Japan in December 1989, allegedly for the purpose of seeking political asylum. Despite an international campaign to prevent his extradition on the grounds that he would likely be tortured upon his return, the Japanese government forcibly repatriated him on April 28. His appeals through the Japanese judicial system did not appear to be given a fair and impartial hearing. Zhang, who was in custody, was permitted only ten minutes with his attorneys prior to filing his application for refugee status, requiring him to write the application on his own. His lawyers did not even see a copy of the application until it had already been rejected by the Ministry of Justice. While it normally takes six months to a year to consider such applications, Zhang's was rejected in two weeks.

The government also obstructed the processing of requests for asylum, refugee status and visa extensions for Chinese fearful of returning to China because of their participation in protest activities. Under a Justice Ministry ban not lifted until late in 1990, lawyers were prohibited from contacting refugees in detention, and the government provided no information on refugee options to students applying for visa extensions.

In addition, the government consistently disregarded evidence that dissidents were likely to suffer arrest and imprisonment if they returned. One student had taken a highly visible role during the pro-democracy demonstrations in Tiananmen Square, bringing food to the students. He was detained briefly after the June 4 crackdown, released after interrogation, and fled to Japan in late June. He received letters from China indicating that the Public Security Bureau in Beijing had arrested two of his friends and was looking for him. The Japanese government did not consider him in danger of persecution and pressed for his forced repatriation.

In some asylum and refugee cases, the government impeded access of Chinese to legal counsel and information, in violation of recommendations issued in 1977 by the Executive Committee of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and a pledge in Paris in July 1989 by the seven industrialized nations, including Japan, "to extend the stays of those Chinese students who so desire."51

Chinese students who took part in demonstrations or joined dissident organizations in Japan experienced systematic harassment by Chinese embassy officials, including surveillance, interrogation and threats. The Japanese government failed to protest, thus appearing to condone restrictions on the students' freedom of expression, assembly and association.

In December 1990, there were indications that the Japanese government was considering a more flexible approach. The Justice Ministry issued ten 90-day visa extensions, and immigration officials appeared to be considering measures which would allow more Chinese students with expired visas to stay in Japan.

US Policy

Officials of the US embassy in Tokyo, while acknowledging that Chinese embassy officials were harassing Chinese students in Japan, did little to urge an end to the practice.52 They also rejected the notion that Japan has engaged in refoulement, or forced repatriation of those who face persecution. After discussing the situation with the Japanese Justice Ministry, representatives of the US embassy in Japan accepted the Ministry's view that no one in danger of persecution had been deported to China.

The Work of Asia Watch

In June, an Asia Watch delegation visited Tokyo to open a dialogue on human rights issues with the main political parties and with members of the Japanese Diet, and to build on contacts already established with non-governmental organizations.

Asia Watch led the US part of the campaign to prevent the extradition of Zhang Zhenhai, through press releases, appeals to the Japanese government, and Congressional advocacy. In October, Asia Watch issued a newsletter, Japan: Harassment of Chinese Students. Copies were widely distributed in Tokyo and Washington. Some members of Congress wrote the Japanese Justice Ministry as a result. In addition, Asia Watch urged the State Department to express its concern to Japanese officials.

51 The six other "G-7" participants are the United States, France, Great Britain, Italy, Germany and Canada.

52 It should be noted that Chinese students face similar harassment in the United States.
NEPAL

Human Rights Developments

Dramatic change took place in Nepal in 1990, transforming the country from an absolute monarchy where political parties were prohibited by law to a constitutional monarchy with a new constitution that contained important human rights guarantees.

The path to reform was marked by violence and serious human rights violations by security forces. Arrests of opposition activists increased steadily in the final weeks of 1989, as opposition political parties, which existed in fact if not in law, began organizing a campaign for the restoration of multiparty democracy, scheduled to begin on February 18, 1990.

On February 5, the largest of these parties, the Nepali Congress, passed a resolution officially launching the "country-wide peaceful mass movement." Shortly thereafter, as many as 475 opposition party members, human rights advocates, students, lawyers and journalists were arrested. Opposition newspapers were seized, reportedly because they contained articles critical of the government and advocating a multiparty system. In a number of incidents, police opened fire indiscriminately into crowds of unarmed demonstrators. Estimates of the number killed range from 50 to several hundred. While the lower figure probably is more accurate, the precise figure may never be known because the police disposed of many of the bodies in secret without conducting inquests.

Throughout the 1990 pro-democracy campaign, demonstrators and others engaging in the peaceful expression of their political views were subjected to mass arrest. In most cases, persons were detained for periods ranging from half a day to several weeks. The detainees were rarely charged under any law, not even under the broad provisions of the Public Security Act.

In one particularly egregious incident, on March 20, over 500 persons were arrested while participating in a seminar at Tribhuvan University which had been organized by the University Teachers' Association, other professional associations, members of the Bar Association and human rights groups. Most of those arrested were held for six to eight hours for interrogation, and some for several days. The detainees were questioned about previous political activity and associations. They were not permitted to notify family members or contact lawyers during their detention.

The use of torture against demonstrators and political activists was widespread. Detainees were often severely beaten all over the body, including the head and the soles of the feet, with wooden batons (lathis). At Traffic Police Headquarters in Kathmandu, where hundreds were held, detainees were whipped, thrown into water tanks, and kept in crowded rooms without adequate food, water and toilet facilities. Many of those detained were held outside ordinary detention centers, where they also were subjected to severe beatings and other forms of torture.

The incident that marked a watershed in the campaign occurred on April 6, when security forces opened fire on hundreds of peaceful demonstrators outside the King's palace. Days later, as demonstrations against the actions of the security forces grew, King Birendra acceded to the opposition's demand to lift the ban on political parties. The Prime Minister resigned and an interim government under K.P. Bhattarai took office and established a Constitutional Commission to redraft the country's constitution. Political prisoners were released, and inquiries into abuses by the security forces were begun. On November 9, 1990, the new constitution was promulgated and the drafting of an election law was undertaken, with elections to be held in March or April 1991.

The 1990 Constitution guarantees a free and independent press, the right to petition for habeas corpus, and the right of workers to unionize. It also abolishes the death penalty. However, the interim government has been unable to secure civilian control over the country's military forces.

US Policy

The Bush administration was inexplicably slow to express concern about the crackdown against the pro-democracy movement in Nepal and about human rights violations by the security forces. The first major public statement by the State Department came on April 2, more than six weeks after the mass arrests began. In that statement, the administration said that "the Nepalese should be free to organize themselves into political parties if they so choose and to express their opinions freely, without fear of arrests or other reprisals." The administration also expressed concern about "the excessive use of force in quelling demonstrations, the practice of preventive detention, and reports of mistreatment of prisoners."

In March, the US ambassador to Nepal, Julia Chang Bloch, responded to Asia Watch questions about the widespread practice of torture in Nepal by asking rhetorically whether it was not the case that torture was fairly standard in the Third World.

After the events of April 6, the administration made some interventions with Nepalese authorities. For example, on April 24, the State Department said that it had "raised [its] concerns with the Nepalese government about the security situation." After the Constitutional Reforms Commission presented a draft constitution to King Birendra and the Palace announced that it would be promulgated on November 9, Assistant Secretary of State for Asian and Pacific Affairs John Kelly testified on November 2, before the House Subcommittee on Asia and Pacific Affairs, saying:

[T]he new constitution appears to represent fundamental political change....[It] also guarantees many fundamental rights. We believe it is a major step forward in the process to develop democratic institutions, which are essential to a workable, thriving democratic system. The United States has encouraged and supported Nepal's democratic transition from its beginnings last spring in Kathmandu.

The Work of Asia Watch

The sharp deterioration in human rights in Nepal in early 1990 prompted Asia Watch to send a mission to the country to investigate reports of torture and the shooting of peaceful demonstrators.

Prior to the mission, Asia Watch issued a number of press releases to focus international attention on the crisis. For example, on February 26, Asia Watch welcomed the initiative of six members of the US Congress who sent a letter to King Birendra expressing concern over mass arrests of pro-democracy activists and calling for investigations into reports of torture of detainees. At the same time, Asia Watch protested the government's banning of over ten opposition newspapers and called on it to release all political activists arrested for exercising rights of freedom of expression and association.

The Asia Watch delegation visited Nepal between March 16 and 25. Asia Watch researchers met with representatives of the Nepali Congress and United Left Front, lawyers, human rights activists, journalists, and senior officials of then Prime Minister Marich Man Singh Shrestha's government. The delegation also met with released prisoners and the families of detainees, relatives of victims of police shootings, and doctors who had treated torture victims and persons injured during demonstrations.

In June, as the Constitutional Commission began its proceedings, Asia Watch submitted a detailed memorandum to the government, summarizing the mission's findings and making recommendations on legal and constitutional reforms to ensure greater protection for human rights.

PHILIPPINES

Human Rights Developments

Both government and insurgent forces of the New People's Army (NPA), the armed wing of the Communist Party of the Philippines, were responsible for human rights violations during 1990.53 The Philippine military, together with the official paramilitary force, CAFGU (Citizens Armed Forces -- Geographical Unit), engaged in summary executions and disappearances of suspected supporters of the NPA and the Muslim insurgency, the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF). Suspected rebels were frequently arrested without warrant, held for long periods in solitary confinement or incommunicado detention, and occasionally tortured.

The NPA continued to execute, without the benefit of fair judicial process, civilians suspected of being informers or abusers of workers or peasants. It also abducted several civilians during the year, including foreign nationals, and held them hostage in an effort to obtain money or a change in government policy. Both the executions and hostage-taking were in violation of international humanitarian law governing civil conflict.

Developments on the legal front were not encouraging. The infamous Presidential Decree 1850, left over from the Marcos years, which gave military courts jurisdiction over all military personnel, including those accused of human rights offenses against civilians, remained in effect, despite congressional efforts to repeal it. For the most part, prosecutions of human rights offenders got nowhere, although 16 officers were finally convicted in September of the 1983 murder of President Aquino's husband, Senator Benigno Aquino, Jr. In July, the right to be protected against arbitrary arrest, guaranteed by the 1987 Constitution, was eroded when the Supreme Court ruled that suspected communists could be arrested without warrant.

The use of CAFGUs and other, unauthorized paramilitary "vigilante" groups in military operations and in attacks on suspected leftists continued to be cause for concern. CAFGUs were implicated in several cases of disappearances and summary executions during the year. In one case, Antonio Buenavista, 42, a fisherman, disappeared on January 7 in the village of Santa Cruz, Hagonoy town, in the province of Bulacan, after refusing to join the CAFGUs (such refusal is often interpreted as sympathy for the rebels). His abductors were former rebels who surrendered to the government and were active in helping build the local CAFGU forces. At the end of the year, Buenavista was still missing. His was only one of several dozen disappearances reported during the year.

CAFGU members were also implicated in the November 22 execution of three members of a workers' theatre group in Murcia, Negros Occidental. Aguinaldo Morfil, Reynaldo de la Fuente and Ferdinand Pelaro had been in Murcia campaigning on labor issues together with members of the militant union, the National Federation of Sugar Workers. The three men were reportedly stopped by CAFGUs, taken to the nearby Hacienda Varela and shot at point-blank range. Their bodies were then taken and dumped near the auditorium in Murcia's town center.

Regular forces were responsible for one particularly brutal massacre. On August 3 in New Passi, Tacurong, Sultan Kudarat, 19 civilians ranging in age from one to 72 were executed by members of the 38th Infantry Battalion based in Esperanza, Sultan Kudarat, apparently in revenge for the MNLF killing of two soldiers some weeks earlier. When soldiers approached the house of Muslim leader Kabagal Manindiala, 72, his son, Kamlong, tried to flee. Kamlong was shot and killed; then, according to press accounts, the other 18 members of the extended family were taken outside and executed. The dead included six children, aged one to 13; a woman who was six months pregnant; and three people over 65. The commander of the 6th Infantry Division, under whose command the 38th Battalion operates, dismissed the battalion commander, two other officers, and 12 regular soldiers after the incident; it was not clear if they would be formally prosecuted.

Unlawful detention continued. As of July, three relief workers had spent eight months in incommunicado detention, despite efforts by their families in the courts to get the military to acknowledge their detention. In November 1989, a community health worker named Josefa Padcayan and two companions had been arrested by members of the 17th Infantry Battalion in Zinundungan, Cagayan in northern Luzon while trying to deliver relief supplies to villages in the Zinundungan Valley affected by intensive military operations. Their families brought a habeas corpus petition before the Regional Trial Court, but key respondents failed to appear after three hearings, the last in June 1990. The court made no effort to try to visit detention facilities at the base camp of the 17th IB to ascertain whether the three workers were there.54

Human rights monitors continued to receive death threats, apparently from military-linked groups. Human rights lawyer Solema Jubilan, a member of the Free Legal Assistance Group in Kidapawan, North Cotabato, received such threats by telephone on May 22. In August, Sister Aquila Sy and other religious workers in Negros Occidental were threatened by military-backed organizations, reportedly for their efforts to press the military to reveal the whereabouts of three men suspected of being couriers for the NPA who disappeared on July 6.

The NPA engaged in its share of abuses. Many of the assassinations carried out by its hit squads, the so-called "sparrow units," were not legitimate military targets by the terms of international law. On June 5, for example, retired Col. Laudemar Kahulugan, the security chief of Purefoods, Inc, in Quezon City, Manila, was shot and killed on his way to work by a sparrow unit. Col. Kahulugan had been the Philippines Constabulary chief in Davao City between 1984 and 1986 at a time when the NPA there was successfully infiltrated by the military.

US soldiers and workers at the six US military installations in the Philippines became NPA targets as well, again in violation of international law since the US is not a direct party to the hostilities. On May 13, two US servicemen were shot dead in Angeles City, near Clark Air Base, the night before bilateral negotiations on the future of the US bases were to begin.

Although hostage-taking is also specifically prohibited by the 1949 Geneva Conventions, the NPA continued to abduct civilians and military personnel alike. NPA guerrillas kidnapped a Japanese aid worker on May 29 and US Peace Corps volunteer Timothy Swanson on June 13; both were released unharmed on August 2. The NPA said Mizuno's abduction was a warning to Japan, apparently to discourage it from providing aid to the Philippines government. The aim of the Swanson abduction was not clear, although it may have been the removal of the Peace Corps, which the NPA characterized as "an instrument of the Central Intelligence Agency to support counterinsurgency in the Philippines." All Peace Corps volunteers did in fact pull out of the Philippines following the abduction.

The saga of PD 1850, which human rights organizations in the Philippines have been trying to get repealed since the day President Aquino took office, continued. In December 1989, the Philippines Congress passed a law repealing the decree, but President Aquino vetoed it in January. A serious coup attempt had just taken place, and the new law would have allowed the coup plotters to be tried in a civilian court. The President submitted an alternative bill to the Congress, together with the veto. The bill, introduced in Congress as Senate Bill 1468, was approved on May 30 by the Senate but the House had not acted by the end of the year. Under it, civilian courts will try members of the armed forces and CAFGU when civilians are either victims or codefendants, except when the crimes committed are service-related, such as desertion, mutiny and sedition.

US Policy

The Bush administration was preoccupied with negotiations over US military bases in the Philippines for most of 1990. The Philippines continued to be one of the largest recipients of US aid ($455 million was requested for fiscal year 1991), but the adminstration remained reluctant to criticize the Aquino government for human rights abuses or to urge that its military aid be made conditional on an improved human rights record.

On October 1, the Manila Chronicle reported the arrival of the first of 22 advanced helicopter gunships bought with foreign military sales credits over the objections of US Defense Department officials. (The officials wanted the Philippines military to use leftover Hueys instead of the new McDonnell Douglas MG520s that they purchased.) The gunships were to be used in counterinsurgency operations, as a deterrent to NPA ambushes, according to Philippine military spokesmen. "The enemy won't know it's there till it's on top of them, that's how quiet it is," one officer told the Chronicle. Given the extent of military abuses and the paucity of prosecutions, the Bush administration could have used such a sale as leverage for pressing the Aquino government to bring military officers accused of human rights offenses to trial.55

The Work of Asia Watch

In May, Asia Watch issued a news bulletin on disappearances in the Philippines. In August, it published The Philippines: Violations of the Laws of War by Both Sides, which was the first report by any human rights organization to address abuses by the New People's Army as well as the government and to explain the provisions of humanitarian law in the Philippines context. The report was widely publicized and discussed in the Philippines. Shortly before it was published, Asia Watch staff met with staff of the House Appropriatons Committee to urge that language expressing concern about human rights abuses be inserted into the 1990 appropriations bill. It was not.

53 Murders, bombings and other criminal acts were committed by right-wing military rebels, but the rebels were not organized enough to qualify as insurgents. The acts they committed were crimes, not violations under international humanitarian or human rights law.

54 Amnesty International, UA 357/90, September 11, 1990.

55 Manila Chronicle, October 1, 1990, in FBIS, October 1, 1990.
SOUTH KOREA
(Republic of Korea)

Human Rights Developments

The South Korean government's commitment to human rights and democratic reform seemed to weaken steadily in 1990 as restrictions on freedom of expression and association increased.

In January, two opposition political parties merged with the ruling party to form the Democratic Liberal Party (DPL), which in turn controlled more than two-thirds of the seats in the National Assembly. It pledged to use its power to effect political reforms and reconciliation with North Korea. To counter widespread skepticism about its sincerity, the government released 22 political prisoners, including Suh Sung, who had been incarcerated for nearly 20 years.56

By the middle of the year, however, that skepticism seemed well founded. As in 1989, writers, publishers, political activists and others were arrested and prosecuted for expressing views contrary to those of the government on reunification between the two Koreas, or for engaging in personal pro-unification diplomacy through unauthorized travel to North Korea.

The number of political prisoners, one indicator of this gap between governmen rhetoric and reality, continued to rise. By the end of July 1990 there were nearly 1,400 prisoners detained for politically motivated crimes, according to Minkahyop, an organization of families of these prisoners, although many of these were charged with acts of violence. Nearly half were workers and labor activists. Some 435 were detained under the National Security Law, a broadly worded statute providing stiff penalties for anyone accused of supporting or benefiting an "anti-state organization." Like the National Security Law, the Law on Assembly and Demonstration, which allows the government to ban a wide range of gatherings, also remained in force in 1990; as of June, some 200 had been arrested under it. The Agency for National Security Planning, historically involved in domestic surveillance and interrogation of political opponents as well as espionage cases, had no new legal limits placed on its activities, and continued to be involved in the arrest of dissidents, labor activists and publishers suspected of sympathizing with North Korea. Though fewer than before, incidents of torture and mistreatment of detainees continued to be reported.

One of those arrested under the National Security Law was Hong Song-dam, chairman of the Kwangju chapter of the National Artists Federation (Minminyon). Hong's main offense was to have sent to Pyongyang, North Korea a photographic slide of a large mural that he had painted. In June, he was sentenced to seven years in prison. Hong alleged that he had been tortured during his three weeks of detention by the Agency for National Security Planning.

On September 29, 1990, Kim Keun-tae, a prominent leader of the opposition movement and recipient of the Robert F. Kennedy Human Rights Award in 1987, was sentenced to three years in prison for violations of the National Security Law and the Law on Assembly and Demonstration. He was charged in connection with demonstrations on May 9, 1990 by at least 100,000 people protesting the formation of the new governing party. The demonstration led to a firebomb attack on the US Information Service building in downtown Seoul; as many as 1,900 demonstrators were detained by the police. Kim was not involved in the violence. It appears that he was arbitrarily singled out because of the influential role that he was playing in Chonnminyon, the movement to unify the opposition, since he was the only person prosecuted for a serious offense in connection with the demonstration.

In early October, the limits of democratization were brought into sharp focus when an agent in the Defense Security Command, the military's counterintelligence agency, publicly revealed the existence of an extensive spying program that kept at least 1,300 politicians, labor leaders, academics, religious leaders, journalists and others under regular surveillance. President Roh Tae Woo immediately fired his Defense Minister and the head of the Defense Security Command (DSC) but replaced them with loyalists. The new Defense Minister, Lee Jong-koo, said in October that the DSC woud no longer engage in domestic surveillance activities.

Increasing trade union activity gave rise to a concerted crackdown on labor organizers and independent trade unions, yielding violence on both sides. The government set a hardline tone when, on January 20, it unveiled a tough program to crack down on labor. President Roh told his key ministers that "labor problems should be coped with resolutely at an early stage and forces behind illegal disputes should be subject to stern punishment." The Labor Ministry produced a new set of guidelines, including a ban on strikes over such "political demands" as seeking the release of imprisoned workers. The right to organize and bargain collectively continued to be undermined by restrictive laws; company goons and plainclothes and riot police continued to be used to break up strikes, sometimes using excessive force; and hundreds of union leaders and organizers were arrested for their union activities in violation of their freedom of assembly and association.

Thousands of riot police were mobilized in April to crush strikes at the Korean Broadcasting System in Seoul, and at the Hyundai companies, a huge industrial conglomerate with shipbuilding and other facilities in the port city of Ulsan. In addition, throughout 1990, the government harshly suppressed efforts by workers to form an independent nationwide union federation, Chonnohyop. The government declared the federation illegal, arrested its key leaders, harassed member unions by launching probes into their internal affairs and accounting, and blocked their rallies and demonstrations on the grounds that it feared violence.

The government also failed to amend laws prohibiting public and private school teachers from organizing unions.57 An independent teachers union, Chunkyojo (Korean Teachers and Educational Workers Union), formed in May 1989 and declared illegal by the government even before its inauguration, saw thousands of its members and supporters arrested for participating in rallies and demonstrations. Some 1,500 Chunkyojo members were dismissed from their jobs for union-related activities in 1989, and ideological tests were introduced the same year to screen out potential pro-union college graduates from obtaining teaching positions.

US Policy

The Bush administration in 1990 continued to state that it was committed to human rights and democratic reforms in South Korea. But its failure to comment publicly and forcefully when the number and severity of human rights violations increased sent the opposite signal.

Notably, the administration missed several opportunities to comment publicly on specific human rights abuses. One such occasion was President Roh's meeting with President Bush in Washington on June 6. The meeting followed Roh's "summit" in San Francisco with Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev where steps toward reunification and improved relations between North and South Korea were discussed, indicating an easing of the concerns over subversion from the north that underlay many South Korean restrictions on human rights. The Washington meeting also took place shortly before a special legislative session was due to begin in Seoul, reportedly to take up reforms in the National Security Law, labor laws, and various other statutes limiting human rights. Asia Watch publicly urged the administration to use the occasion to press the South Korean government to implement legal reforms, including revisions of the National Security Law, and to release those imprisoned for non-violent political activity. However, as far as could be determined from the published accounts of the talks, neither President Bush nor the State Department made any reference to human rights concerns.

US officials in Seoul told Asia Watch that it was current policy to raise human rights concerns only through quiet, diplomatic channels because of the Korean government's sensitivity and the danger that public criticism could give rise to anti-Americanism. They rejected the view that the US embassy should be publicly outspoken about human rights abuses, or that it should demonstrate its concern about detainees subjected to abuses by seeking to visit them. The embassy was also reluctant to consider sending observers to trials of trade-union leaders and others charged for peaceful political activities, either as an act of protest over the prosecutions or as a signal of US concern that trial procedures meet international standards of due process.

There is no evidence that this quiet diplomacy is working to curb Korean abuses. At a time when South Korea is seeking to become a member of the United Nations, the US should use Korea's desire for international acceptance to press publicly for improvements in the human rights situation.

The United States continues to be one of South Korea's most important trade markets. South Korea exported $20.2 billion worth of goods to the US in 1988 and and $19.7 billion in 1989. In 1989, over $80 million in insurance and investment guarantees were given to US investors in South Korea through the Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC).58 OPIC is mandated by Congress to "take into account...all available information about observance of and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms" in countries receiving OPIC assistance. Other federal statutes59 also link US trade benefits to the recipient government's respect for internationally recognized worker rights, including the right to freedom of association and the right to organize and bargain collectively. In November, Asia Watch testified during the annual OPIC review and called for the termination of OPIC assistance to South Korea due to the failure of the Korean government to take steps to adopt and implement labor rights.

The Work of Asia Watch

An Asia Watch delegation visited South Korea from June 5 to 17 to examine freedom of expression and labor rights.

Based in large part on information gathered during the mission, Asia Watch in November published Retreat from Reform: Labor Rights and Freedom of Expression in South Korea.

In December, Asia Watch published a newsletter, "The Plantados of Asia: "Non-Converted Political Prisoners in South Korea." The publication described the plight of 57 long-term political prisoners, 25 of them men in their 60s and older, detained under the National Security Law and the Anti-Communist Law.60 They are languishing in prison with no hope for parole or inclusion in government amnesties because they have refused to submit to government pressure to "convert" their political beliefs from communism to democracy. Requiring prisoners to sign "conversion" statements violates their rights to freedom of expression and conscience as guaranteed by the International Covenant on Civil and political Rights and the South Korean Constitution. The Korean government sent a letter to Asia Watch on December 13 responding to the newsletter. It said that most of the prisoners in question were convicted North Korean espionage agents, that they were not being coerced into "conversion" but rather instilled with "a respect for the laws of our democratic society," and that Asia Watch had failed to take into account "the constant menace of internal subversion by the North."

Throughout 1990, Asia Watch conveyed its concerns directly to the Korean government on a number of individual prisoner cases, such as Dan Byong-ho, head of Chonnohyop, and Yun Yong-kyu, chairman of the Korean Teachers and Educational Workers Union.

At the end of April, Asia Watch wrote to President Roh expressing concern about reports of injuries and arrests during violent clashes between riot police and workers in Ulsan at the Hyundai Heavy Industries; between police and student demonstrators in Seoul; and between police and demonstrators in Kwangju. Asia Watch urged that Korean law enforcement officials respond to the demonstrations in compliance with the UN Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials, which provides that they may use force "only when strictly necessary and to the extent required for the performance of their duty."

In July and August, Asia Watch protested the imprisonment of Kim Keun-tae and called for his prompt and immediate release. The Director of the Human Rights Division of the Ministry of Justice responded to various Asia Watch appeals on behalf of Kim by saying that he and fellow members of the opposition coalition Chonminnyon had referred to the South Korean government as a "pro-American military dictatorship." This and other phrases in the Chonminnyon charter were deemed to be "concepts...used by North Korea to bring about instability and incite revolution in South Korea" and therefore to violate the National Security Law. He also equated Kim's participation in rallies with "instigating violence," though without providing any evidence of instigation.

In response to the Asia Watch report Retreat from Reform, the Korean government issued a public statement critical of the report, charging that it was "lacking in objective and reasonable grounds and ignored the legal order in the Republic."

Asia Watch continued to be an important source of information for those in Congress concerned with human rights in Korea. With support from Asia Watch, ten members of Congress sent a cable in mid-February to Korean authorities calling for the release of Suh Sung; he was released two weeks later. In March, the Congressional Working Group on International Labor Rights, a bipartisan group of 50 US senators and representatives, wrote to South Korean officials about the deterioration of labor rights in South Korea. In October, a letter by 46 members of the Congressional Human Rights Caucus focused on the detention of political prisoners and the "conversion" system.

The United States continues to be one of South Korea's most important trade markets. South Korea exported $20.2 billion worth of goods to the United States in 1988 and $19.7 billion in 1989.61 In 1989, over $80 million in insurance and investment guarantees were given to US investors in South Korea through the Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC).62 OPIC is mandated by Congress to "take into account...all available information about observance of and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms" in countries receiving OPIC assistance. Other federal statutes63 also link US trade benefits to the recipient governments' respect for internationally recognized worker rights, including the right to freedom of association and the right to organize and bargain collectively.

56 Suh was arrested in April 1971 on charges of "anti-state activities" and held until his parole in February 1990. He was one of Korea's most well known and longest-serving political prisoners. His original death sentence had been commuted to life imprisonment in 1973.

57 In 1989, the National Assembly passed an amendment to the Trade Union Law which would have lifted the ban on union organizing by public-school teachers; President Roh vetoed it.

58 OPIC guarantees to South Korea declined steadily in 1990 due to a ceiling imposed by the OPIC board of directors which was lifted late in the year.

59 Section 502(3)(8) of the 1984 Trade Act.

60 The Anti-Communist Law was enacted in 1961 by President Park Chung-lee to block the activities of Communist and pro-Communist organizations which were considered a threat to national security.

61 Official Statistics, US Department of Commerce, July 26, 1990.

62 OPIC guarantees to South Korea declined steadily in 1990 due to a ceiling imposed by the OPIC board of directors. The ceiling was lifted late in the year.

63 Section 502(3)(8) of the 1984 Trade Act.


In March, for example, the US Agency for International Development (USAID) renewed funding for what is named a "Military-Oriented Youth Center" run by the ANS forces where boys aged 12 to 16 received training in marching, drills and "basic acts of combatants." While the USAID aid letter specifically stated that US funds should not be used for the military training, the aid obviously freed other funds to be used for that purpose. The US appeared to be encouraging the ANS to violate provisions of humanitarian law prohibiting children under 15 from serving as soldiers. Use of child soldiers by the ANS was reported to Asia Watch by aid workers along the Thai-Cambodian border in May and again in November.

The Bush administration repeatedly denied that there was any "systematic" cooperation between its non-Communist clients and the Khmer Rouge, despite some evidence to the contrary. In September, for example, the Bangkok press reported that the Khmer Rouge had joined the KPNLF in a four-hour attack on a government military base. On June 28, the Senate Intelligence Committee, concerned that the $10 million in "non-lethal" covert aid to the KPNLF and ANS was directly or indirectly benefiting the Khmer Rouge, voted to end that aid. The House Intelligence Committee did not go along. In October, over administration objection, the Senate passed an amendment to the foreign aid appropriations bill, largely replacing the covert aid program -- a small amount of covert aid reportedly remained through January 1991 -- with $25 million in humanitarian and development aid to Cambodia, only some portion of which would go to non-Communist resistance forces as "non-lethal" assistance.5 Enacted into law, the provision required the President to produce a public report by January 1, 1991 detailing how the aid would be allocated as well as describing the extent of military cooperation since 1986 between the Khmer Rouge and any group or faction of the non-Communist resistance.

During a hearing on September 12 before the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific, Undersecretary of State Robert Kimmitt argued that any cut in aid would have "tragic humanitarian consequences" and would "severely and adversely" affect the ability of the non-Communists to win concessions from the Phnom Penh government at a crucial stage in the negotiating process. On the question of the non-Communists' cooperation with the Khmer Rouge, he said that "there has been a degree of contact that is expected when forces operate in proximity to one another," but that this contact was "still below the threshhold of the law," referring to legislation that bars cooperation with the Khmer Rouge as a condition of US aid to the non-Communist resistance.

It was not clear that the Bush administration had the will or the capacity to accurately assess the nature of cooperation among the resistance factions; instead, the administration appeared prepared simply to accept assurances from top non-Communist field commanders that there was no coordination.

But if the administration was concerned about the growing strength of the Khmer Rouge forces, it was strangely silent about the complicity of others in assisting them. Not only did the Thai military actively encourage the forced relocations from Khmer Rouge-controlled camps back into Cambodia, but in June, Bangkok newspapers revealed that six Thai timber companies were offering the Khmer Rouge cash and equipment in exchange for logging concessions around Pailin. One of those companies was partly owned by a Thai cabinet minister. In addition, despite the delivery of Chinese-supplied tanks and heavy equipment to the Khmer Rouge in October, President Bush still welcomed Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen to the White House in November (see chapter on China, infra).

The Bush administration also made no comment when, during the meeting of the four Cambodian parties in Jakarta in September, the Khmer Rouge included Son Sen as one of their participants in the Supreme National Council. A close aid of Pol Pot, Son Sen was responsible for the administration of the notorious torture center in Phnom Penh, Tuol Sleng. In the September 12 hearings before the House Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific, Undersecretary Kimmett merely said that Son Sen's name did not appear on the list that the State Department had prepared of the Khmer Rouge leadership.

The Work of Asia Watch

In January, Asia Watch sent a mission to the Thai-Cambodian border to interview Cambodian refugees and aid workers about the human rights situation. One result was a newsletter on "Violations of the Laws of War by the Khmer Rouge."

In May, Asia Watch visited Phnom Penh at the invitation of the government, the first strictly human rights organization to be so invited.6 While the delegation was able to meet with officials of the Foreign Affairs and Justice Ministries, its efforts to meet officials from the Defense and Interior Ministries got nowhere. As a result, Asia Watch was not able to visit the main Phnom Penh prison, T-3, where it had hoped to interview political prisoners and corroborate reports suggesting that there had been some improvement in prison conditions since 1985 and 1986 when torture, the use of dark cells, shackling, and prolonged deprivation of food and water were common. (Information received after the visit from recently released detainees indicated that dark cells, at least, were still in use.)

In early June, with the help of an Asia Watch representative in Phnom Penh, Asia Watch was the first organization to verify the names of the six officials arrested for trying to form a new political party.

On July 20, two days after Secretary Baker announced the policy change, Asia Watch testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on the human rights situation in Cambodia. While noting that it did not oppose a continuation of humanitarian aid, Asia Watch testified that any assistance that would further the non-Communists' objective of "neutralizing" Cambodian security forces would leave the Phnom Penh government all the more vulnerable to Khmer Rouge attack.

On September 11, Asia Watch met with Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs Kenneth Quinn and Charles Twining, Director of the State Department's Office for Vietnam, Laos and Cambodian Affairs, to discuss US policy on Cambodia. Following that visit, Asia Watch wrote to Quinn suggesting ways in which the human rights section of the Perm 5 agreement could be made more specific.

4 Reuters Information Services, October 15, 1990

5 Of the $25 million, $5 million is earmarked to aid children.

6 In August 1989, the Cambodian Documentation Commission, a private organization with a strong human rights concern, sent a delegation to Phnom Penh headed by Dith Pran and Haing Ngor.
SRI LANKA

Human Rights Developments

Violence against civilians by all parties to the conflict continued to characterize the war in Sri Lanka in 1990. In the south, the murder in February of a prominent journalist brought world attention to the activity of government-backed death squads, which then seemed to subside. An armed Sinhalese nationalist group, the Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP), which was responsible for several thousand killings, appeared to be crushed when its top leaders were apparently killed in custody in late 1989. By late 1990, however, both the JVP and the death squads had resurfaced. In the northeast, human rights conditions reached a new low in June, after the breakdown of a 14-month ceasefire between the Sri Lankan government and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), the largest Tamil opposition group.

Even for Sri Lanka, the utter brutality on all sides that followed the LTTE's June attacks on police stations and military installations in the northeast was unprecedented, creating an atmosphere of terror. The LTTE and the Sri Lankan security forces both carried out massacres of civilians. The army summarily executed suspected Tamil insurgents; the LTTE did the same to Sri Lankan police officers. Both the LTTE and the security forces used civilians as shields against attacks. The army engaged in heavy bombing in civilian areas, resulting in damage to homes, hospitals, temples, churches and pedestrians. Burning bodies appeared along roadsides in many parts of the country, and reports of mass arrests and disappearances increased.

Since June, more than 4500 may have been killed in the course of the fighting in the northeast. An estimated one million people have been displaced, of whom over 100,000 have fled to southern India.

From July to September, bloody massacres of Muslim and Sinhalese villagers in the north and east left hundreds dead.64 The Sri Lankan government attributed the killings to the LTTE, a charge which the group has repeatedly denied. Others are less sure, claiming to have heard both Tamil and Sinhala spoken during the attacks.

The killings led to retaliatory attacks by Muslims and Sinhalese on neighboring Tamil communities, perpetuating the already familiar cycle of ethnic violence in the region. Many of these attacks appeared to have been the work of Muslim home guards -- volunteer forces that were armed and trained by the Sri Lankan army at the request of Muslim community leaders following the massacres of Muslims in July.

The government announced in a November 15 press conference that it would continue to support and train these home guards. At the same news briefing, Defense Minister Ranjan Wijeratne admitted that the security forces had also "deployed" members of the EPDP (Eelam People's Democratic Party) and TELO (Tamil Eelam Liberation Organization), rival Tamil groups, against the LTTE. He said that the government would begin using these militia more extensively to protect Tamil villagers against attack by the Muslim home guards. These rival Tamil groups, in turn, have been accused of carrying out extrajudicial executions of suspected LTTE members. Despite the utter ruthlessness of these killings, Asia Watch is unaware of any serious government investigation.

As a result, members of the security forces, operating outside the law, continue to be responsible for extrajudicial executions, sweeping arrests and torture of Tamil civilians, particularly though not exclusively young men. The aim appears to be to wipe out all possible active supporters of the LTTE.

In late 1989 and early 1990, government-backed death squads, reportedly made up of members of the security forces and police officers, are believed to have murdered tens of thousands of students and other civilians suspected of sympathizing with the JVP. A delegation of European parliamentarians who visited Sri Lanka in October 1990 estimated the number of killed and disappeared on all sides in south and central Sri Lanka alone to be at least 60,000 in the prior two years. Other more conservative estimates place the number at around 35,000. Local human rights groups estimate that several thousand of these deaths are attributable to the JVP. The majority are thought to be the work of government-linked death squads.

After the top JVP leaders were killed under suspicious circumstances in police custody in November and December 1989, the organization was widely considered crushed. Yet death squad killings of suspected JVP sympathizers continued. The Financial Times reported on January 17, 1990 that "147 headless corpses -- presumed suspected members of the JVP -- were found on roads in the south." As late as November 1990, Asia Watch continued to receive reports from southern Sri Lanka of disappearances of people forces suspected of JVP links. In Kandy District, which had been a JVP stronghold, burning bodies continued to appear along roadsides. These practices had been characteristic of the government's counterinsurgency campaign since 1988, although the number of persons killed declined in 1990.

In what has become one of the most publicized cases of death squad activity in Sri Lanka in 1990, Richard De Zoysa, a respected actor and journalist who had been outspoken in his criticism of human rights violations by the Sri Lankan security forces, was found murdered on February 19. Eyewitnesses reported that on the morning of February 18, six gunmen, two wearing police uniforms, arrived in a police jeep and took De Zoysa from his home. Other witnesses reported that they knew some of the abductors to be members of a special police team that reported directly to President Ranasinghe Premadasa.

De Zoysa's mother, Dr. Manorani Saravanamuttu, positively identified Senior Superintendent of Police Ronnie Gunasinghe as the leader of the group of abductors. In statements to the police and, through her lawyer, to the court of inquiry, she also said that she had information implicating a second police officer, Ranchagoda, in the abduction. She has continued to press for a full inquiry into her son's death, despite death threats received in May warning her away from the case. Her lawyer, Batty Weerakoon, received a similar threat, as did two police guards appointed for his protection.

Not unexpectedly, a court-ordered investigation by the police into the charges against their colleagues made little headway. At a hearing before the court on August 30, representatives of Attorney General Sunil De Silva reported that there was insufficient evidence against Gunasinghe to proceed against him. Gunasinghe remains on active duty.

Attempts to press for an independent inquiry into the De Zoysa abduction and murder have so far been unsuccessful. The police officers identified by Dr. Saravanamuttu have brought a defamation suit against her.

After De Zoysa's widely publicized death, the incidence of death squad killings gradually decreased, only to increase again with reports of renewed JVP activity in the south. According to human rights organizations in Sri Lanka and Amnesty International, there were at least twelve disappearances and many reports of burnt bodies found along roadsides in Kandy District in September and October. The European parliamentarians' report estimated that the combined total of reported disappearances and killings in Kandy was between 20 and 40 a week for that two-month period.

US Policy

While the Bush administration has recognized the seriousness of the human rights situation in Sri Lanka, its response has been muted. Administration officials acknowledge the flagrant abuses by all parties, including the existence of government-linked death squads and the killing of civilians by security forces in the northeast. They have also called publicly for prosecution of perpetrators of death squad killings. But they have made little effort to reinforce such statements with concrete actions, such as economic sanctions.

Although US aid to Sri Lanka is only approximately $31 million (mostly in the form of food aid), the United States nevertheless is in a position to exert economic leverage on Sri Lanka through its participation in the Sri Lanka Aid Consortium, which accounts for approximately $1 billion in nonmilitary grants and loans. At the Consortium meeting in October in Paris, US representatives acknowledged human rights abuses by government forces as well as the LTTE, and urged the government to discipline those involved in violations -- an important step. The US refrained, however, from any effort to condition aid on an end to abuses -- a step which, in light of the severity of Sri Lankan abuses, should have been taken.

In 1989, the last full year for which data was available, the United States supported loans to Sri Lanka totaling $172 million from the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank. Substantially more seemed to have been extended in 1990, with US support. In accordance with Section 701 of the International Financial Institutions Act, which mandates US opposition to such bank loans to governments that consistently engage in gross violations of human rights, except those that expressly benefit the poor, the US should oppose all loans to Sri Lanka that do not fall within the statutory exception.

In fiscal year 1990, the United States also provided Sri Lanka $18.5 million in development assistance and approximately $30 million in food aid under PL 480. The Defense Department in its FY 1991 Congressional presentation for Security Assistance Programs estimated that licenses for commercial sales of military equipment to Sri Lanka would total an estimated $1 million. The figures on equipment actually shipped were unavailable. According to the State Department, no sales of munitions were approved during 1990.

The Work of Asia Watch

Asia Watch in 1990 continued its efforts to document and respond to the ongoing human rights abuses by all parties to the Sri Lankan conflict, focusing particular attention in the first part of the year on violations by government-linked vigilante groups in the south and later in 1990 on the war between the LTTE and the government in the northeast.

On February 5, Asia Watch cabled the Sri Lankan government, expressing concern over the arrest of V.S. Wanniarachchi, wife of Nimal Jayawardena, a human rights lawyer and chairman of the Kandy Citizens Committee who had received death threats in connection with his work and left Sri Lanka in late December 1989. In January 1990, armed men came to Jayawardena's home, demanded human rights documents belonging to the Citizens Committee, and shot two young men who had assisted him. On February 4, Jayawardena's wife and her brother-in-law, Sarath Pathirana, were arrested, reportedly by army personnel. Asia Watch urged the government to ensure their protection and investigate all assassinations of human rights lawyers. The New York City Bar Association, acting on information received from Asia Watch, also sent a cable to the Sri Lankan government on this case. The two were later released.

Richard De Zoysa's fame as a television personality and the ceaseless efforts of his friends and family helped focus much-needed international attention on the activities of the death squads operating in southern Sri Lanka. In February, Asia Watch issued a press release condemning his murder and calling for the prosecution of all security personnel involved in death squad killings.

On March 8, Asia Watch published a longer newsletter, Journalist Murdered in Sri Lanka as Death Squad Killings Continue, which linked a special police team with close ties to the Premadasa government to De Zoysa's murder. The newsletter called on the Sri Lankan government to institute an independent investigation into this and other death squad killings, and urged the government to prosecute security forces who have engaged in extrajudicial executions. Asia Watch also called for the repeal of the Indemnity Act, which grants immunity from prosecution for human rights abuses committed by security personnel.

On the same day, Asia Watch issued a press release denouncing unsubstantiated accusations by Sri Lankan officials that De Zoysa was a member of the JVP, that he had issued "death threats to fellow journalists, shopkeepers, hospitals and transport workers," and that he had written "false articles" on Sri Lanka's human rights situation to "damage Sri Lanka's image." The press release concluded that the allegations "appeared to reflect an effort on the part of some government officials to justify his murder" and reiterated Asia Watch's demands for an independent investigation.

Following the publication of this newsletter, an Asia Watch delegation met with Sri Lankan Ambassador to the United Nations Daya Perera to discuss human rights concerns.

In late March, an Asia Watch researcher traveled to Sri Lanka where she met with US embassy officials, journalists, members of international humanitarian organizations, government officials and human rights organizations.

On March 12, Asia Watch wrote to Secretary of State James Baker urging the State Department to convey US concerns about human rights abuses to the Sri Lankan government. Asia Watch called on the US to press the Sri Lankan government to stop abusive activities, focusing particularly on the killings in custody of top JVP members in late 1989 and the continued activity of death squads as evidenced by the De Zoysa murder in February.

Asia Watch denounced the killing and harassment of human rights lawyers and the imposition of the Prevention of Terrorism Act, which permits the government to detain persons incommunicado for up to 18 months without charge or trial in any place selected by the Interior Minister. Asia Watch also urged Secretary Baker, in accordance with US law, to oppose loans to Sri Lanka that do not expressly benefit the poor in view of the Sri Lankan government's consistent pattern of gross violations of human rights.

On April 4, in consultation with Asia Watch, Reps. Tom Lantos and John Porter of the Congressional Human Rights Caucus sent a letter of concern to the Sri Lankan Ambassador to the United States, W. Sunta De Alwis, focusing on continuing abuses by government forces and pro-government vigilante groups and specifically denouncing the De Zoysa killing. Their letter urged the Sri Lankan government to launch "an independent inquiry into death squads and to prosecute members of paramilitary organizations or the army or police who are engaged in killings and disappearances of noncombatants."

On June 4, Asia Watch issued a press release calling on the Sri Lankan government to ensure the safety of human rights lawyer Batty Weerakoon and Richard De Zoysa's mother, Dr. Saravanamuttu, after they received death threats in connection with the police investigation into the De Zoysa murder.

On July 9, Asia Watch issued a press release providing an update on the human rights situation in northeastern Sri Lanka following the breakdown of negotiations, and condemning abuses by both the LTTE and the Sri Lankan government.

In a press release issued on October 3, Asia Watch condemned the seizure by government forces of papers documenting human rights violations which a member of the Sri Lankan parliament was carrying to a meeting of the United Nations Working Group on Disappearances in Geneva.

In advance of the Sri Lanka aid consortium meeting in Paris in October, Asia Watch sent a letter to members of the consortium designed to stimulate a discussion of human rights issues.

On October 19, Rep. Stephen Solarz, chairman of the House Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs, and Gus Yatron, chairman of the House Subcommittee on Human Rights and International Organizations, wrote a joint letter which cited the Asia Watch release of October 3, urging representatives of the US Agency for International Development to raise human rights concerns during the aid consortium meeting.

64 The majority of Tamil speakers in Sri Lanka are Hindu. Many Muslims also speak Tamil, but are considered a separate ethnic group. The Sinhalese are predominately Buddhist. There are also small numbers of Christians who speak each language.
VIETNAM

Human Rights Developments

The year 1990 saw a sharp curtailment of the modest human rights reforms that had accompanied Vietnam's "renovation" policy (doi moi). Alarmed at the political changes in Eastern Europe and the impending cutback of Soviet-bloc trade and aid, the Communist Party of Vietnam followed China's lead in attempting to hedge economic reforms with tight ideological control at home.

The policy of renovation, adopted in December 1986 by the Sixth Party Congress of the Communist Party of Vietnam, came to embrace gradual reform of Vietnam's economy toward a greater market orientation, amnesties for thousands of political prisoners held since 1975 in "reeducation" camps, promulgation of a criminal procedure code, exposure of corruption within Party and government ranks, and limited official sanction of political and social criticism in the arts and media. Although the Party officially continued to support economic reforms, it reasserted control over actual and supposed critics, the better to avert any Tiananmen-style protests.

Directive 135, issued from the Council of Ministers in late 1989 and promulgated by the National Assembly in April 1990, established a paramilitary police unit and inaugurated a series of campaigns against criminals, corruption and opponents to Party policies.65 The result was arrests and "surrenders" of thousands of criminals and massive seizures of contraband tapes and videos, according to the official press. Asia Watch sources reported that citizens, particularly former "reeducation" prisoners, were forced to attend study sessions on Directive 135, and that the authorities stepped up detention, interrogation and harassment of small entrepreneurs under its mandate.

Tough new restrictions on press and publishing went into effect during the summer. A Central Committee Secretariat directive gave procedures for banning publications and punishing "politically reactionary" authors, and called for "councils of arts" nationwide to censor literary and artistic publications and review all existing works published in the North prior to 1945 and in the South prior to April 1975.66 The Secretariat also required newspaper editors and publishers to be Party members.67 The government banned a Quang Nam-Danang Province legal journal, Tap Chi Phap Luat, and fired the deputy director of the provincial judicial service for allowing its publication.68 In this climate, it was not surprising that in November and December, Colonel Bui Tin, deputy editor of the party newspaper Nhan Dan, chose to express his views on Vietnam's troubles from France using the BBC to reach his readership in Vietnam.69 Asia Watch has received reports from refugees and others that a number of writers and poets previously released from "reeducation" camps were rearrested in late 1990. These include Le Nguyen Ngu, Le Van Tien, Pham Thai Thuy, Vuong Duc Le, Khuat Duy Trac and Mai Trung Tinh.

Persecution of religious leaders remained in full force, although refugees interviewed by Asia Watch reported that official toleration of private worship increased somewhat during the "renovation" years. The authorities continued to severely restrict applications for admission to the clergy of all religions.

On May 16, Father Chan Tin, a prominent Catholic priest accused of preaching sermons that would incite Catholics to demand political and civil rights, was removed from his church in Ho Chi Minh City and confined to another on the outskirts of the city. Nguyen Ngoc Lan, his associate and a prominent Catholic intellectual, was placed under house arrest. Both were reported to have been arrested for "carrying out activities aimed at opposing socialism, sowing dissension among religions, undermining the solidarity between religious and secular life, and compiling and supplying documents to other countries for use against the people's authorities." Eleven Catholics, including Nguyen Van De and Nguyen Thi Nhi, were sentenced in August for illegal religious and political activities following a two-day trial.70 Buddhist monks Thich Tue Sy and Thich Tri Sieu remain incarcerated under 20-year sentences for alleged subversion, and monks Thich Quang Do and Thich Huyen Quang, both critics of human rights violations, have been banished from Ho Chi Minh City to their villages in Central Vietnam since 1982.

Anticipating political unrest on the 15-year anniversary of the end of the war (April 30) and the centenary of Ho Chi Minh's birth (May 13), the public security authorities intensified the crackdown on perceived troublemakers. On April 23, public security forces jailed US businessman Michael Morrow for two weeks, accusing him of espionage. Although Morrow, who was never given an opportunity to meet with counsel, was released after admitting to inadvertent violations of Vietnam's public security regulations, certain Vietnamese intellectuals who were detained in association with him remain in prison. They include Doan Thanh Liem, a lawyer and specialist in constitutional law; Do Ngoc Long, a Catholic businessman; Nguyen Van Tan, a former journalist; Do Trung Hieu, a well known Communist intellectual; and Dang Hai Son, an art dealer.

Vietnam detained and expelled a number of other foreigners during this time, including Miriam Hershberger, a Mennonite teacher who was accused of trying to destabilize the government by using foreign newspapers in her English classes.71 The official press reported these cases with a stern warning that "we must expose and severely punish those elements engaged in espionage work who travel to our country under certain covers to carry out activities aimed at opposing our socialist regime and sabotaging our people's livelihood."72

The government extended its repression even to the ranks of the "loyal opposition." Nguyen Ho and Ta Ba Tang, chairman and vice-chairman of the Club of Former Resistance Fighters, a group of South Vietnamese Communist war veterans which called for accelerated political and economic reform, resigned their positions under pressure on March 4. Both were placed under police surveillance and house detention after giving interviews to a British journalist a few days earlier. Huyhn Tan Mam, a former student leader and opponent of the South Vietnamese government during the war, was also placed under house detention and surveillance; he had published an open letter to Party General Secretary Nguyen Van Linh calling for more democracy.

Despite the release of thousands of political prisoners in 1987 and 1988 and regular amnesties on Vietnam's National Day, Asia Watch believes that large numbers of political prisoners remain in the notorious "reeducation" camps, subject to rigorous labor, life-threatening shortages of food and medical care, and abuses such as fettering, beating and solitary confinement. Among these prisoners are Tran Vong Quoc, imprisoned since December 1984 for trying to pass information to international human rights organizations; journalist Tran Duy Hinh, the last member of Vietnam's former PEN association, imprisoned for the last 15 years; Father Le Thanh Que, a Jesuit priest accused of counterrevolutionary propaganda and sedition; and the Hanoi poet Nguyen Chi Thien, who has been incarcerated periodically since 1958, most recently in 1979 when he attempted to send his poetry abroad for publication.

US Policy

The Bush administration made significant strides in 1990 toward normalizing relations with Vietnam. A series of official US-Vietnamese contacts over the summer culminated on September 29 when Secretary of State James Baker received Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach in Washington for the highest-level talks since the end of the Vietnam War.

Vietnam's cooperation in resolving the Cambodia crisis and accounting for MIA-POWs were the two issues emphasized by the State Department as key to progress on normalization. On December 5, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs Richard Solomon said that the US was prepared to start formal talks on normalization once Vietnam agreed to sign the United Nations-sponsored peace plan for Cambodia, and made satisfactory steps toward resolving MIA cases.73 Although Vietnam approved the establishment of a permanent US presence in Vietnam to handle MIA issues,74 Solomon's prediction that full normalization could be complete within two years may have been premature, given Vietnam's rejection of the UN plan on December 14.75 However, the fluidity of negotiation positions in the course of Cambodian peace talks during 1990 left open the possibility that Vietnam's rejection was not definitive.

Strikingly absent from the administration's stated agenda on normalization were human rights abuses directed at Vietnam's own citizens. Members of Congress, however, were more vocal on this issue. On April 23, Senator Pete Wilson introduced a resolution calling for human rights and democratic reforms in Vietnam as a precondition to normalization of relations. The resolution, which called for release of all political prisoners, abolition of "reeducation" camps, establishment of an independent bar and judiciary, introduction of free elections and repeal of the constitutional supremacy of the Communist Party, was sharply criticized by Radio Hanoi.76 Senator John McCain, who met with Foreign Minister Thach in October, called for the US to tie full economic relations to political reforms, particularly Vietnamese respect for the right of dissent, and urged that the release of Vietnamese war veterans from "reeducation" camps be made a condition of diplomatic relations. Although Asia Watch takes no position on the question of normalizing US-Vietnamese relations, it urges the administration to use available leverage to encourage Vietnamese authorities to curb human rights violations.

The Work of Asia Watch

Asia Watch conducted an investigative mission to the refugee camps and detention centers of Hong Kong from October 16 to 28, interviewing two dozen recently arrived Vietnamese about human rights conditions in Vietnam. Although the refugees tended to agree that human rights conditions had improved somewhat throughout the renovation years, they also reported fresh arrests for religious and political activities, and confirmed the continued existence of conditions of privation and brutality in "reeducation" camps. The Asia Watch researchers gathered detailed accounts of the operation of Vietnam's system of household registry, through which citizens exercise (and are frequently denied) basic civil rights, and of continued discrimination against individuals based on the political history of their relatives. Among those interviewed were members of the Vietnam Human Rights League, an underground group dedicated to nonviolent human rights advocacy, who had escaped from Vietnam earlier in the year. Their accounts of protest activities and police repression will be published in 1991.

On July 25, Asia Watch expressed its concern about the continued detention of Doan Thanh Liem to Madame Nho Ba Thanh, president of the Legislative Committee of Vietnam's National Assembly, and relayed a petition for his release from the faculty of the Georgetown University Law Center. At Asia Watch's request, the Congressional Committee to Support Writers and Journalists wrote the Permanent Representative of Vietnam to the United Nations to request the immediate release of Tran Duy Hinh. Asia Watch also participated in a briefing session on Capitol Hill on December 14, discussing human rights conditions in Vietnam in the context of the refugee situation in Southeast Asia.

In November, Asia Watch formally requested permission to visit Vietnam to discuss human rights concerns with government officials. No official response had been received by the end of the year.

65 Nhan Dan, April 16, 1990, in FBIS, April 16, 1990.

66 Hanoi Domestic Service in Vietnamese, July 27, 1990, in FBIS, August 8, 1990.

67 Hong Kong AFP in English, August 3, 1990, in FBIS, August 7, 1990.

68 Hanoi Domestic Service in Vietnamese, June 25, 1990, FBIS, June 29, 1990.

69 See, "Ex-Follower of Ho Chi Minh Scolds Vietnam in Broadcasts," New York Times, December 29, 1990.

70 Hong Kong AFP in English, August 17, 1990, in FBIS, August 20, 1990.

71 United Press International, June 8, 1990.

72 Saigon Giai Phong, June 19, 1990, in FBIS, August 27, 1990.

73 "U.S. is Now Ready for Vietnam Talks," New York Times, December 6, 1990.

74 United Press International, October 30, 1990.

75 United Press International, December 15, 1990.

76 Hanoi Domestic Service, June 19, 1990, in FBIS, June 19, 1990; see also Indochina Digest, April 29-May 5, 1990.
HELSINKI WATCH OVERVIEW

The East European revolutions of 1989 have had a profound effect on the work of Helsinki Watch. Gratifying beyond our greatest expectations, the transformations in many of the countries in which we have long been involved have also compelled us to reassess our program for the future and to reorder our priorities.

Since its inception in 1979, Helsinki Watch has played a special role in Eastern Europe and the USSR. In the countries where we have been most deeply involved -- Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union -- our contacts, the "dissidents" whose rights we have long defended, are now helping to shape their countries' futures from positions of power. The Presidents of Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Poland, for example, are each our former colleagues in the human rights struggle, and in these countries, as in the Soviet Union, many former members of Helsinki Committees are now serving as members of the government or Parliament. It has been a thrilling experience to watch this evolution and to see the extent of the goodwill, trust and prestige that we maintain in those countries. There have been many instances that echo the sentiment that Vaclav Havel expressed when he visited the offices of Helsinki Watch during his one-day visit to New York in February 1990: "I feel that I'm here as a friend among friends. I know very well what you did for us and perhaps without you our revolution could not be."

This is not a time for self-congratulation, however. Serious problems remain in Helsinki-signatory countries and it is to those problems that we are now directing our energies. In addition to classic human rights problems, the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia, Romania and Bulgaria are all in turmoil, frequently rocked by violence and discontent that can be variously categorized as anti-Communist, interethnic, discriminatory against minorities, nationalist and secessionist. Many of these conflicts have human rights ramifications. Despite greater glasnost in these countries, secrecy and suspicion still set the tone for governments confronting unprecedentedly vocal criticism. In many places, Helsinki Watch is still denied access to information and to the right to visit scenes of upheaval. Our difficulties are compounded by the virtual disappearance of the kind of local human rights groups that in the past helped in the collection of human rights information; their members (or those who might have become members of such groups under other circumstances) are now engaged in direct political action.

At the same time, we now have unprecedented opportunity to work directly in countries where in the past we were prevented from conducting overt fact-finding missions and which sometimes denied us entry altogether. During 1990 we sent a series of fact-finding missions to each of the above-mentioned countries, and in two of them, Bulgaria and Romania, we stationed members of the Helsinki Watch staff for lengthy periods. The opportunity to have members of our staff living in these countries, conducting investigations on the spot and organizing fact-finding missions from a local base, has made it possible for us to document a series of human rights violations in Romania and Bulgaria and to produce reports and articles on issues that include the persecution of the Hungarian minority in Romania, the persecution of ethnic Turks in Bulgaria, pre-electoral conditions in both countries, and the situation of the AIDS orphans in Romania.

Helsinki Watch is also devoting a major portion of its activity to monitoring events in the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia. The federal structure in each of these countries appears to be disintegrating in the face of declarations of sovereignty or independence by the fifteen republics of the Soviet Union and the six republics of Yugoslavia. Helsinki Watch has established a program of investigating incidents of violence in the various republics and establishing contacts in these often remote places. It is not always easy from afar to extricate the human rights factors involved in some of the violent conflicts that have erupted in the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia -- what role the government played, or refused to play, in the events. Official information tends to obscure and minimize such events and has proven to be unreliable. It has become increasingly clear to us that we must ascertain through on-the-spot inquiries the facts of each case.

We are now engaged in negotiations to open offices in Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union, which we will use as bases from which to collect information and to launch missions to the various republics. Even without an office in the Soviet Union, however, we have already sent representatives to conduct our own fact-finding in such far-flung Soviet republics as Kazakhstan, Tadzhikistan, Uzbekistan and Azerbaidzhan. We recently published a report and a lengthy article on Kazakhstan, and we sent a follow-up mission to Kazakhstan after the report was published. Reports on Tadzhikistan and Azerbaidzhan are now in preparation, and we are planning missions to Armenia and Moldavia. We have also sent missions to the various republics of Yugoslavia. We have issued several first-hand reports about the repression of ethnic Albanians in the Kosovo Province of Serbia and have documented recent violence between Serbs and Croats in the Croatian Republic.

When it comes to the countries of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, Helsinki Watch does not have serious differences with the human rights practices of the United States government. Although our agendas are somewhat different, we share a common wish to assure that the new governments in the area respect human rights and democratic freedoms. We worry at times that the administration may be downplaying human rights concerns in the interests of detente. We are concerned at times that the quiet diplomacy that is being used might have more effect on human rights practices if it were more public. But on the whole, our differences are relatively minor and reflect the fact that Helsinki Watch has a single-purpose human rights agenda while the US government must balance human rights concerns with other policy issues.

Helsinki Watch has been more critical about the US government's role in Turkey, where human rights practices have worsened. Helsinki Watch remains concerned about the continued use of torture in Turkey and abridgements of free speech, free press and free association. We continue to urge the US government to use its considerable economic leverage in Turkey to pressure the government to improve its human rights practices. We recently sent our second mission to Eastern Turkey to report on the plight of the Kurds, and we will continue to watch and report on the situation in Eastern Turkey during the months to come.

The end of the cold war and the breakdown of the East-West blocs provides Helsinki Watch with new opportunities in the various forums of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), the "Helsinki process," which heretofore has been used exclusively for East-West confrontations, and where non-Warsaw Pact countries such as Yugoslavia, Turkey, Greece and the United Kingdom, despite documented violations of human rights, have never been the recipients of human rights criticism from the West. Now, with the governments of Eastern Europe friendly to the United States and the other changes resulting from East-West detente, there is the possibility of finding support for raising human rights concerns about all countries involved in the Helsinki process.

Helsinki Watch will continue to pressure the US government to take a more active role in the CSCE process with regard to the human rights practices of all countries, so that the CSCE will evolve into a genuine multinational arena for the discussion and resolution of human rights problems, in the place of its former role as a forum for acrimonious exchanges between the two blocs. To make the CSCE meetings fulfill this new function will require open discussions about human rights problems in all countries, including the United States.

For the 1991 CSCE Human Rights Conference in Moscow, Helsinki Watch, together with the International Helsinki Federation for Human Rights (IHF), is planning to document abuses in a variety of the countries that signed the Helsinki accords. In addition to reporting on the human rights situation in Romania, the Soviet Union, Bulgaria, Yugoslavia and Turkey, we plan to release a series of reports: on prison conditions East and West; on various minority problems; on Gypsies in European countries; and on the situation in Northern Ireland. We also hope in the near future to join an IHF mission to Albania. Albania's appliction to enter the CSCE provides leverage for us in gaining access and establishing contacts.

Currently, our work in the newly established democracies of Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary has diminished drastically. Nevertheless, we continue to watch events in these countries and to maintain contacts with the many people we know there. The governments that have come to power there are fragile and inexperienced in the ways of democracy. Beset by economic and social troubles of great magnitude and by the resurgence of long-suppressed ethnic hostilities, even those with the best of intentions may succumb to pressures beyond their control.

Our friends in these countries have frequently turned to us for assistance in the building of their democracies. They need books and teachers, assistance in drafting new legislation and constitutions, information about electoral laws, and so forth. Helsinki Watch has been reluctant to become directly involved in such pursuits, however. We know that our strengths are in fact-finding and reporting on human rights abuses and in pressuring governments to change their practices. There are many educators, legal scholars, election experts and others who are eager to share their knowledge with the new governments in Eastern Europe that are in need of such services. Helsinki Watch has tried to refer such requests to the right people, rather than attempt to fulfill them ourselves. However, when it comes to human rights education, i.e., instruction in the human rights work that we know best, we have been directly supportive.

Helsinki Watch has encouraged the work of a new Human Rights Center established in Poland by the Polish Helsinki Committee. We are in the process of arranging internships in our offices for a Polish activist attached to the Center and also for a Romanian activist who feels the need for on-the-spot training in human rights work. Helsinki Watch also plans to organize, in the spring of 1991, a series of regional conferences on the methodology of investigating abuses of the past. We plan to bring groups in the USSR, Hungary, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Romania and Bulgaria together with individuals from other parts of the world -- from Brazil, Argentina or Chile, for example -- who can share their experiences in documenting past abuses. Such documentation, and the need for truth and justice, has long been a concern of all the divisions of Human Rights Watch. This is a form of human rights education that we are well equipped to conduct.

In the next few years, Helsinki Watch will monitor the various countries outlined above and, where applicable:

o Continue our established program of documenting and publicizing human rights abuses in all Helsinki-signatory countries.

o Work to convince governments to establish greater access to information and greater freedom for travel and investigation, both for domestic nongovernmental groups and for those from abroad.

o Help the International Helsinki Federation in its work to strengthen and expand the existing network of Helsinki Committees in Eastern and Western Europe.

o Document abuses of the past in countries where such documentation is possible, and work to educate individuals in those countries to take over such documentation themselves.

o Urge that trials of members of the previous regimes be conducted in accordance with the norms of international law, and send observers to such trials to monitor the procedures.

o Document and help protect the rights of ethnic minorities in the various countries that we monitor.

o Monitor electoral conditions in countries where there is reason to believe that such conditions will not be fair and open.

o Help in efforts to establish greater independence for lawyers and judges.

* * *

At the end of 1989, we looked back at a year in which the impossible had become true. Governments long thought to be impervious to change had toppled like a succession of dominoes in the face of mass public protest that, with the exception of Romania, was conducted virtually without violence. The year l989 was exhilarating, the time of the velvet revolutions.

A year later, at the end of l990, we look back at other, less happy events, equally improbable, that have come to pass. The exhilaration is gone. The prospects are often quite grim.

The Soviet Union, its empire dissolving, its internal structures on the verge of anarchy, has become a supplicant, seeking food credits from the West. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is disintegrating. Riots and demonstrations have been going on, almost without pause, in Romania, Bulgaria and Albania, where current or former Communists still cling to positions of power. Polish Solidarity has been rent by internal strife. Ethnic conflict is rampant throughout the region. In Czechoslovakia, President Havel has been forced to seek extraordinary powers in his efforts to keep the nation from fragmenting.

Helsinki Watch must steer its course through these uncharted waters. Our goal is clear: to promote the cause of human rights by exposing and publicizing violations in all countries, regardless of their political systems or past histories. Now, as never before, we have an opportunity to help and influence the democratic forces in those countries and to drive home the message that the protection of human rights is essential to the creation of free and democratic nations.
BULGARIA

Human Rights Developments

Despite multiparty elections and a number of reforms, human rights problems persisted in Bulgaria. The "revolution" in Bulgaria was different from the others in Eastern Europe in that it was initiated from above, in a "palace-led" coup. On November 10, 1989, Bulgarian Communist Party chief Todor Zhivkov was forced to step down by the party leadership. During the next year, until November 1990, Bulgaria was governed by the same party, which simply changed its name from Communist to Socialist. The pace of change was correspondingly slow. Parliamentary elections in June, which returned the Socialists to power, were followed by a serious economic crisis that all but paralyzed the new government. Neither the ruling Socialists nor the opposition Union of Democratic Forces (who controlled the presidency) wanted to initiate unpopular measures to streamline the bureaucracy or address the country's enormous economic problems.

A similar paralysis was seen in the lack of leadership on human rights issues. Although many laws at the national level were rewritten to extend human rights to minorities and others, there were few changes at the local level, where administrators were given almost free reign to implement policies as they choose. Many of these local officials were holdovers from the Zhivkov era. Local elections were originally scheduled for the fall of 1990, but were postponed until sometime in 1991.

In late November, mass demonstrations and a general strike brought about the resignation of Prime Minister Andrei Lukanov. In December, a coalition government was formed, the first successful attempt at multiparty rule since the downfall of Zhivkov.

The June parliamentary elections were marked by allegations of physical violence, widespread voter intimidation and some election irregularities. There was also an unequal distribution of resources to parties competing with the party in power. The Socialist (formerly Communist) Party retained control of newsprint and offices, and strictly limited such resources to opposition parties.

Minorities experienced serious human rights problems in 1990, and it was unclear how much the central government was prepared to do to remedy these difficulties. On December 29, 1989, the government reversed Zhivkov's assimilation policy and announced that everyone in Bulgaria would be free to choose his or her name, religion and language. In 1990, legislation was enacted to implement this new policy. However, the initial legislation adopted (the Law on Names) contained many flaws and raised questions about the government's commitment to its new policy. Passed by the National Assembly in March, the law allowed citizens whose names had been forcibly changed during the assimilation campaign to restore their former names. But applicants were required to use a judicial procedure to change their names, and after December 31, 1990, to pay a fee for the procedure. Many individuals whose names had been forcibly changed during the assimilation campaign objected to this procedure. They argued -- with good cause -- that their names had been taken away by an administrative (non-judicial) procedure, and thus they should be able to restore their names by a simple administrative procedure rather than a cumbersome judicial one. Applicants were also required to retain the traditional Bulgarian name endings (ov, ev, ova, eva), to which many objected. In November, Parliament enacted new legislation to respond to these concerns, allowing the use of an administrative procedure to restore names that had been forcibly changed, deferring fees for this process until 1995, and permitting names without traditional Bulgarian endings.

In March, the National Assembly passed the Law on Political Parties, part of which bans the formation of political parties on ethnic or religious lines. Its effect was felt in the aftermath of the June elections, in which many ethnic Turks supported the Movement for Rights and Freedoms, a political movement, led by an ethnic Turk, which advocates human rights for all Bulgarians, including cultural rights for ethnic Turks. Leaders of both the Socialist Party and the Union of Democratic Forces cited the Law on Political Parties in seeking to ban the Movement's 23 deputies from sitting in the Assembly as representatives of the Movement. However, by the end of 1990, this attempt had not succeeded.

In November, a Sofia district court invoked the Law on Political Parties to deny the Democratic Roma Union (an organization that defends Gypsy rights) registration as a political party. The Roma Union had sought registration to be able to participate in local elections.

An amendment to Article 52 of the Bulgarian Constitution was adopted in March which some legal experts argued prohibits the formation of social and cultural organizations on ethnic or religious lines. The amendment reads: "Organizations that endanger the sovereignty, the territorial integrity of the country and the unity of the nation, incite racial, national, ethnic or religious intolerance or violate personal rights and freedoms, as well as fascist organizations and organizations striving to achieve their purpose through violence, are prohibited." In June, the Blagoevgrad regional court denied the Ilinden United Macedonian Organization (an unofficial association which defends the cultural and human rights of Macedonians living in Bulgaria) permission to register as an organization. As a result of this ruling, the Petric mayor and police prevented Ilinden members from gathering petition signatures in October. The same grounds were cited to prevent Ilinden members from holding a congress in August; one Ilinden member was fined 300 leva (the average monthly salary) for attempting to organize and hold the congress.

Those who support such restrictions on the formation of political and cultural groups argued that Bulgaria is a small country which needs to maintain its national identity, particularly since the country has frequently been dominated by foreign powers, notably the Soviet Union and the Ottoman Empire. Mincho Minchev, the speaker of the Fatherland Party of Labor, explained his concerns to Helsinki Watch:

[I]n the past 45 years, the Bulgarian nation lost much of its patriotism. In 50 to 60 years, it is possible that the Bulgarian national will not exist. If at this historical moment we do not unite, I fear we will be doomed. We are for the rights of the individual, but not for the differentiation of separate groups within the country because this would lead to a split of the nation. We are against the generation of separate ethnic identities. We would like to see everyone in Bulgaria call himself a Bulgarian.

While such concerns with maintaining the nation's territorial integrity are widespread in Bulgaria, Helsinki Watch is concerned that they not be addressed by denying freedom of association for all Bulgarians, including Bulgaria's minorities.

Sometimes less abstract concerns, such as simple prejudice or a desire to maintain power, seemed to motivate those who denied minorities their rights, particularly on the local level. During the parliamentary election campaign, local officials frequently intimidated minorities into casting their ballots for the Socialist Party.1 Rumors were spread -- particularly in Gypsy communities -- that pensions would be reduced or rents raised for those who did not vote for the Socialist candidates. Many Gypsies, not trusting the secret ballot, believed these rumors.

Ethnic tensions rose to the surface as the rigid social control once exercised by the state apparatus loosened. The economic crisis probably exacerbated this tendency and led some Bulgarians to use minorities as scapegoats. For example, the Gypsy community was widely blamed for profiteering on the black market from shortages of food and consumer goods. In most instances, the Bulgarian government did nothing to refute these allegations, and sometimes it even instigated them. For example, the state-controlled television and radio broadcast frequent reports criticizing the Gypsy community for black-market activities, even though many ethnic Bulgarians also trade on the black market. So far, the new government has done little to reduce ethnic tension or to try to heal the wounds that have been created over centuries, particularly during the latter years of Zhivkov's rule.

Bulgaria had other human rights problems unrelated to minorities. State Security (the secret police) continued to monitor the activities of human rights activists and those who were working to promote minority rights. In Preslav, for example, secret police reportedly intimidated those campaigning during the pre-electoral period for the Movement for Rights and Freedoms. In the Pirin mountain region, secret police closely monitored the Macedonian group Ilinden and harassed its activists. For example, several dozen Ilinden members were denied exit visas when they attempted to attend a Macedonian meeting in Yugoslavia. Many opponents of the government reported suspicious interference with their telephone and mail services and speculated that State Security was responsible.

In September, President Zhelev pardoned several dozen political prisoners who had been sentenced under the Zhivkov regime. At the end of 1990, there were still some 28 prisoners in jail who may have been imprisoned for political reasons. Nearly all were ethnic Turks. The President's office, as well as the Parliament's Commission on Human Rights, were investigating these cases further, and the President seemed prepared to extend additional pardons for those found to be confined for having exercised their right to peaceful expression.

No trials were held in 1990 of those responsible for human rights abuses under the Zhivkov regime, even though several newspapers and independent groups collected information on the sites of mass graves and on labor camps to which political opponents were sent from the 1940s to the 1960s. Zhivkov himself has been the focus of a criminal investigation into his role in the unlawful imprisonment of political opponents. The government also announced in early 1990 that it would examine the 1978 killing of Bulgarian exile and journalist Georgi Markov, who was allegedly shot with a poison pellet in London by someone carrying an umbrella. However, the investigation appeared to be stagnant at the end of 1990. No other investigations into Zhivkov-era abuses had been announced at year's end.

Although on April 3 the Bulgarian Constitution was amended in several respects to respond to the dramatic political changes of the previous November, the Constitution is still problematic from a human rights point of view. For example, the prohibition on certain ethnic and religious organizations quoted above is an unjustifiably broad restriction on freedom of association. On July 30, the National Assembly established a commission to prepare a new draft by the end of 1990, but the commission took no visible action because the National Assembly was preoccupied with the country's economic crisis and other issues deemed to be more pressing.

On the positive side, the press was free to criticize the government, and many large, peaceful demonstrations took place without government interference.

US Policy

The Bush administration demonstrated strong interest in the June 10 parliamentary elections and on several occasions expressed its hope that Bulgaria would hold "free and fair elections." Indeed, most of the administration's public statements relating to human rights issues focused on the fairness of the parliamentary electoral process. In public fora, the administration failed to address other human rights issues adequately, including the situation of the minorities, past abuses, and invasion of privacy by State Security.

The administration played a positive role in attempting to foster free and fair electoral conditions in June. As early as February, Secretary of State James Baker visited Bulgaria and met with leaders of the ruling Socialist Party and the primary opposition group, the Union of Democratic Forces. He discussed pre-election conditions and expressed the US government's concern that the electoral process be fair. The administration continued to monitor campaign conditions through the US embassy in Sofia and, ten days before election day, issued a three-page statement noting the following:

o In many instances, the electoral lists reportedly contained numerous errors.

o The principle of party parity had not been strictly observed in the formation of electoral commissions, especially at the regional level.

o There had been a number of allegations of physical violence and psychological intimidation against members of various parties, in particular, a number of allegations showing "a consistent pattern of intimidation in provincial areas by members of local government against elements of the population."

o There was an unequal distribution of resources available to the competing parties in the pre-electoral period, such that "the resources of the ruling party are vastly superior to those of the opposition, and not enough has been done to offset these advantages."

The State Department called upon the Bulgarian Central Election Commission, the government, and the major political parties to resolve these problems prior to election day. On June 5, to highlight its concerns in a dramatic way, the State Department announced that the US Ambassador to Bulgaria had flown to Copenhagen to make a personal report on pre-election conditions to Secretary of State Baker.

Several days before June 10, President Bush announced that he would send a presidential mission to observe the elections, again signaling the administration's concern over their fairness. The presence of the oberserver team helped serve to deter further acts of intimidation against voters, but it undoubtedly was insufficient to erase the fear generated by past intimidation. Its impact might have been greater if the administration had announced the plans to send it earlier, if the team had stayed in Bulgaria for more than two days, and if the team had included the June 17 parliamentary run-off elections within its mandate.

On June 21, State Department spokesman Richard Boucher assessed the election results. He noted that the process had been marred by "irregularities and serious inequities," which "may have had a significant effect on the outcome of the voting." The State Department asked the Bulgarian authorities to investigate all electoral irregularities promptly, and to hold accountable those guilty of intentional misconduct.

The administration has made few public comments on the minorities question. In its June 21 statement on the elections, the State Department noted that diverse viewpoints were represented by the parties that had won the parliamentary elections, "including minorities," and that this was "an important and welcome step" in the process of building a democracy.

Earlier in the year, just after the Bulgarian government announced that it was reversing Zhivkov's policy of forced assimilation, State Department spokesman Boucher publicly welcomed the decision. He called it a "significant step forward in Bulgaria's respect for human rights and in honoring its commitments under the Conference for Security and Cooperation in Europe agreements." However, the State Department issued no public protest about the attacks against the Movement for Rights and Freedoms later in the year, or about the human rights problems of Gypsies and Macedonians.

When President Zhelev visited the United States in October, President Bush announced that the US government would provide 100,000 tons of feedcorn to Bulgaria. The US President made no public statement on Bulgaria's lingering human rights problems.

The Work of Helsinki Watch

Helsinki Watch focused its efforts in 1990 on the rights of minorities, including ethnic Turks, Pomaks, Macedonians and Gypsies, as well as on constitutional reform and electoral conditions. Helsinki Watch maintained a full-time representative in Bulgaria for much of the year.

Helsinki Watch placed a special emphasis on the rights of minorities, both because it is by far the most serious human rights problem in Bulgaria and because neither of the two major political parties have focused on this issue. On several occasions, Helsinki Watch raised its human rights concerns about the plights of the minorities with government officials, such as President Zhelev's adviser on nationality problems and representatives of the Interior Ministry. Helsinki Watch also met frequently with members of the National Assembly's Commission on Human Rights.

Helsinki Watch has focused considerable attention on the situation of the Turkish and Pomak minorities which have continued to experience human rights abuses since Zhivkov's assimilation campaign was initiated against them in the 1970s. In February, a Helsinki Watch mission traveled to Bulgaria to investigate continuing ethnic tensions. The mission met with representatives of the Turkish and Pomak communities and with Ahmet Dogan, the chairman of the Movement for Rights and Freedoms. Helsinki Watch issued a newsletter in March which expressed its deep concern about the plight of the Turkish and Pomak minorities. It noted that although conditions had improved somewhat for the Turks and Pomaks after the new government reversed Zhivkov's assimilation policy, significant human rights problems remained. Helsinki Watch called upon the Bulgarian government to guarantee the cultural and religious rights of all of its citizens.

In May and June, another Helsinki Watch mission followed up on the situation of the Turkish and Pomak minorities and visited numerous regions with Muslim populations, including Kurdzhali, Djebel, Orlyak Perperek, Gotse Delchev, Tolbunin, Sumen, Preslav, Kaolinovo and Todor Ikonomovo. The mission participants spoke with ethnic Turks, Pomaks and Bulgarians, and with government officials. They examined not only the human rights problems of the ethnic minorities, but also the situation of the Bulgarians who live in predominantly Turkish regions and also experience human rights problems.

In August, Helsinki Watch issued a newsletter on the continuing human rights problems and tensions in the Turkish and Pomak provinces. The newsletter focused on a number of human rights violations. One section described cases of local officials who discriminated against minorities in contradiction of central government policy. Helsinki Watch recommended that local elections be held as soon as possible to replace old mayors and local councils, and that adequate minority representation be established on local council committees that have responsibility for such matters as education, delivery of social services, and allocation of public resources. Another section focused on the new opportunities for minorities to participate in politics, and recommended that the National Assembly increase these opportunities by rescinding the portion of the Law on Political Parties that banned political parties from forming on ethnic or religious lines. The newsletter described some of the shortcomings of the Law on Names, enacted in March, and recommended that the law be amended to allow Turks and Pomaks to reclaim their names through a simple administrative procedure, and to enable them to take their names without traditional Bulgarian endings. Another section focused on the relations between ethnic Turks and Bulgarians, and noted that the assimilation campaign had produced deep tensions and psychological wounds in regions cohabitated by these two ethnic groups. The newsletter noted that these "lingering tensions may prove to be the most difficult problem for the new government to solve." It recommended that a special commission be appointed to examine the causes of the assimilation campaign, and that the results be made public. It also recommended that the National Assembly adopt a law to prohibit managers and workers in state-owned enterprises from discriminating against minorities, and that the government investigate and prosecute alleged violations of civil rights.

In the fall, Helsinki Watch began an investigation of the situations of the Macedonian and Gypsy minorities, two groups that have received little attention in the international human rights community despite the significant human rights problems that they face. In November, a Helsinki Watch mission visited Blagoevgrad to meet with members of Ilinden, a Macedonian group, and visited Sliven and the Fakulteta region in Sofia, which have large Gypsy populations. While in Sliven, the Helsinki Watch representatives met with the mayor and other local officials to discuss problems that the Gypsies were having with social services, housing and education. They also met with several members of the National Assembly who have an interest in the Gypsy issue, including Manush Romanov, chairman of the Democratic Roma Union, and the Bulgarian Minister for Higher Education. Helsinki Watch will continue to investigate the problems of the Macedonian and Gypsy minorities in Bulgaria, and plans to issue newsletters describing their situations in early 1991.

Helsinki Watch also sent two missions early in 1990 to examine pre-election conditions. In February, Helsinki Watch representatives met with human rights activists and leaders of several political parties to explore changes in the political scene and to examine pre-election conditions. An article on these topics, "The Bulgarian Difference," appeared in The New York Review of Books on May 17. In March, Helsinki Watch issued a newsletter describing the numerous privileges and advantages enjoyed by the Communist Party and calling on the government to ensure that the June elections would be free and fair.

In May, a Helsinki Watch mission again evaluated pre-election conditions. The members visited numerous cities and villages, including Kurdzhali, Sliven, Pernik and Trun. They also met with the Chairman of the Central Election Commission and with the Procurator General. A special "Election Report" was issued by Helsinki Watch from Bulgaria in June, describing significant human rights violations in the pre-election process, particularly in the provinces. The report recommended that the Bulgarian government and the Socialist Party ensure free electoral conditions, noting that they had a special obligation to do so because of their responsibility for past abuses and their control of the political system. It also recommended that the government and all political parties encourage voters to renounce violence and all forms of intimidation.

Helsinki Watch has offered assistance to a group of Western lawyers who are planning a constitutional reform project in Bulgaria. A constitutional conference is planned for February 1991.

Helsinki Watch has closely followed the work of the National Assembly's Commission on Human Rights with respect to political prisoners. Helsinki Watch is satisfied that the cases of prisoners who may have been imprisoned for peaceful expression are being adequately investigated and is pleased that President Zhelev has extended pardons to those individuals deemed to be imprisoned for exercising their right to free speech.

Helsinki Watch is also monitoring the investigation of past abuses in Bulgaria and will observe the trial of Todor Zhivkov, should a trial be held.

1 The electoral process was marred by many irregularities which may have affected the outcome of the voting in certain districts.
ROMANIA

Human Rights Developments

Shortly after the December 1989 revolution which ousted Nicolae Ceausescu, many of the most repressive practices of the Ceausescu era were abolished. For example, severe restraints on freedom of speech, assembly, the press and travel were removed. However, Romania was a country sadly lacking in democratic institutions, with a population unfamiliar with democratic principles. Progress has been slow, and at the end of 1990, one year after the bloody Christmas revolution, Romania was still suffering significant human rights abuses.

In the first months of 1990, numerous independent newspapers, associations and political parties were founded, and Romanians began to take advantage of their new-found freedom of speech and association. However, the initial euphoria of the revolution ended quickly, as opposition to the governing Council for National Salvation, headed by Ion Iliescu and Petre Roman, became more vocal, and large numbers of Romanians took to the streets calling for the leadership's resignation. The year 1990 was punctuated by frequent, large anti-government demonstrations and numerous episodes of violence from a variety of quarters.

The May 20 elections were the first multiparty elections in Romania in over 40 years and, as such, were considered an event of great significance for the future of a democratic Romania. Unfortunately, a pre-election atmosphere of fear and uncertainty was not conducive to a free expression of the electorate's will. The elections were preceded by numerous violent attacks on candidates, demonstrators and political-party headquarters. Few of these attacks were investigated by the police. There were numerous reports of local Communist officials, who in many counties had not been replaced by the time of the May elections, using their power to intimidate voters and opposition candidates.

Ethnic tensions, which had long lain dormant, turned violent in numerous incidents in 1990. Ethnic tension in Romania began to escalate in early January, when Hungarians started to demand greater cultural freedom, including the reestablishment of Hungarian-language schools and the reopening of the Hungarian-language Bolyai University, which had been merged into the Romanian-language Babes University in 1959 as part of Ceausescu's decision to dismantle the Hungarian-language educational system. Other ethnic minorities also began to pressure the government for schools taught in their mother tongues. Progress was made in this area. For the 1990-1991 academic year, schools were established in Hungarian, German and a host of other minority languages. However, representatives of the Hungarian community reported increasing fear because of threats and acts of vandalism against their schools. The unresolved issue of Bolyai University continued to generate strong emotions and the potential for violence in Transylvania.

In March, violence broke out between ethnic Hungarians and Romanians in the Transylvanian city of Tirgu Mures. On March 19, the headquarters of the Democratic Union of Hungarians in Romania (UDMR) was attacked by a large group of ethnic Romanians. The police and army did not respond to the UDMR's calls for protection until several hours after the attack began. Many ethnic Hungarians trapped inside were seriously injured.

On the following morning, some 15,000 ethnic Hungarians gathered in the town square to protest the previous day's events. A group of approximately 3,000 ethnic Romanians hostile to the Hungarians' demands began to gather on one side of the square in the early afternoon. Tensions escalated as word spread that buses of ethnic Romanian peasants from neighboring villages were heading toward town to support the Romanians in the square. By 2:30 p.m., the Chief of Police gave assurances to ethnic Romanian and Hungarian leaders in the square that the police had blocked off entrances to the city. However, unconfirmed reports indicated that the police allowed buses of ethnic Romanians through the roadblocks. Romanian peasants from villages outside Tirgu Mures arrived in the town center long after the roads should have been closed, and joined the Romanians already in the square.

Around 5:00 p.m., violence erupted as ethnic Romanians surged forward and attacked the Hungarians, breaking the single line of 50 police that the authorities had sent to divide the two groups. Although the police and army had been made aware of the potential for violence by both Hungarian and Romanian leaders, who had made numerous reports of the escalating tensions in the square, the authorities once again failed to respond in an adequate manner to protect the citizens of Tirgu Mures.

A commission of the provisional Parliament (CPUN) was established to investigate the violence in Tirgu Mures. The commission's findings were never made public. However, Helsinki Watch was able to obtain a copy of its report. Unfortunately, the report did not address the critical questions raised by the violence: What role did the army and police play in initiating the violence, and why did they fail to respond immediately to calls for help?

The Gypsy population was an increasingly frequent target of discrimination and violence in 1990. Gypsies were singled out for prosecution as a result of the Tirgu Mures clash, even though they were acknowledged by most to have played a small role in the violence. Gypsy communities were also the target of several violent attacks in which local police or officials participated. For example, the miners who upon government invitation rampaged through Bucharest in June, discussed below, were led into some Gypsy areas by police officers. The same minors also attacked many Gypsies on the streets of Bucharest. In each case, the police offered no protection.

In contrast to their passive stance in the face of attacks on certain minorities, the police on occasion have not hesitated to use force against peaceful demonstrators. For example, on April 24, approximately 1,000 police arrived in Bucharest's University Square, where a demonstration had been going on for two days. The police beat the demonstrators and arrested many of them. The demonstrators later returned to the square and remained for several weeks. At approximately 4:00 a.m. on June 13, police surrounded the square and arrested those still demonstrating. Many of those arrested reported being kicked and beaten with rubber sticks and metal rods. There were no known investigations into such instances of police misconduct.

Another disturbing trend was the government's use of extra-legal forces to establish order. The most dramatic example was then President-elect Iliescu's call on June 13 for miners to come to Bucharest to restore order. The stage for this event was set when the police forcibly cleared University Square on the morning of June 13. This was followed by a string of increasingly violent attacks by demonstrators on government buildings and the television station. Iliescu then called on "workers and conscientious people" to come to Bucharest to restore order. In the early morning of June 14, an estimated 10,000 miners arrived by train. For the next 48 hours, the miners terrorized opposition groups and newspapers, attacked opposition party headquarters, and committed random acts of violence against Gypsy communities and other innocent citizens. Much of the miners' violence was committed in the presence or with the actual assistance of the Bucharest police. Once again, a parliamentary commission was established to investigate these events, but no findings had been made public by year's end.

During 1990, Romanians frequently took to the streets to demonstrate their dissatisfaction with the government. On August 27, in response to the June violence, the mayor of Bucharest issued Decision 828 banning demonstrations in University Square and five other squares in central Bucharest. Protesters were left the right to demonstrate only in four parks in the capital. While this decree was not consistently enforced, it is an unnecessary limitation on freedom of speech and assembly.

The arrest and detention of hundreds of Romanians following the June events underscored the need for significant changes in the Romanian Code of Criminal Procedure, inherited from the Ceausescu era. Under the Code, a detainee can be held for a preliminary investigative period of 60 days without the right to seek judicial review, to confer with an attorney, or to have the detainee's family notified of his or her whereabouts. The Prosecutor General apparently issued a directive that defense attorneys be allowed access to their clients during the preliminary investigation. However, the directive did not create an enforceable right, in that access to an attorney at the earliest stages of the investigation remained within the discretion of the Prosecutor General, whose decision was not subject to judicial review. At the end of 1990, Parliament was discussing amendments to the Criminal Procedure Code which may include important improvements, especially with regard to guaranteed access to counsel during the preliminary investigation, and restrictions on the prosecutor's right to use and extend preventive detention.

Romania has one national, state-owned television station which is considered by many to have a strong pro-government bias. (Toward the end of 1990, several independent local stations with extremely restricted broadcast range were also established.) During the May election campaign, opposition political parties and independent organizations, as well as foreign election observers, consistently accused the national television station of allowing opposition candidates insufficient air time. Television reporting during the demonstrations in University Square also revealed a pro-government slant; television cameras focused almost exclusively on people in the square who appeared to be black-market dealers or petty thieves, giving the impression that the demonstrators consisted mainly of criminal elements. Calls for an independent national television station increased during the last months of 1990. The Romanian government, in turn, proposed legislation that would allow the establishment of private television stations by domestic or foreign private capital; at the same time, certain stations would remain in government hands. However, the draft legislation would apparently apply only to "commercial" stations, which independent journalists feared would be used as a mechanism for requiring all political reporting to be on government-controlled stations.

The Romanian government in 1990 failed to seek accountability for gross human rights abuses committed under the repressive Ceausescu regime. Several trials of former Ceausescu associates and family members resulted in convictions for charges related to genocide. Other former Communist Party officials and members of Securitate (the Ceausescu secret police) were under investigation or being tried for similar crimes. But the charge of genocide related to crimes committed only during the December revolution, and the testimony at the trials that were conducted was restricted to events that occurred during the week of December 17-25, 1989. The narrow scope of these prosecutions appears to have been an attempt to avoid embarassing disclosures about members of the post-Ceausescu government. No known effort was made to investigate, prosecute and punish those who committed abuses during the 25 years of Ceausescu rule.

The Romanian government failed to clarify the status of the Securitate. Despite its formal disbanding, many Romanians still feared that former Securitate officers were operating either independently of the government or in the newly organized security department, the Romanian Information Service. Lack of information about the whereabouts of former Securitate agents and the failure of the government publicly to investigate past Securitate abuses sustained an atmosphere of fear and intimidation that was detrimental to the building of democratic institutions.

US Policy

The Bush administration played an important role throughout 1990 in holding the Romanian leadership to its commitments under international human rights law. Immediately after the December revolution, the Bush administration welcomed the changes that had occurred in the country. At the same time, it emphasized that it would carefully evaluate human rights developments in deciding on an aid package or the granting of Most Favored Nation (MFN) trading status. Unlike some Western countries, the Bush administration did not rush to send a high-level delegation to welcome the new Romanian leaders. Rather, State Department spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler spoke in conditional terms in mid-January: "The Romanian government's steps toward freedom of travel and immigration as well as movement toward a pluralistic, multiparty democracy will obviously be relevant to our consideration of [whether to grant MFN status]."

Throughout 1990, the Bush administration took a firm stand on human rights violations in Romania:

o In late January, it denounced efforts by Romanian officials to restrict the right to protest. State Department spokeswoman Tutwiler stated:

we are deeply troubled by what appears to be active intimidation of legitimate organizations which are seeking a legitimate, independent role in Romania's new political order. Our ambassador in Bucharest protested these actions to Romanian officials and asked that the right of all political groups to peaceful protests be fully protected.

According to the State Department, these concerns were also raised by Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs Richard Schifter, during meetings with National Salvation Front officials in Bucharest.

o In mid-May, US Ambassador to Romania Alan Green was recalled to Washington for consultations. According to State Department spokeswoman Tutwiler, the action was "taken in light of the reports of irregularities in the Romanian electoral process which raise questions about whether those elections will be free and fair." This move was an important public signal to the Romanian government of the Bush administration's concern that the elections be free and fair. According to the State Department spokeswoman, these concerns were also raised directly with the Romanian government on several occasions, including by Secretary of State James Baker during a pre-election visit to Bucharest. The Bush administration also designated a special delegation to observe the May elections.

o In June, the Bush administration condemned the violence by vigilante groups in the center of Bucharest. State Department spokeswoman Tutwiler stated:

The United States condemns in the strongest possible terms the Romanian government's brutal suppression, including the use of deadly force, of legitimate forms of dissent and political protest. We deplore, as well, government-inspired vigilante violence by workers and others against Romanian citizens.

State Department spokesman Richard Boucher also warned on June 15: "Until the democratic process is restored the United States has decided to withhold all non-humanitarian economic support assistance that Romania might be eligible for."

o In late June, Ambassador Green boycotted the inauguration of President Iliescu in a dramatic protest against the Romanian government's repressive actions of June 13-15.

The US embassy in Bucharest was also active in supporting and maintaining contact with a variety of civic groups, including all human rights organizations. In addition, according to statements made to Helsinki Watch by Bogdan Marinescu, Romania's new Minister of Health, the embassy played a positive role in raising concerns at a variety of levels about the conditions in Romania's orphanages.

However, the Bush administration was not persistent in publicly calling on the Romanian government to investigate and prosecute those responsible for abuses. For example, it failed to use its considerable influence to keep pressure on the Romanian government to investigate thoroughly and make public its findings about the role of the army and police during the December revolution and during the events in Tirgu Mures in March and in Bucharest in June. Nor did the administration press for investigation and prosecution of those responsible for gross abuses during the Ceausescu era.

The Work of Helsinki Watch

Although the December 1989 revolution dramatically changed the human rights situation in Romania, Helsinki Watch recognized that post-Ceausescu Romania was likely to have continuing, serious human rights problems. Helsinki Watch saw Romania as needing special attention during its transition from totalitarian rule and directed additional resources toward its efforts to monitor human rights developments in that country.

Helsinki Watch was the first human rights organization to visit Romania after the December revolution. A Helsinki Watch/International Helsinki Federation (IHF) team arrived in Bucharest on January 3, 1990, the day the airport reopened. At the same time, another Helsinki Watch group entered Romania from Hungary and visited Timisoara before joining the others in Bucharest. A January newsletter called on the Romanian government to investigative past abuses, while cautioning about the implication of the government's decision to rely almost exclusively on military tribunals for the trials of those who had been arrested.

In late January, Helsinki Watch sent an observer to Bucharest to attend the trial of four of Ceausescu's former aides. The defendants confessed their guilt to crimes committed during the December revolution. Helsinki Watch issued a newsletter criticizing the trial for concentrating only on events that occurred during the December revolution and not exploring abuses during the Ceausescu years.

Because of the unremitting turbulence in Romania, Helsinki Watch saw a need to have a representative stationed in Romania to conduct human rights investigations. A Helsinki Watch researcher was stationed in Bucharest for six months, from April to October, observing and reporting on the volatile political situation and on various violations of human rights.

From April 16 to 24, a Helsinki Watch mission conducted an on-site investigation into the violent clashes that had occurred between ethnic Hungarians and Romanians in the town of Tirgu Mures in mid-March. Interviews were conducted with both Hungarians and Romanians, including numerous eyewitnesses and victims of the violence, and meetings were held with local government officials and members of the Prosecutor's office who were conducting the official investigation. The conclusions were published in a Helsinki Watch newsletter in May, which described how Gypsies had been made into scapegoats and held responsible for the clashes. The report also concluded that the army and police had failed miserably in anticipating the violence and responding to calls for assistance once the violence was in progress. This report, in Hungarian translation, was published in the newspaper Romaniai Magyar Szo.

In May, Helsinki Watch began investigating reports of human rights abuses connected with the Romanian election campaign. Meetings were held with party representatives in Bucharest, Bacau, Sibiu and several other cities, as well as with Election Board members. Victims of violence were also interviewed. A report was issued on May 15, just before the elections were held, setting out in detail the abuses that had created an atmosphere of fear and intimidation leading up to the elections.

The Helsinki Watch researcher in Romania was in Bucharest during the violent clashes in June and was able immediately to conduct interviews with victims of the clashes, visiting hospitals, party headquarters, and Gypsy homes on the outskirts of Bucharest, and meeting with the independent press, leaders of the numerous opposition groups, and the Prosecutor General of Romania. In early July, a Helsinki Watch delegation discussed the June events with Romanian government officials, including the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Minister of Interior, and a close aide to President Iliescu. Helsinki Watch outlined its human rights concerns and presented a number of specific recommendations, including a suggestion that accurate information regarding the whereabouts of any detainee be made immediately available to his or her family. A Helsinki Watch newsletter was published in July deploring the Romanian government's call for the miners to come to Bucharest and expressing concern about the government's failure to protect the citizens of Bucharest from the miners' violent attacks. This report was published in Romanian translation in the newspaper Cuvintul and in Hungarian translation in the newspaper Romaniai Magyar Szo.

In August, a Helsinki Watch mission explored the conditions in Romanian orphanages and homes for the handicapped. The mission visited six orphanages and homes, toured a pediatric hospital, and visited two AIDS-baby hospitals. Talks were held with Romanian and foreign doctors and nurses at these institutions, and a meeting was held with the Minister of Health and the Director of the Institute for Infectious Diseases. An article entitled "How AIDS Came to Romania" appeared in The New York Review of Books on November 8. A newsletter from Helsinki Watch was also published in December setting out the human rights concerns raised by the cruel treatment of orphans in these institutions.

In late September, a Helsinki Watch mission laid the groundwork for an in-depth study of the situation of the Gypsies in Romania. Interviews were conducted with Gypsy leaders, as well as with individual Gypsies in and near Bucharest, Craiova, Sibiu, Tirgu Mures and Brasov. The delegation met with a mayor of a town that had been the site of significant Romanian-Gypsy conflict, and with an official in the Ministry of Education to discuss the proposed experimental education program designed specifically for Gypsy communities. A follow-up mission to explore the Gypsy issue further is planned for early January 1991.

In addition to the various investigative reports issued during the year, Helsinki Watch worked closely with budding Romanian human rights organizations and independent civic associations in an effort to provide information, share experience, and offer moral support.

SOVIET UNION


Human Rights Developments

Introduction

The year 1990 was a paradoxical one for human rights in the Soviet Union. While official government policy toward human rights continued to improve, the scale of violations grew sharply, due largely to violent confrontations among ethnic groups and political factions that the central government was unable and at times unwilling to control. While individual empowerment increased, individual rights were threatened by growing confusion, hostility and even anarchy.

Political pluralism was accompanied by a breakdown of governmental authority at all levels, giving rise to new conflicts among competing political forces. Contradictions abounded as various republics declared the supremacy of their laws over All-Union laws, or the republics failed to incorporate All-Union laws and decrees in their own legal codes. In Lithuania and Latvia there were two procuracies -- one headed by a procurator appointed by Moscow, the other by a procurator appointed by the republican government. The Ukrainian government passed a law calling for the establishment of an independent Ukrainian procuracy. President Gorbachev referred to the danger of what he called the "Lebanonization" of the Soviet Union.

Numerous new laws protecting the right to a free press, freedom of conscience and freedom of association were passed in 1990, although some feared that renewed regulation of individual liberties that had been flourishing de facto for the past three years could result in the diminution of these liberties. Conversely, central government power had so diminished that its ability to regulate or protect these newly enshrined rights was doubtful.

With the economy in rapid decline, the newly tolerant and permissive atmosphere in many parts of the Soviet Union began to be overshadowed by calls for a strong hand, and toward the end of the year, by rumors of an imminent military takeover.

The Judicial System

Progress continued to be made in the Soviet judicial system. On the civil side, a revised law on the right to appeal acts of government officials entered into force in July. Unlike the old law, the new one allows judicial review of decisions of anonymous collegial bodies, so that it is not necessary to identify particular officials as defendants. However, the new law does contain possible barriers to effective judicial review. First, it excludes from court scrutiny "normative" acts. Second, if a republic creates a different appeals procedure for particular administrative decisions, these decisions are not subject to review under this law. Finally, some new laws such as those on the press and religious freedom contain express references to the appeals law, although the appeals law by its terms does not require such a reference to be invoked, creating the potential for confusion when no explicit reference is made.

In December 1989, the Committee on Constitutional Supervision was formed, charged with reviewing the constitutionality of new legislation and the conformity of republic and local laws with USSR laws. If any law is found to violate basic human rights provisions in the USSR Constitution or in international compacts to which the Soviet Union is a party, it is supposed to be automatically suspended. The Commission in 1990 ruled unconstitutional a presidential decree on demonstrations (see Freedom of Assembly, infra). It also criticized the internal passport system (see Freedom of Movement, infra). However, Soviet legal specialists complained that the Commission's findings had no real force; for example, the internal passport regime was still in place at year's end.

As to criminal law, amendments to the Fundamentals of Criminal Procedure passed in April codified the presumption of innocence, and created a right to counsel from the moment that criminal charges are brought, or within 24 hours of arrest or detention. At least one Soviet legal scholar commented that even 24 hours is too long to allow the militia unimpeded access to a defendant; the law says nothing about the right of the accused to remain silent during that time. Moreover, in practice, defendants were not apprised of their right to counsel and continued to be denied access to counsel until later in the criminal process. The amendments allow defense counsel unlimited access to their clients and to the investigative file, but in practice, access to both was still controlled (and sometimes denied) by the investigator or the militia. In addition, the small number of defense attorneys practicing in the Soviet Union made it unlikely that criminal defendants would be able to obtain the level of representation that the new law envisioned.

Although the criminal justice system showed some signs of improvement, other developments were disturbing. Administrative punishment, with less protection afforded the accused, became a major means of harassing those seeking to exercise civil liberties, particularly freedom of expression. Administrative procedures allow detention without formal charges and the imposition of fines; penalties increase for repeat offenses. Administrative detention was used in 1990 with special frequency in areas under emergency rule, such as Azerbaidzhan. Politically motivated criminal prosecutions continued to be instituted, and political prisoners remained. (See Political Prisoners, infra) These cases were brought both by the central government and by republic governments. In some cases these prosecutions reflected interethnic tensions. Long periods of pretrial detention, up to eighteen months, were still permitted by Soviet law, and were still used in 1990, particularly in politically sensitive cases. For example, ten people arrested for participating in riots in Fergana were imprisoned in June 1989 and remained in custody at the end of 1990. After trial in September 1990, the case was dismissed for insufficient evidence, but the defendants remained in jail as procurators attempted to mount a new case against them.

Freedom of Expression

Great strides continued to be made in the area of freedom of speech and of the press, although more improvement was still necessary. A new press law was passed in June with many positive elements: affirmance of the right to free expression and the right to information from the government, and the prohibition of censorship. Prohibitions on publication are limited to state secrets, pornography, advocacy of the violent overthrow or change of the government, propaganda for war or for ethnic or religious intolerance, and incitement to criminal activity. But the requirement that all publications must register with the government provides a possible new means for suppressing publications at odds with the government, although by law a registration request can be rejected only for violating the above prohibitions, or for other systematic violations of the law. Publications must register every year.

Registration proceeded apace, with various publications fighting, successfully, to break free of their official sponsors. Ogonek, Argumenty i Fakty, Literaturnaya Gazeta and other independently minded publications were permitted to register as having been founded and owned by workers' collectives, overcoming claims to their ownership by conservative government- or Party-affiliated groups such as the USSR and RSFSR Writers' Unions, the Communist Party Central Committee Publishing House, and the Pravda Publishing House. The USSR Writers' Union initiated a lawsuit against Literaturnaya Gazeta challenging the registration decision.

Subject matter in the Soviet media appeared to be almost unlimited. Criticism of Gorbachev, the military and the KGB could be found everywhere. Even though prohibited by the press law, pornography was also available.

Despite this openness in the press, contradictory signals continued to emerge. A major blemish on the record of glasnost in 1990 was a new law that criminalizes slandering the President. The law was being used to prosecute a number of people who, in person or in print, disparaged Gorbachev. One case involved an article that compared Gorbachev to Hitler. Another case involved a man who defaced a large photo of Gorbachev and marched down the street with it. Even the new press law contains a typically cryptic formulation of libel, prohibiting the mass media from being used for "the degradation of [citizens'] honor and dignity." These anti-slander provisions reflected the opposition of conservative officials to unbridled public criticism.

"Glavlit," the state censorship organ, was ostensibly abolished in 1990, but in fact it was merely replaced, or perhaps renamed. The new organ, "GUOT" (Main Administration for Safeguarding State Secrets in the Press and Other Mass Media), issued an updated list of "Information Forbidden for Publication." The list, like its predecessors, included subjects as diverse as the disease rate of livestock and any information about crime in the military. While it appeared that the press for the most part ignored GUOT (Izvestia published an article ridiculing the emergence of the new list), its very existence raised the specter of renewed censorship.

Restrictions on revealing state secrets continued to be used against government critics. For example, Oleg Kalugin, a former KGB general who was stripped of his rank and pension after he began publicly criticizing the KGB, was being investigated on charges of divulging state secrets.

Ink, paper and printing presses were for the most part still controlled by the Soviet government and the Communist Party, with progressive and independent publications at the bottom of the priority list for access to these resources. While all publications were subject to shortages, the independent press was particularly hampered. Paper became a big black-market commodity. Editors of independent publications from all over the Soviet Union, including distant Siberian Kuzbass, sent their material thousands of miles to the Baltic states for printing -- after they had managed to scrounge enough paper. Meanwhile, back home in Novokuznetsk, the typography plant manager reserved his premises for the Party. This example shows how far the independent press had come -- and still had to go.

Publishers and distributors of unofficial publications continued to be routinely harassed. Printers, editors, writers and distributors of samizdat in Kuibishev, Leningrad, Moscow and Gorky (RSFSR), Kiev and Khabarovsk (Ukraine), Minsk (Belorussia) and various other parts of the Soviet Union were subjected to searches, detentions, fines and administrative arrests. When they were charged with a crime, it was frequently for unauthorized peddling. The publications involved were routinely confiscated, resulting in significant monetary loss, since these publications frequently operated on shoestring budgets. There was no clear explanation for this repressive activity in the midst of positive policy reform, except that it reflected a breakdown of authority and the existence of resistance to reform among some local officials charged with implementation.

Finally, states of emergency in various regions of the Soviet Union gave legal sanction to restrictions on expression (see State of Emergency, infra).

Freedom of Assembly

Freedom of assembly improved dramatically in 1990. Although the flawed July 1988 law on demonstrations was still on the books, it seemed to be honored largely in the breach. Thousands of demonstrations took place, varying widely in size, crowd composition and stated purpose. A few examples show their immense diversity: a public campaign, including demonstrations, forced Soviet authorities to move their nuclear test site from Semipalatinsk (Kazakhstan) to Novaya Zemlya in the Arctic; irate smokers in Chelyabinsk protested the dearth of cigarettes; and Ukrainians and others demonstrated to show support for the Lithuanian declaration of independence.

For the most part, demonstrations proceeded unhindered by the authorities. However, it should be noted that some Soviet activists were subjected to heavy fines and administrative arrest for organizing "unsanctioned" meetings, not only in major cities such as Moscow but also in such places as Omsk, Ufa and Voronezh in the RSFSR and Chernovtsi, Zaporozhe and Drogobich in the Ukraine.

States of emergency, in effect at year's end in over a dozen areas of the USSR, imposed severe restrictions on freedom of association and assembly, incuding curfews and bans on public meetings. In Azerbaidzhan, public assemblies were outlawed in connection with the state of emergency first declared in January. A similar ban was announced for parts of Kirgizia after violence erupted during the summer. Other areas under states of emergency were subjected to such bans as well. In two republics, Moldavia and Kazakhstan, where republic authorities feared public unrest, bans on public assemblies were announced even though no state of emergency was in effect. Large demonstrations in these two republics proceeded in peaceful defiance of official bans. In April, President Gorbachev attempted to curtail demonstrations in the center of Moscow by passing a presidential decree forbidding the liberal Moscow City Council from issuing demonstration permits. He transferred this power to the USSR Council of Ministers, a more conservative body firmly under his control. In September, this decree was declared unconstitutional by the Committee on Constitutional Supervision. Its fate remained unclear at the end of 1990, although the Moscow Soviet continued to issue permits. Nevertheless, conflicts between the Moscow authorities and the central government over demonstrations continued. In November, the conservative USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium unsuccessfully attempted to ban counterdemonstrations in Moscow to the official Revolution Day parade. The demonstrations took place unhindered with the permission of the Moscow city authorities.

Freedom of Association

Thousands of diverse civic groups dotted the Soviet social landscape in 1990. A few typical types of new organizations included mass-based national rights groups such as the Popular Fronts that had sprung up in almost every Soviet republic; independent labor unions, including the potentially two-million-strong national Miners' Union; numerous environmental action groups, such as the "Green Front"; and "Memorial," a small but influential national alliance of independent groups for social justice, particularly for victims of Stalinism.

In October, a new law on public associations was passed by the Supreme Soviet and signed by President Gorbachev. The law treats as public associations such not-for-profit organizations as political parties, trade unions, artists' groups and charitable foundations. Like the laws on the press and religion, the public association law requires that an organization register to come within its terms. Properly registered public associations have the right to own property, to establish mass media and engage in publishing activity, and to act as juridical entities. Also like the religion and press laws, the implication of the association law is that associations not properly registered cannot engage in such activities. The law allows international as well as domestic organizations to register. Organizations can be refused registration only if they fail to comply with registration procedures, or if the purpose of the organization as stated in its by-laws is criminal (e.g., the violent overthrow of the government, or incitement of ethnic discord).

There were, of course, exceptions to the generally permissive approach to the right to associate, most notably the refusal of the Belorussian republican authorities to register the influential Belorussian Popular Front. The republic appeared to be waging a propaganda war against the Popular Front, falsely portraying it as an organization that preaches ethnic hatred to justify denying its registration under the new law. The Azerbaidzhan Popular Front operated under severe restrictions imposed by state authorities during the state of emergency. The state of emergency imposed in Osh, Kirgizia also forbade gatherings of more than three people.

The Supreme Soviet, in late October, was debating two alternative drafts of a new law on trade union rights. The labor unions claimed that they should have the right to veto the closure of any unprofitable enterprise and the dismissal of workers. The state authorities, fearful of the effect of such a law on labor productivity, delayed discussion of the issue. A "right to strike" law, passed in October 1989, was widely dubbed the "anti-strike" law due to its restrictive provisions.

Freedom of Religion

A huge increase in the number of places of worship for a wide variety of faiths, including Muslim, Russian Orthodox, Baptist and Catholic, occurred in 1990. Some of the chronic problems faced by Soviet religious believers, such as severe shortages of clergy and religious literature, were being addressed after many decades of official atheism. The import of materials from abroad was much easier. Religious groups were also being permitted to extend their activities to new areas, including hospital and other charitable work. Members of the clergy -- such as Russian Orthodox former political prisoner Father Gleb Yakunin -- were even elected to various republic parliaments.

In October, a new law on freedom of religion was passed by the Soviet Congress and signed by the President. The law is unequivocal in its support for religious freedom. It contains provisions on nondiscrimination and separation of church and state. Religious education is expressly permitted, and religious organizations are given rights as legal entities to own property, hire workers, etc. Religious organizations are tax exempt, although they must contribute to the social insurance fund for the benefit of their employees.

The major flaw in the law is the requirement of registration. Informal societies of believers need not register, but the law implies that any organization that wants to conduct business as a legal entity must register with the regional or city council. No criteria are given for approving a registration request, although rejection may be appealed according to the law on appeals (see The Judicial System, supra). The law allows republics to draft their own registration procedures, raising the possibility that some repressive republic legislatures might pass restrictive procedures. However, reformist legislatures are free to establish pro forma registration criteria that every organization could meet. The new RSFSR law, for example, states that registration can be denied only for failure to follow the registration procedure laid down in the law.

The All-Union law does not make clear what legal rights distinguish a registered organization from a nonregistered one. For example, can a nonregistered "religious society," an entity envisioned by the legislation, buy and sell property under its own name? Presumably not, but the law does not state this. Could its individual members buy and sell property in their own names, even though the activity is clearly for the sole benefit of the society?

Regardless of how well the new law protects religious freedom or erects a barrier between church and state, conflicts continued among different faiths over authority, resources and places of worship. These conflicts have inhibited religious freedom in the past. The most notable of these disputes was in the Ukraine, where the Ukrainian Orthodox Church (allied with the Russian Orthodox Church) was battling the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church and the Ukrainian Catholic Church for use and ownership of church buildings.

Elections

Multicandidate elections occurred on the national, republic and local levels in 1990. Although Communist Party candidates almost always commanded the preponderance of resources -- particularly access to media outlets and campaign staff -- non-Party candidates won in many cases.

For example, in Moscow, Leningrad and Kiev, non-Party liberals were swept into office; they later took control of the city councils. The maverick former Moscow Party chief Boris Yeltsin was elected President of the RSFSR. Traditional Party bosses lost out to non-Party activists in numerous other parts of the RSFSR.

In Azerbaidzhan, Belorussia and the Central Asian republics, the Communist Party retained control of the legislatures. In Georgia, Armenia, Moldavia and the Baltics, non-Communists dominated the legislature. In the Ukraine, the non-Communists became the dominant political force, in effect if not in numbers.

Article 6 of the USSR Constitution, which proclaimed the leading role of the Communist Party in all facets of life, was abolished in 1990. A de facto multiparty system began developing in many parts of the country. In Soviet Georgia, 31 parties competed for seats in the republican congress. In Moscow, dozens of new political parties, albeit often of marginal power, sprang up. In the Baltic republics and elsewhere, "popular front" organizations became de facto political parties, fielding candidates for republic office. The law on public associations gave central government approval to a multiparty system by recognizing political parties as legal entities.

Election observers reported that in the 1990 elections irregularities were present in regions where the Communists triumphed as well as where they failed. In at least two republics, Azerbaidzhan and Tadzhikistan, elections were held during states of emergency. Interior Ministry troops were present in large numbers, a midnight to 5:00 a.m. curfew was in effect, and free expression was curtailed. In Azerbaidzhan, the military commandant tried to ban foreign and domestic election observers. Despite what appeared to be great popular support, the opposition Popular Front did very poorly in Azerbaidzhan. Election abuses were reported by Communists and non-Communists alike.

Freedom of Internal Movement

Freedom of movement inside the Soviet Union continued to be hampered by the residence registration system that requires official authorization to live in any particular location or to permanently resettle. In October, the USSR Committee on Constitutional Supervision criticized this system, but stopped short of declaring it unconstitutional.

Ethnic minorities, in many cases displaced from traditional homelands by prior Soviet official policy and practice, continued to claim a right to live in historic territories. The government, while beginning to allow these groups cultural autonomy, was slow to permit return -- or actively hindered return -- to their areas of origin. For example, the Soviet German population, exiled to Central Asia under Stalin, attempted to return to its historic homeland along the Volga river, but the residence registration system made this migration practically impossible. In addition, new Slavic settlers in the Volga area opposed the Germans' return. Many Germans gave up and decided to emigrate to Germany.

The Crimean Tatars, though officially told that they could return to the Crimea, were not able to do so because of land and housing shortages and the resistance of the local population. Government plans to make housing available to them in the Crimea were put on hold, and disputes arose over squatters.

The Meskhetian Turks, a small group expelled by Stalin in 1944 from their historic homeland in Meskhetia, Georgia, were the targets of a pogrom during the summer in Fergana, Uzbekistan. Once again they were forced to flee from their homes. Some 40,000 Meskhetian Turks found refuge in Azerbaidzhan, with thousands more resettled in the RSFSR. Zviad Gamsakhurdia, the newly elected President of Georgia, spoke out against their return to that republic.

By 1990, as many as one million Soviet "internal refugees" had fled their homes due to civil unrest or natural disasters. Aside from an initial paltry payment, the Soviet government took no responsibility for their welfare -- saying that they were the concern of the republic governments. Because the central government still controlled the majority of resources, and maintained a registration system that dictated where refugees could permissibly resettle, it had a special responsibility to these refugees. In areas like Armenia and Azerbaidzhan, internal refugees were one of the largest problems confronting the government and society.

Freedom of Foreign Travel

The opportunity for foreign travel was one of the most visible signs of reform in the Soviet Union. Restrictions eased substantially, although the central government still required its citizens to have an invitation from a person living in the country of destination. The difficulty of converting the Soviet ruble to foreign currency kept foreign travel prohibitive for many Soviets. The government would only exchange a small amount of dollars for rubles, so that only those Soviets who could rely on friends or relatives in foreign countries for basic living expenses, or those who could buy hard currency on the black market, could afford to travel abroad. Obtaining airline tickets was also very difficult. For example, the government announced a severe curtailment of the number of tickets to the United States that it would sell for rubles to 72 per week, including for tourists and emigres. Even before this restriction, a large black market in airline tickets had sprung up. The government also announced plans to restrict the sale of train tickets abroad to those who could pay in hard currency, or perhaps in the currency of the destination country. Similar plans were also announced and then abandoned for plane tickets; the government's policy remained uncertain at year's end.

Unfortunately, the new opportunities for Soviets to travel abroad were not accompanied by any significant improvements in the ability of foreigners to travel inside the Soviet Union. The government still closed many areas to foreigners for reasons of national security. In practice, over 80 percent of Soviet land area was closed. In addition, states of emergency in 1990 included bans on travel by foreigners to the affected areas. While it had become possible for foreigners to stay in the homes of their Soviet friends, the procedure for arranging personal invitations was extremely cumbersome and time-consuming. As before, itineraries had to be approved in advance, and visas were usually granted only at the last minute.

Freedom to Emigrate

Restrictions on emigration eased substantially, although the long-awaited law on the right to emigrate was not enacted. Comments by KGB officials in December suggested that they, at least, were opposed to unrestricted emigration. They warned of the danger to the Soviet economy of a "brain drain" caused by emigration of educated people. A new draft of the emigration law, published in October, allows restrictions on travel and emigration for people who possess state secrets, without defining what constitutes a state secret. One variation of the draft limits the duration of the restriction to ten years from the time of exposure to the secret.

By far the largest group of emigres continued to be Jews bound for Israel or the United States. As of November 30, some 146,436 Jews had emigrated to Israel in 1990, and 2,956 to the United States. In total, approximately 300,000 people left the Soviet Union in the first nine months of 1990, the largest non-Jewish groups being Germans (108,991), Greeks (10,961), and Armenians (6,107).

Ethnic Tensions

The multinational Soviet state long claimed that it granted special legal rights to various nationalities and ethnic groups in the Soviet Union. These rights, often observed more in the breach than in practice, included education in national languages, facilities for preserving unique cultural heritages, and the opportunity to use national languages in workplaces, courtrooms and the like.

In reality, many of these rights were vitiated by the long-standing official Soviet practice of Russification. Members of the over 100 national and ethnic groups in the Soviet Union often felt affronted by Russification, which they viewed as a violation of cultural and other national rights. Hundreds of national rights activists are known to have suffered long years of imprisonment for their nonviolent advocacy.

Due to greater freedom of speech, press and assembly under glasnost, dozens of national and ethnic groups in the Soviet Union began to voice their grievances. In most non-Russian republics, the titular nationalities passed new laws requiring official use of their language, with various requirements that Russians and other members of nontitular nationalities learn these languages within a specified time period.

Such laws, and the rise to local political power of some activists seen as espousing extremist nationalist views, gave rise to fear among members of nontitular nationalities that they would face discrimination or worse. Others, noting instances of interethnic conflict in various parts of the Soviet Union, moved to their ethnic group's titular republic, even though in many cases, their families had not lived there for generations. Taken together, these reactions produced an atmosphere rife with fear, intolerance and potential violence.

The year 1990 saw an intensification of these trends among dozens of national and ethnic groups in the Soviet Union. In the Baltic states, for example, national tensions increased, due in part to the imposition of strict new language laws, which the Russian minority in Estonia found particularly offensive.

Even inside the giant RSFSR, the titular nationalities in various autonomous republics declared sovereignty in 1990 in an effort to assert their national rights. Such assertions angered members of the nontitular nationalities living in their midst.

In Moldavia, a strong drive among the Moldavian majority for enhanced national rights produced a backlash among the 300,000-member Russian-Ukrainian enclave on the Dniestr River and among the 150,000-member Christian Turkish group, the Gagauz. Faced with what these groups perceived as discrimination by the Moldavian republic government, these two groups proclaimed sovereignty -- a proclamation which the republic government declared illegal. Tensions reached such a height that six people were killed in violent clashes between troops and Russian nationalists in November, near Dubossary on the Dniestr River.

The increased hostility among ethnic groups of all kinds in the Soviet Union raised concerns about an increase in anti-Semitism, long a particularly serious manisfestation of interethnic discord. On the one hand, conditions for Jews were improving. New Jewish cultural centers were being built, Jews were allowed to emigrate freely, and the problem of anti-Semitism was being addressed more openly in Soviet society. Yet anti-Semitic acts continued, and there was still a widespread perception that these acts were orchestrated with some official complicity, if not at the highest levels of central government power, then at the local level.

An example of these contradictory signals can be found in the prosecution and conviction in 1990 of Konstantin Smirnov-Ostashvili for leading a group that disrupted a writers' meeting by shouting anti-Semitic threats. It was the first prosecution in the Soviet Union for anti-Semitic behavior, and in that sense it was a positive development. However, there were clear signs that Ostashvili's actions were officially supported, and that official efforts were made first to obstruct the prosecution and then to limit it to Ostashvili alone.

States of Emergency

In April, the USSR Congress passed and the President signed a new law governing states of emergency. It defines a state of emergency as a "temporary measure...[to] ensur[e] the safety of USSR citizens during natural disasters..., and also during large-scale disturbances." The law requires that states of emergency be declared only by the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of a union republic or by the USSR Supreme Soviet by a two-thirds vote of all its members. (Presumably autonomous republics can declare states of emergency as well, since elsewhere in the law they are given authority to lift a state of emergency that they declared.)

The law allows the suspension of most civil liberties. Censorship may be introduced, meetings and demonstrations may be prohibited, house arrest may be imposed for no stated reason, compulsory labor may be ordered, a curfew may be established, and political parties and other organizations may be suspended. The government entity that declares the state of emergency is given complete power over subordinate government entities.

Under a state of emergency, administrative and criminal penalties can be imposed for a variety of extremely vague "offenses," including disseminating "provocative rumors," the "active hindering of citizens and officials in the exercise of their lawful rights and the performance of their duties," and "any other actions of this sort that violate public order or the tranquility of citizens." The military or the internal affairs organs are authorized to handle such cases. The USSR Supreme Soviet may change the jurisdiction over any civil or criminal case pending in the affected area.

Troops may be introduced "in exceptional cases"; no other criteria are spelled out in the law. The President or the USSR Supreme Soviet has authority to send in troops.

Pursuant to the reporting requirements of Article 4(3) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the state of emergency law requires that the Soviet Union notify the United Nations whenever a state of emergency is declared. In 1990, the Soviet Union notified the UN about states of emergency imposed in Nagorno-Karabakh, Baku and other parts of Azerbaidzhan in January, and about a state of emergency imposed in Dushanbe in March. Through the end of 1990, Soviet authorities had not yet notified the UN about any of the other states of emergency that had been imposed.

As of the end of November, there were twelve areas where states of emergency were in force: four in Azerbaidzhan, three in Armenia, and one each in Georgia, Tadzhikistan, Uzbekistan, Kirgizia and Moldavia. In each area, several of the following were implemented: bans on public demonstrations and meetings, restrictions on public organizations, restrictions on the media, administrative detention, and the searching of vehicles and people. A reinforced Soviet troop presence was evident in Moldavia, Azerbaidzhan, Kirgizia, Uzbekistan and Tadzhikistan.

Although states of emergency are supposed to be "temporary," in Azerbaidzhan and Tadzhikistan they had been in effect for almost a year by the end of 1990.

Self-Determination

Declarations of "sovereignty" or "independence" by republics and other territorial units resulted in two cases of especially harsh responses from governmental authorities. The central government responded to Lithuania's declaration of independence (the first by any entity in the Soviet Union) with an economic embargo and shows of heightened military activity, including military takeovers of the procuracy and some publishing houses that printed independent newspapers. The takeover took place with unnecessary violence against civilians, disrupted publishing and challenged civilian rule. In Moldavia, the Russian settlements on the Dniestr river and the small Christian Turkic Gagauz community in the south declared their independence and held elections for new governmental bodies. In response, the Moldavian government declared a state of emergency in the Gagauz areas. Central government troops were called in, and many civil liberties were suspended.

Violent Clashes

Violent clashes were probably the clearest expression of social, political and economic dislocations in Central Asia and the Caucasus. According to official Soviet statistics, a total of at least 900 people died in interethnic violence in 1989 and 1990. According to unofficial information received from local activists by Helsinki Watch, the death toll from violence in Osh alone was over 1,000.

In 1990, violence broke out in Armenia, Azerbaidzhan, Uzbekistan, Tadzhikistan, Kirgizia, Moldavia and the Russian Republic. The response of the Soviet and republic governments to these events was generally erratic, defensive and unhelpful. In most cases, the central government appeared more concerned with protecting government property than protecting the lives of citizens, and in some cases it appeared that the governmental response was dictated more by political considerations than by the desire to minimize bloodshed.

The introduction of Soviet troops in Baku, the capital of Azerbaidzhan, for example, was ostensibly to protect the lives of Armenians who had been the subject of violent attacks in the days preceding the troop deployment. Yet Soviet troops stationed in Baku did nothing to assist the Armenians during the violent attacks; the declaration of a state of emergency in Baku and the introduction of soldiers took place three days after the attacks on Armenians had largely subsided. Defense Minister Dmitri Yazov later voiced what was probably the primary justification for sending in Soviet troops: to prevent the Azerbaidzhani Popular Front, the most popular political group in Azerbaidzhan, from seizing power from the Communists. The Popular Front had been negotiating with the Communists and had taken control of some governmental structures nonviolently. Elections to a new Azerbaidzhani parliament had been scheduled for March, and the Popular Front looked as if it would win a commanding majority in a free election. In addition to scuttling this political process, Soviet troops killed numerous civilians. Eleven months later, after the vast majority of Armenians had fled Baku, the state of emergency remained in force with a 1:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. curfew, censorship and other restrictions on civil liberties.

The armed conflict between Armenia and Azerbaidzhan over the territorial enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh continued in 1990. The new Armenian President, Levon Ter-Petrossian took a new stance on this protracted conflict in 1990, calling for negotiations with the Azerbaidzhani leadership, but this did not succeed in stopping the bloodshed.

A tragic new development for 1990 was the emergence of vigilante armies in Armenia, with an estimated membership of 10,000. Shortly after Ter-Petrossyan's election, six people, including an Armenian parliamentarian, were killed by the Armenian National Army. Ter-Petrossian moved at once against the dozen vigilante militias. At his request, the Armenian National Army leaders surrendered their weapons and called upon their followers to do the same. Unfortunately, these actions have not eliminated the problem.

The Soviet government repeatedly denied foreign journalists immediate access to the scenes of civil unrest, and sometimes prevented Soviet journalists from releasing their material. Local governments sometimes denied official investigative commissions access to crucial information and prevented unofficial groups from making public their views on these violent incidents.

Political Murders

The deaths in mysterious circumstances of at least five nonviolent political, religious or national rights activists in 1990 were cause for alarm. Noted Russian Orthodox priest Father Aleksandr Men was brutally murdered in his parish outside Moscow. An investigation by the military procurator was begun. In late August, three members of the Estonian National Independence Party (ENIP) were killed in a car accident, and several days later, a car chased and nearly ran down another ENIP activist. An investigation of the incidents was also initiated. In Azerbaidzhan, the head of the Popular Front's Electoral Committee was killed shortly before congressional elections began. While Soviet governmental or KGB involvement cannot be proven in any way, neither can it be totally discounted in light of official conduct in the not-so-distant past.

Capital Punishment

Although there was discussion about abolishing the death penalty, it remained in force and continued to be used to punish violent and nonviolent, including economic, crimes. Draft legislation would reduce the number of crimes punishable by death from eighteen to six. In 1990, a Soviet government official reported some death penalty statistics that, when interpolated, indicate 300 executions per year. The exact number is a state secret.

Political Prisoners

Unfortunately, 1990 did not allow one yet to consign the issue of Soviet political prisoners to history. Cronid Lubarsky, a veteran chronicler of Soviet human rights abuses, documented 57 political prisoner cases, with 21 possible others for which more information was needed. These cases included prosecutions for slandering the President, anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda, illegally crossing the border, and hooliganism. The activity punished included criticism of the government and the President, peaceful opposition political activity, and attempts to emigrate. There were 21 additional prisoners being held for conscientious objection or army desertion, with six others for which more information was needed.2

Some of these political prisoners had been imprisoned for many years. Valerii Ianin had been incarcerated for 11 years for attempting to flee to Turkey. Vladimir Chokhisam had been incarcerated in a psychiatric hospital for 10 years for participating in a Human Rights Day meeting and for tearing down official slogans. Victor Chistkov had been incarcerated for 11 years in psychiatric hospitals (he became mentally ill after his incarceration) for attempting to flee to the United States. After a lengthy public campaign, one veteran Russian prisoner jailed after seeking to emigrate, Mikhail Kazachkov, was released from labor camp in November after 15 years in prison.

Many political prisoners, however, are new cases. Eighteen of the 57 noted above were arrested in 1990. For example, 12 were active in the Azerbaidzhani opposition and arrested in the aftermath of the state of emergency in January. In December, three of the Azerbaidzhani cases were dropped, and two others suspended after the accused were elected to the Azerbaidzhani Congress.

Some of these new cases are reflective of republic-level opposition to political reform. For example, in Turkmenia, Kurbanberdi Karabalakov, a member of the opposition political group "Democratic Platform," was involuntarily confined in a psychiatric hospital in October. Sherali Nurmuradov, leader of the Turkmenia Popular Front, was sentenced in 1990 to seven years in prison on fabricated charges of fraud.

A disturbing new trend in state suppression of dissent in those republics marked by civil unrest was the subjection of nationalist leaders -- most of whom were nonviolent -- to lengthy terms of pretrial detention on vague charges such as membership in an organization that violates public order. For example, many members of the Azerbaidzhan Popular Front reportedly were jailed in January and spent the remainder of the year in custody on charges of membership in such an organization. Armenian activist Arkady Manucharov spent 15 months in pretrial detention before being released in May.

A presidential decree issued in August rehabilitated en masse "all victims of political repressions from the 1920s to the 1950s." The RSFSR parliament rejected Sergei Kovalev's proposal to rehabilitate all political prisoners since 1917, suggesting that official repentance for abuses was still limited to the Stalin era. In addition, Soviet human rights advocates commented that a blanket rehabilitation has less meaning to the victims and their families than a case-by-case exoneration.

Several prominent exiled intellectuals had their citizenship restored by decree, including Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, Vladimir Voinovich and Yuri Orlov.

Prison and Labor Camp Conditions

As for conditions in the gulag, even the Ministry of Internal Affairs (MVD), which oversees the labor camp complex, stated its intention to improve lamentable conditions. One hopeful sign of MVD intentions was the granting of permission to Valery Abramkin's nongovernmental Prison Project to inspect gulag facilities. Reports of camp brutality, such as the severe beating in May of Baptist prisoner Anatoly Matviyenko, still surfaced.

The MVD faced scrutiny from former political prisoner Sergei Kovalev in his new capacity as Chairman of the RSFSR Human Rights Committee. During a gulag inspection tour, Kovalev visited the labor camp in which he himself had been a prisoner.

Psychiatric Abuse

Psychiatric abuse continued in the Soviet Union. Although Soviet officials loudly claimed to be reforming the psychiatric system, the Soviet psychiatric establishment in fact showed little sign of wanting to reform. The leadership of Soviet psychiatry was still the same cast of characters that brought the world the brazen distortion of its medical science to punish dissent. Many psychiatric institutions where abuse was common were still managed by the same doctors as before. The only positive note in terms of personnel was the retirement of Georgy Morozov, formerly head of the Serbsky Institute.

The drugs sulfazine and atropine, banned in the United States because of their questionable benefits and severe adverse side effects, were still used in the Soviet Union in 1990, despite an "official ban" by the Ministry of Health during the summer of 1989.

Peter Reddaway of George Washington University noted that while many political prisoners who had been victims of psychiatric abuse were released, there were still almost certainly a number of unknown victims held against their will in psychiatric hospitals in 1990. In addition, people who had been released from mental hospitals found it extremely hard to lead normal lives because it was still difficult to obtain legal and psychiatric rehabilitation after treatment in a mental hospital.

Some in the criminal justice system continued to associate dissent with mental illness. A pervasive problem was that of Soviet citizens who had complained about living or working conditions and then were punished in mental hospitals. One such victim, R. Shakin, was forcibly hospitalized five times in the past after exposing administrative abuses in the mine where he worked. It was only in March 1990 that he was reexamined at the instigation of the Independent Psychiatric Association and found to be completely healthy. In 1990 in at least two cases, those of Gennady Smirnov and Valeria Novodvorskaya, Soviet citizens were arrested for slandering the President and immediately detained for psychiatric observation. Novodvorskaya was later found sane and released. Smirnov's fate was not known at year's end.

Mistreatment of Army Recruits

A human rights issue that emerged prominently in the public consciousness for the first time in 1990 was the mistreatment of soldiers in the Soviet army. Reports from Shchit, an unofficial organization advocating military reform, and from the Committee of Soldiers' Mothers, another unofficial group, claimed that 15,000 members of the armed forces had suffered noncombat deaths in the previous four to five years. This number was repeated in a number of well known Soviet publications. The causes of death included intentional mistreatment, negligence and suicide. Numerous cases of intimidation and hazing of new recruits were reported in 1990. In addition, reports were rife of discrimination and harassment based on national origin. A decree issued by President Gorbachev did not address this mistreatment directly, but urged other governmental bodies to introduce a universal insurance system to be funded by the Defense Ministry and to consider adopting a procedure for soldiers to challenge unlawful acts of their superiors.

US Policy

The Bush administration, and especially the Department of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, must be credited for efforts to regularize the human rights dialogue with the Soviet Union by increasing governmental contacts at the legislative, executive and judicial levels. Part of this dialogue has been an effort to educate Soviet officials about human rights and the rule of law. Contacts were established between American and Soviet legislators, judges, and civil and criminal justice officials. The program is unprecedented in the level and continuity of the dialogue, and reflects the administration's recognition of the importance of legal reform in securing individual rights in the Soviet Union. The focus of this program has been primarily all-Union governmental institutions located in European Russia. The program would be enhanced if expanded to all parts of the Soviet Union and all levels of government.

The Human Rights Department also promoted humanitarian exchanges with the Soviet Union touching on human rights issues. Informational exchanges were organized on the subject of social programs for the elderly and the disabled. Specific subjects included providing physical access to public places, the construction of wheelchairs, and institutionalization of disabled children.

The Bush administration also deserves credit for its continued work in some areas of traditional human rights concern. One success was the broad-brush yet significant affirmation of various human rights principles within the so-called Helsinki process, formally the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE).3 The Copenhagen Document signed in June contains, on paper at least, a strong affirmance of the right to representative government, freedom of expression, religion and association, among other human rights, and of the rule of law as a means for securing those rights. The Document, while nonbinding, will provide a basis for additional moral and diplomatic suasion to ensure the protection of human rights in the Soviet Union and all signatory countries. Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs Richard Schifter also suggested using the CSCE process as a forum for the discussion and resolution of interethnic disputes, and he reported that there was Soviet interest in this idea.

The Bush administration, in its approach to human rights in 1990, faced certain problems that are endemic to all attempts to deal with the Soviet Union at this time. The dizzying pace and scope of political and social change in the Soviet Union has bewildered both nongovernmental and governmental experts. When power was effectively concentrated in a very few hands, the task of monitoring human rights and establishing responsibility for abuses was a relatively easy one. Now, with the increasing devolution of power to local entities, a myriad of new social and political groups, and a bewildering number of new laws and draft laws in various stages of discussion and approval, it is more difficult to track human rights abuses and to determine where the responsibility lies.

Like its influence on the American public, "Gorbymania" has also affected the Bush administration which, in its support for the Gorbachev reform program, has closely identified the man with the reforms. The reasons for this are understandable. Gorbachev's strong personality and his role in launching the process of reform in the Soviet Union are key. Moreover, the complexity of the huge multiethnic Soviet Union, and the tradition of dealing with a strong, centralized Soviet government, make it easier and simpler to credit Gorbachev alone for reform. Finally, the specter of the fragmentation of the Soviet Union, long considered one of the world's most powerful countries, is a frightening one with potentially disastrous consequences for human rights and international stability. Secretary Baker voiced such concern in December when he said, "instability in the Soviet Union is definitely not...in the interests of the United States." It is thus a natural reaction for the US and other governments to embrace President Gorbachev as the only Soviet leader who holds out some promise of stable progress.

Yet, the failure to envision what might lie beyond Gorbachev, and the central government and Communist Party power structure upon which he continues to rely, has adversely affected the US government's human rights policies. Fear of weakening Gorbachev and imperiling the US-Soviet dialogue appears to lie behind the Bush administration's reluctance publicly to criticize the Soviet Union for human rights abuses.

For example, the cool US government attitude toward those seeking Lithuanian independence, even when their rights were being violated, was dictated by the conviction that gains in US-Soviet relations should not be risked. On May 23, Secretary Baker stated: "Soviet policies, as we have seen in Lithuania, may disturb us deeply, offending our fundamental values. Yet, as the President has made clear, there is too much at stake in the United States-Soviet relationship to dismiss cavalierly or imprudently the potential for progress." Because of this view, the administration did not present a strong public response to the human rights violations that took place at the hands of the Soviet army in Lithuania, such as the occupation of the Communist Party press building and the suppression of some newspapers, the Soviet army's violent seizure of nonviolent Lithuanian deserters who had sought refuge in a Red Cross hospital, the Soviet army's violent takeover of the procuracy building which resulted in injuries to civilians, and two incidents of Soviet army beatings of peaceful protestors.

The Moscow-centric view of the nation has also meant that too little energy and attention has been focused on events in the non-Russian republics and the non-Russian part of the Russian Republic, and on the behavior of republic and local government officials.

For example, US officials reacted mildly to the introduction of Soviet troops in Baku, Azerbaidzhan, and the resultant killing of many civilians, characterizing it as the embattled central government trying to control interethnic violence. With the first announcement of the troop action, State Department spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler stated: "We understand the need to establish order in a situation where order has broken down and where both Armenians and Azerbaidzhanis are being killed." Relying heavily on Soviet press accounts of the event, the administration took at face value the Kremlin's claim that armed forces were needed to protect the Armenian population of Baku from further reprisals. In fact, the troops were introduced too late to save the Armenian population, as even the Armenian government acknowledged at the time. As of January 24, eight days after the troops moved in, there had been no high-level communication on the subject between the United States and the Soviet Union. Hampered by a lack of independent information, the administration reacted to the Azerbaidzhan action with a somewhat reflexive statement of support for Gorbachev.

By contrast, conflicting views about the introduction of Soviet troops in Azerbaidzhan emerged from the Soviet Union. The Soviet Minister of Defense announced that the purpose of sending Soviet troops to Azerbaidzhan was to prevent a takeover of the Azerbaidzhani government by the Popular Front, by then the dominant political force in the republic and poised to win a majority in upcoming elections to the republic congress. Later, the Foreign Minister and the Soviet Ambassador to the United States stated that the purpose was to restore order and maintain peace. The administration, while acknowledging that the Defense Minister's remarks were "disturbing," gave more credence to those of the Foreign Minister, and did not publicly condemn the Soviets. One month after Soviet troops had moved on Baku, and the Western press had reported the number of civilian casualties, the Bush administration's stance was still conciliatory. On February 21 Assistant Secretary Schifter expressed the view that the primary reason for the late arrival of Soviet troops to the area was a cumbersome decision-making process. Schifter stated that the Soviet central government was "confounded" by the problem of interethnic conflict, and genuinely wished to resolve it.

Officials in the State Department have acknowledged the problem of focusing mainly on the center, and attribute part of its cause to a shortage of resources and to lack of access. The difficulty of expanding the US consular presence beyond Moscow and Leningrad, and the travel restrictions still placed on US officials by the Soviets, are indeed impediments to gathering information in the Soviet Union.

A greater impediment, however, may be one established by the administration itself, by placing undue emphasis on supporting the Gorbachev government. The United States has placed limits on contacts with republic officials for fear of undermining Gorbachev. The National Security Council (NSC) issued a classified directive in 1990 that prohibits all US policy-making officials from direct contacts with republic officials without NSC approval. Pursuant to this directive, for example, a Deputy Assistant Secretary in the Treasury Department was prevented in late November from traveling to Lithuania at the Lithuanian government's invitation to discuss tax systems. Because contacts with the republics have been narrowed, available information about human rights in the country as a whole has been reduced.

Toward the end of 1990, the US administration began to expand its Soviet focus. Secretary Baker expressed a willingness to create contacts with non-Communists and other Republic-level officials. High-level meetings took place in the United States with officials from Lithuania, Armenia, Kazakhstan and the RSFSR. But while the Lithuanian President had a brief meeting with President Bush, the Armenian President did not. One State Department official ascribed the difference in treatment to an administration policy that denies the highest level access to all but representatives of the Baltic Republics, whose incorporation into the Soviet Union the United States has never recognized.

The US government still pursued its efforts in traditional areas of human rights concern. State Department officials indicated that the Bush administration continued to raise political prisoner cases with the USSR foreign ministry in private working sessions. For cases considered clear-cut, the administration pressed for the prisoner's release. For cases about which there was some dispute, requests were made for more information, including the investigative record from the criminal proceeding. The case of Stepan Khmara, a Ukrainian People's Deputy who was recently stripped of his immunity and arrested for allegedly assaulting an Interior Ministry officer, was raised by Assistant Secretary Schifter with his Soviet counterparts during the December meeting between Secretary Baker and Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze. Yet the continued existence of several long-standing cases calls into question the efficacy of this exclusively private approach. Particularly with respect to those long-standing cases, some public pressure might be appropriate.

The government faced the same difficulties as nongovernmental groups in determining whether a criminal case represented a violation of human rights. Arrests during 1990 for incitement of interethnic discord typified this difficulty. For example, when the case of Mamed Gatami, an Azerbaidzhani nationalist leader, was raised with Soviet officials, they responded that he was being charged with incitement to riot. (Gatami was eventually released and his case dropped). But other cases did not appear at all on the State Department's prisoner list. For example, none of the Azerbaidzhanis cited by human rights monitors as arrested in 1990 for political reasons (see Political Prisoners, supra) were on the State Department list.

Assistant Secretary Schifter's office reported that it had raised the "slander of the president" law with Soviet officials. The State Department rightfully considers this law a violation of the right to free expression. The law and four cases in which it was known to have been applied were reportedly raised again by Schifter at the December Baker-Shevardnadze meeting.

Since 1974, the US government has linked the normalization of trade relations to emigration guarantees in the Soviet Union, relying on the Jackson-Vanik amendment in denying Most Favored Nation trading status to the Soviet Union. Freedom to emigrate from the Soviet Union has always been a high priority for US administrations, and it remained high on the Bush administration's list of human rights priorities for most of l990.

In late December, responding to pressure from the Soviet Union and Western allies and taking into account the considerable easing of emigration restrictions, President Bush announced a six-month waiver of the Jackson-Vanik restrictions. The purpose of the waiver was to ease severe food shortages in the USSR by providing credits to buy agricultural products.

Nevertheless, a new Soviet law on emigration remained stalled at the end of 1990, as it had been for more than a year. Although Jewish emigration quotas were so high that the National Conference on Soviet Jewry itself approved a temporary waiver of the Jackson-Vanik amendment, true freedom of emigration had not yet been incorporated into Soviet law. It is hoped that at the end of the six-month waiver period, the Bush administration will again examine Soviet emigration policy and practice with a critical eye before deciding on further trade concessions.

The administration's actions with regard to a visit of Soviet psychiatrists to the United States were unfortunate, in the view of Helsinki Watch. The Soviet delegation was invited to the United States to observe psychiatric hospitals after an American investigative mission visited the Soviet Union -- a precondition for the reacceptance of the Soviet Union into the World Psychiatric Association.

Bruce Gelb, Director of the United States Information Agency (USIA), which had agreed to underwrite some of the expenses of the Soviet delegation, asked Helsinki Watch to examine the roster of intended participants to identify any members that might have engaged in psychiatric abuse. Helsinki Watch had serious misgivings about a few of the participants, and communicated these in writing to Gelb, and to Assistant Secretary Schifter. These participants had been implicated in abuse, either directly or by employment in hospitals in which systematic abuses occurred. After receiving Helsinki Watch's comments, the USIA decided to withhold funding of the delegation, and the group's visit was postponed.

Assistant Secretary Schifter and the State Department's Bureau of Human Rights later expressed dismay at Helsinki Watch's "intervention" in a visit that clearly had the approval of at least that section of the State Department. Schifter did not address Helsinki Watch's criticism of doctors directly implicated in abuse but, rather, focused on those who had been indirectly associated with abuse.

In September, a different Soviet delegation of psychiatrists came to the United States, in place of those whose trip had been postponed in the spring. The new group was free of anyone implicated in the past abuse of psychiatry, although some apologists for the old system remained part of the delegation. A very busy schedule was planned by the National Institute of Mental Health without any opportunity for human rights groups to meet with the delegation.

State Department officials reported that the issue of anti-Semitism was raised by Secretary Baker at a February meeting with Foreign Minister Shevardnadze. Assistant Secretary Schifter stated in 1990 that anti-Semitism remains a problem that, though not officially sponsored "at the top level of government," is not officially condemned at the top either.

In a new area of concern, the Bush administration initiated a proposal for adding free elections to the CSCE human rights framework. The June Copenhagen Document included a requirement of free elections, the accountability of the executive to the electorate, and the separation of the state from any political party. Observers from the US Helsinki Commission issued useful public reports on the conduct of many of the congressional elections that occurred in the Soviet Union in 1990.

The Work of Helsinki Watch

The growing instability of the Soviet Union created new complications for Helsinki Watch's traditional human rights monitoring. It was often not clear whether new human rights violations were exceptions, holdovers from the past, or condoned by the system. If systemic, it was often not clear which part of the splintering system bore responsibility -- the central or a local government, or some semiautonomous unit of the bureaucracy.

With the continuing fragmentation of the Soviet Union, it became possible and necessary to expand human rights work to areas other than the traditional focal points of Moscow, Leningrad and Kiev. Helsinki Watch began an expanded program to explore human rights issues in the 15 Soviet republics, treating each republic as the separate territory that it may possibly become. Helsinki Watch investigated the Soviet and local governments' responses to violent clashes in various republics about which objective information had been scarce. It worked to overcome the Soviet government's habit of secrecy, particularly with regard to incidents of violence in the non-Russian republics. And it continued to urge greater openness with regard to travel within the Soviet Union and access to information, both by local civic groups and by Western journalists and activists.

Helsinki Watch began publication of a series of reports on human rights in each of the republics. It issued a report on Moldavia in March, describing the evolution of national consciousness in the republic and its human rights implications. The second report in this series, Conflict in the Soviet Union: The Untold Story of the Clashes in Kazakhstan, dealt with the Kazakhstan Republic, in particular the violent events of December 1986. An article that grew out of the Kazakhstan research appeared in the October 11, 1990 issue of the New York Review of Books. Missions and reports on Tadzhikistan, Uzbekistan, Azerbaidzhan and Armenia were in progress at year's end.

Helsinki Watch continued to appeal to the Soviet government to account for its behavior in the non-Russian republcs. It protested various central government actions in response to the Lithuanian independence drive, including the violent behavior of the Soviet army in several incidents, and the travel restrictions imposed to and from the republic.

Helsinki Watch also began to create a network of contacts with activists in the non-Russian republics. For example, it provided a public forum in the United States for these activists so that journalists, government officials and the interested public could better understand events in the entire Soviet Union. Helsinki Watch hosted public meetings with people such as: Yuri Butchenko, a Siberian labor activist from Kuzbas; Aleksejs Gvigorievs, a Latvian editor; Mekhdi Mamedov, a member of the Azerbaidzhan Popular Front; Rostislav Bratun, a Ukrainian People's Deputy; Rafael Kazaryan, then Deputy Chairman of the Armenian Supreme Soviet Presidium; Iurie Rosca, Vice President of the Moldavian Popular Front; Kazimiras Uoka, a Lithuanian labor activist and the new State Controller; Hambartsum Galstian, the Chief of Staff to the President of Armenia; Dzhangir Zeinally, a film maker who has documented unrest in his native Azerbaidzhan; and Andrei Makarov, a defense attorney involved in a number of ground-breaking cases.

As is the practice in all of Helsinki Watch's work, follow-up visits were made to areas that had been the subject of published reports. In November, Helsinki Watch representatives returned to Kazakhstan to disseminate the Kazakhstan report and assess local reaction to it. A mission to Moldavia was being planned for 1991. Such follow-up missions greatly increase Helsinki Watch's impact in the Soviet Union.

At the same time, Helsinki Watch continued its traditional work, publicly appealing on behalf of those prosecuted under the slander law and calling for the law's repeal. It also appealed on behalf of members of the independent press who were searched, detained or otherwise harassed in 1990, including the staff of the independent human rights publication Ekspress Khronika and the editor of Glasnost. In addition, appeals were made on behalf of those who were harassed in connection with peaceful political protest or activity, such as members of the Democratic Union who were detained on numerous occasions for holding unauthorized demonstrations.

Helsinki Watch also continued to monitor the cases of the remaining political prisoners in the Soviet Union, publicized their fate to the US government and media, and lobbied the Soviet government for their release. Among others, appeals were made on behalf of Sergei Kuznetsov, jailed for exposing official corruption and released in 1990; Aleksandr Goldovich and Bohdan Klimchak, two prisoners in the notorious Perm 35 prison (Klimchak was released in 1990); and Mikhail Kazachkov, falsely convicted after his attempt to emigrate and finally released in 1990. It also urged the rehabilitation of those unjustly convicted.

A Helsinki Watch newsletter on psychiatric abuse in the Soviet Union was issued in May. Despite certain legal reforms involving psychiatric internment, Helsinki Watch continued to put pressure on the Soviet government to conduct a thorough examination of past abuses and to investigate and halt any continuing abuses including the use of psychiatry for political purposes.

The publication of the newsletter on psychiatric abuse coincided with a proposed visit to the United States by a group of Soviet psychiatrists, a visit which, as noted above, was eventually postponed because several of the psychiatrists were implicated in past abuses. The information provided by Helsinki Watch about the delegation was the basis for a decision to postpone the visit until a more acceptable group of doctors could be found.

Helsinki Watch vigorously supported the creation of independent organizations in the Soviet Union that foster free expression. The emergence of these independent organizations was documented in a Helsinki Watch report published in February, entitled Nyeformaly: Civil Society in the USSR. Included in this report was an appendix listing names, addresses and telephone numbers of 71 particularly active organizations throughout the Soviet Union. Such a list, though incomplete, is invaluable for Western visitors seeking contact with members of the emerging civil society. The contact, in turn, can often serve as a form of protection from persecution by regressive elements in the government.

As another means of disseminating Helsinki Watch's work in the Soviet Union, efforts were made to increase contacts with Soviet journalists. One fruit of these new contacts, and a step toward greater openness in the Soviet Union, was an article describing Helsinki Watch's report on the December 1986 events in Kazakhstan that appeared in Soyuz, a new Izvestia weekly on nationality issues.

Although Helsinki Watch does not monitor the fairness of balloting on election day, it does closely examine human rights issues in the context of elections. Helsinki Watch released a newsletter examining trends relating to human rights before the March 1990 elections for the Congress of People's Deputies.

As Soviet society continued in its transitional phase, social dislocations became increasingly painful. The new problem of Soviet "internal refugees," estimated at around one million, was one manifestation of such dislocation. Helsinki Watch took testimony from refugees in the Meskhi Turkish, Armenian and Azerbaidzhani communities. An op-ed article by Helsinki Watch, "Refugees in the Soviet Union," appeared in the New York Times of June 24, 1990. Helsinki Watch is continuing to monitor the internal refugee problem.

Helsinki Watch also continued to monitor the plight of ethnic minorities displaced from their traditional homelands. It issued an appeal on behalf of Crimean Tatar activists who were mistreated and unjustly tried, and urged the Soviet government to allow the Crimean Tatars to return to the Crimea. The situation of Soviet Kurds was discussed in an article by Helsinki Watch that appeared in the October 11 issue of the New York Review of Books.

In early June, several Helsinki Watch representatives participated in the Annual Meeting of the International Helsinki Federation for Human Rights (IHF) in Moscow which brought together leading activists from 19 countries of East and West Europe. The meeting, one of the first independently organized international human rights meetings to take place in the Soviet Union, included two days of public human rights hearings at which representatives of dozens of activist groups from all over the Soviet Union testified about a wide range of human rights problems. Helsinki Watch representatives also participated in a number of official meetings with Soviets including Boris Yeltsin, President of the RSFSR; Sergei Stankevich, Deputy Mayor of Moscow; and Leonid Sizov, USSR Deputy Minister of Internal Affairs.

Helsinki Watch continues to be an active participant in scholarly conferences on issues relating to the Soviet Union, sponsored by organizations such as the American Association for the Advancement of Slavic Studies. It also continues to act as a clearinghouse of information on the Soviet Union for journalists, scholars and other human rights organizations.

2 The Moscow Helsinki Group, together with the human rights section of Memorial, released a list of 189 political prisoners, based on its research.

3 CSCE brought together all nations of Europe with the exception of Albania, plus Canada and the United States. These 35 nations were reduced to 34 in 1990 with the reunification of Germany.

TURKEY

Human Rights Developments

The human rights picture in Turkey grew worse during 1990, with increasing restrictions on freedom of expression, on the press, and on political activists. Torture also continued unabated.

Most torture takes place in the political sections of police headquarters during the initial interrogation of a suspect. Human rights activists and lawyers report, as they have for some years, that over 90 percent of political suspects are tortured, as are over 50 percent of people suspected of ordinary crimes. Torture in police stations includes suspending the victim for prolonged periods, applying electric shock, directing highly pressurized water at the victim, and falaka (beating the soles of the feet).

During 1990, Helsinki Watch received credible reports of seven deaths in detention under suspicious circumstances.4 In three of the cases, security forces alleged that the detainees had committed suicide. The seven were:

o Emine Yilmaz, 22, who was arrested in April on charges of using counterfeit German marks, died the evening of the day she was jailed. The Public Prosecutor opened an investigation, and the corpse was sent to the Istanbul Forensic Institute for analysis.

o Ali Akkan died in police custody in Antalya on May 6. He had been suspected of giving shelter to a member of an illegal organization. Authorities claimed that he committed suicide by jumping out the window of Antalya Police Headquarters. Akkan's family and the Human Rights Association have asked for an autopsy.

o Besir Algan, 36, a peasant who, according to Member of Parliament Fuat Atalay, had been taken into custody and then shot dead by security forces in the village of Budakli, in the province of Mardin, died on May 22.

o Serdar Cekic Abbasoglu, 23, a robbery suspect, was found dead in bed in Ankara Central Jail on June 4, following interrogation. The authorities claimed that there were no signs of blows on Abbasoglu's body, but 67 fellow detainees asserted that he had been bleeding from his nose and mouth, and that his bed was stained with blood on the day of his death.

o Ibrahim Ates, a robbery suspect, was detained on July 15. He was allegedly killed by being thrown from the fourth-floor balcony of a police station in Mersin ten days later. Police claimed the death was a suicide.

o Abdurrahim Tanribilir, from the Duzova village of Cizre, was, according to his mother, beaten at home and then detained on September 7. His body was returned on September 8. The authorities said that he had committed suicide.

o Yakup Aktas died in detention in the Interrogation Center at Mardin Gendarmery Regiment Commandership, one week after his detention on November 18. Security forces alleged that he had suffered a heart attack. His family reported a head wound and bruises on body.

Torture is not confined to adults. Some children under 18 (including some as young as 11 or 12) have allegedly been beaten by the police, after having been detained for such offenses as writing "No to war" on a public wall, demonstrating on May Day, fighting, and belonging to an illegal organization.

Nor is torture confined to police stations. In 1990, several credible reports alleged a resurgence of torture in prisons, largely in the form of mass beatings with truncheons or wooden sticks.

Political activists continue to be incarcerated. Some thousands of such prisoners, hundreds of whom have neither used nor advocated violence, are held in various prisons in Turkey. Some -- defendants in mass trials, mostly of left-wing organizations -- have been in custody since 1979 or 1980.

Turks' right to freedom of expression is violated daily. Freedom of the press is routinely restricted; at present, at least 34 journalists and editors are in prison for what they have written or published. Many are serving absurdly long sentences; one journalist received a sentence of 1,086 years, later reduced on appeal to 700 years. (No one will serve more than 36 years, the maximum time permitted by Turkish law.) While Turkish citizens are freer to voice their opinions and to criticize the government than they were during the period following the September 1980 military coup, they continue to risk harassment, torture, criminal charges and imprisonment for expressing their views. During 1990, scores of journalists were charged with offenses such as spreading separatist, communist or religious propaganda, insulting the president, insulting government officials or military personnel, or injuring Turkey's reputation while abroad -- all crimes contained in the Turkish Penal Code, which was taken from Mussolini's Italy in 1938. Dozens of issues of journals have been banned or confiscated, sometimes before reaching newsstands.

In April, the Council of Ministers issued a new order, Decree 413, which equipped the regional governor in southeastern Turkey with extraordinary powers to censor the press, exile people who are deemed "a danger to law and order," remove judges and public prosecutors, and suspend trade-union rights. Following this and other decrees issued later in April, an almost complete censorship was imposed on news from southeastern Turkey, where a guerrilla war is being waged by a separatist Kurdish organization, the Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK). Most news from that region is now based on information released by the regional governor's office. Journalists who try to cover Kurdish issues or investigate allegations of abuse on the part of security forces run a serious risk of criminal charges and prison sentences. Some have been expelled from towns in the southeast.

Publishing is still a hazardous profession in Turkey. During 1990, dozens of books were banned or confiscated, and in many cases, their authors were detained, charged and sometimes tried.

Freedom of association also encounters restrictions. Helsinki Watch has received reports of harassment experienced by more than twenty different associations during 1990. The harassment included raids on offices, prohibition of meetings, bans on organizations, and detention, interrogation, torture and trial of members. The organizations affected ranged from the Turkish Farmers' Association, the Nurses' Association, and the Association of Educators, to the Turkish Industrialists and Businessmen's Association. Criminal prosecutions were initiated for making anti-war statements, taking a poll on trade unionism, calling for early general elections, and being a communist organization.

Freedom of assembly was also frequently curtailed during 1990. Following Iraq's invasion of Kuwait and Turkey's support of US and UN actions against Iraq, many anti-war meetings in Turkey were banned or broken up, on grounds of "disturbing public order" or "shouting slogans and distributing illegal leaflets." At one such rally, 155 people were detained; most were released after a few hours. A rally of poets and writers to protest the imprisonment of people for their opinions was banned by the governor of Istanbul in June. A rally organized by 19 editors of left-wing reviews to protest the draconian Decree 413 was banned, and at a resulting press conference, all 19 editors were detained by the police. In addition, dozens of university students have been detained for varying periods for demonstrating on university issues or against war. Two students were shot and wounded by the police in September for taking part in an unauthorized anti-war demonstration; the police had opened fire on a group of about 1,000. One of the students was hospitalized for several days. The police also detained civil servants who scheduled a rally to protest their small salary increases, as well as political demonstrators protesting various government actions.

Human rights monitors fared badly in 1990. At least 23 members of various branches of the Human Rights Association (HRA) and 17 members of TAYAD (Association of Friends and Relatives of Detainees and Convicted Prisoners) were arrested, interrogated, tried, or sentenced during the year.5 At least one monitor, Ali Ozler, president of the Tunceli HRA branch, was convicted and given a six-year-and-eight-month prison sentence in October for "making separatist propaganda and helping the PKK." In addition, in November, the Gazientep HRA branch was closed down, and the Istanbul branch was raided and its documents, including membership lists, seized.

Political freedom continued to be restricted. Several parties that were banned following the September 1980 coup are still outlawed. The police continue to detain and arrest many people charged with membership in illegal communist organizations. In addition, a trial continues of two Communists who returned to Turkey in 1987 to establish the Turkish United Communist Party. Detained on their return, the two leaders spent two-and-a-half years in prison awaiting trial; after a 20-day hunger strike, they were finally released in May 1990. Meanwhile, meetings of the party have been banned, and the government has brought legal proceedings to declare the party illegal.

The Socialist Party, which was set up in 1988, was promptly banned, but later legalized by the Constitutional Court. Nonetheless, its officials and members have been arrested and tried for such offenses as "spreading separatist propaganda" and conducting anti-war demonstrations. Members of the Socialist Unity Party have also been detained.

In other actions, the mayor of Nusaybin was dismissed by the Interior Ministry in April for statements deemed to be in support of the PKK. The mayor of Canakkale was suspended in April for snubbing President Turgut Ozal.

The Kurdish minority in Turkey continues to suffer abuse. Caught between Turkish security forces and the separatist guerrillas of the PKK, Kurdish civilians are harassed, tortured and sometimes killed. The PKK has been waging a guerrilla war in southeast Turkey since 1984. About 2,000 have died in that time at the hands of security forces and the PKK, over a third of them villagers. The Turkish government's pattern of detention and torture of perceived political opponents is even more pronounced in southeastern Turkey than in the rest of the country. Village guards, who are charged by security forces with protecting their villages, have become targets of PKK attacks. The PKK also continues to inflict casualties on civilians.

In many villages, civilians refuse to serve as village guards, and then are forced by government forces to evacuate their villages with their families. Many thousands of such forced evacuations occurred in the southeast during 1990. In some cases, security forces have burned entire villages to force the occupants to abandon their homes and fields.

In addition, the Turkish government continues to deny the ethnic identity of the Kurdish minority by forbidding the use of the Kurdish language in official settings and by denying Kurds the rights to give their children Kurdish names, to celebrate Kurdish holidays, and to perform Kurdish songs and dances. Although in 1989 the government announced that families would be able to speak Kurdish when visiting relatives in prison, Helsinki Watch has received reports that Kurdish is still not allowed in some prisons. Lawyers also continue to report that they are not allowed to converse in Kurdish with clients, even when the client does not speak Turkish.

US Policy

The Bush administration has had no apparent impact on human rights in Turkey, despite the enumeration of many serious human rights violations in the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1989, issued in early 1990. Instead of minimizing ongoing human rights abuses while stressing Turkey's progress in human rights, as it did in 1986, 1987 and 1988, the 1989 report began by acknowledging that "continuing instances of torture were the principal human rights problem in 1989." The report cited allegations of deaths under torture and described the routine methods of torture used by police while suspects are held in incommunicado detention. However, it only vaguely alluded to the frequency with which suspects are tortured, stating that "[s]uspects in common and political crimes frequently appear to be tortured by the police during initial interrogations while held incommunicado," without explicitly referring to reports by lawyers that 90 percent of political suspects and 50 percent of common-crime suspects are tortured in detention. The report also described the inadequate response of the Turkish legal system to allegations of torture, the difficulty of obtaining a fair trial in Turkey, the serious restraints that continue to exist on freedom of expression, association and assembly, and the discrimination and criminal prosecutions directed against Kurds and others with Kurdish affiliations.

Despite its own catalogue of persistent abuses of human rights in Turkey, the Bush administration, like previous administrations, has ignored Section 502B of the Foreign Assistance Act, which prohibits military and other forms of assistance to a country that "engages in a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights." Turkey remains the third largest recipient of US aid, after Israel and Egypt. In fiscal year 1990, Turkey received $497,850,000 in military assistance and $14,264,000 in Economic Support Funds. For fiscal year 1991, Congress has earmarked $500 million for military aid, and the administration has requested $50 million in Economic Support Funds.6

Although Section 502B contains an exception to the ban on aid if the President submits a written statement to Congress explaining that "extraordinary circumstances exist warranting provision of such assistance," no administration has ever submitted a statement explaining the "extraordinary circumstances" that warrant continued provision of assistance to Turkey. This is more than an academic point, because an official expression of concern over human rights abuses in the context of the aid question would provide a powerful incentive for the Turkish government to curtail abuses.

Ambassador Morton Abramowitz, in his second year as US ambassador to Turkey, has referred in speeches given to Turkish groups to the need for Turkey to improve its human rights record. He has also made direct mention of "allegations of large-scale torture" and the "problem of incommunicado detention." However, a review of the ambassador's speeches, as well as of public State Department briefings on Turkey, fails to reveal any reference to the extent of torture, the methods used, or the deaths that have allegedly occurred as a result of torture. Nor has the ambassador spoken out on the incarceration of hundreds of political prisoners who have reportedly neither committed nor advocated violence; criticized the severe restrictions on freedom of expression in Turkey; or protested the Turks' treatment of its Kurdish minority, especially the forced evacuation of thousands of villagers for refusal to provide village guards for security forces. Although some of this information was contained in the country report, the ambassador has lessened its impact by failing to reinforce it in public statements. There is also no indication that the ambassador made any public statement criticizing the issuance of Decree 413, perhaps the major step backward in 1990. Instead, he has said that the Turkish "human rights situation has steadily improved."7

Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs Richard Schifter appears once again to have adopted a position that he had earlier abandoned, to the effect that torture is due to inadequate training of the police force, rather than to a lack of political will to end it. On February 21, Assistant Secretary Schifter told reporters at a State Department briefing that the Turkish government has made "efforts over a period of time to effect change" in this area, but that "an overhaul of the entire police force" was necessary. He did not address the lack of prosecution for torture.

Turkey, of course, is a strategic ally of the United States. For many years, it was seen as a bulwark against the Soviet Union and as an important listening post. However, following recent changes in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, Turkish government officials briefly feared that their country's importance to the United States and NATO had declined, and that US foreign assistance would diminish accordingly. Turkey's prompt response to the Gulf crisis in August reestablished its role as a crucial ally; Secretary of State James Baker, at NATO headquarters in Brussels, called Turkey "a strategic anchor of our alliance."

Helsinki Watch recommends that the US government condemn the human rights abuses detailed in this report and, as required by Section 502B of the Foreign Assistance Act, state clearly what, if any, extraordinary circumstances warrant provision of military assistance and Economic Support Funds to Turkey in light of its consistent pattern of gross violations of human rights.

In addition, as we have noted in the past, the administration should use its best efforts to persuade the Turkish government to:

o Acknowledge the pattern of torture in police detention centers and take steps to end it.

o Enforce the September 1989 decree guaranteeing detainees the right to be represented by attorneys from the moment of detention.

o Prohibit the use in court of confessions obtained by torture.

o Prosecute and increase sentences for torturers.

o Take steps to improve the inhumane and degrading conditions that now exist in Turkish prisons and detention centers.

o Allow the International Committee of the Red Cross and other international organizations to visit detainees and prisoners on a regular basis.

o Release from prison and detention centers all those held for the expression of their peaceful political views.

o Stop all legal actions against the press and against writers and publishers based on the content of their writings.

o Amend the Penal Code to eliminate Articles 141, 142 and 163, which forbid advocating communism or the establishment of a religious state, and other Penal Code articles that are used to deprive Turks of their human rights, such as Article 158, which forbids "insulting the President," Article 159, which forbids "insulting or vilifying the Turkish nation," and Article 140, which forbids "publishing in a foreign country untrue, malicious, or exaggerated rumors or news about the internal situation" of Turkey.

o Acknowledge the existence of the Kurdish minority in Turkey and grant its members the civil and political rights held by other Turks.

o End restrictions that deprive Kurds of their ethnic identity, including restrictions on the use of Kurdish language, music and dance.

We also recommend that the Bush administration urge the Turkish government to:

o Rescind Decree 413 and restore the rights suspended by that decree.

o Abolish the village guard system.

o Protect the civilian population in areas where guerrilla warfare is taking place and comply with international laws governing internal armed conflicts.

o End efforts to relocate civilians from troubled areas except in instances in which the security of the civilians or imperative military necessity so demand.

o Punish appropriately the abuse and humilitation of civilians by security forces.

The Work of Helsinki Watch

During 1990, Helsinki Watch continued its efforts to improve human rights in Turkey by trying to draw public attention to Turkey's appalling record and to persuade the Bush administration to exert greater pressure on Turkey to reform its abusive practices.

In February, a 12-page newsletter, "Freedom of Expression," was issued as an update to the March 1989 Helsinki Watch report, Paying the Price -- Freedom of Expression in Turkey. The newsletter revealed that criminal cases had been brought against nearly 400 journalists in 1989 for what they had written; that 33 journalists had been imprisoned for their writings; and that hundreds of magazines and books had been confiscated or banned.

In May 1990, a joint Helsinki Watch/Danish Helsinki Committee mission visited Turkey to investigate government practices under the new Decree 413. The mission met with lawyers, human rights activists, doctors, business people, journalists and villagers in Istanbul, Diyarbakir and Siirt. In June, a 22-page newsletter was issued, describing the continued denial of the Kurds' ethnic identity; killings, harassment and abuse by security forces; and the forced evacuation of villages whose inhabitants had been given a choice of acting as village guards for the military or abandoning their villages. In September, Helsinki Watch issued a more detailed, 52-page report, entitled Destroying Ethnic Identity -- The Kurds of Turkey, An Update.

In October, Helsinki Watch sent an observer to the trial of Turgut Kazan, the president of the Istanbul Bar Association, and members of the Bar Association's executive committee. In an attempt to restrict the Bar Association and the legal profession, the government tried to remove the executive committee. The case received a good deal of international attention and was later dropped.

During 1990, Helsinki Watch sent protests to the Turkish government on fourteen separate occasions. Many of the protests addressed the detention of human rights lawyers, writers, editors and political leaders. Others asked for investigations into the June 9, 1990 Cevrimli massacre in the southeast in which 27 people were killed -- the government blamed the PKK, but human rights activists in the area challenged this assumption -- and the alleged poisoning of Iraqi Kurdish refugees in 1989 and 1990 in camps in the southeast. Two protested actions by the State Security Court: an investigation into the SHP's report on Turkish Kurds in the southeast; and the prepublication banning of an issue of the newspaper Sabah, which contained unspecified statements about the 1988 wounding of then-Prime Minister Turgut Ozal. One protested charges brought against the Istanbul Bar Association, and one condemned the placement in a mental institution of an army lieutenant who had sent a critical telegram to President Ozal. One protested the refusal of the government to issue a passport to Zubeyir Aydar, a Kurdish lawyer and human rights activist, who had been invited to the United States to be honored by Helsinki Watch for his human rights activities. Many of these Helsinki Watch interventions received considerable attention in the Turkish press.

4 In Turkey, suspects can be detained incommunicado, without charges, for periods of between one and 30 days, depending on the type of offense. At the end of this period, a suspect is either released without charge, or formally charged and kept (or taken into) custody. Some suspects are released pending trial, but many are detained throughout the pretrial and trial period. Trials, particularly mass political trials, can continue for many years. Some trials of the left-wing group Dev-Sol, for example, have been underway since 1980.

5 See Human Rights Watch, Persecution of Human Rights Monitors, December 1989 to December 1990 (December 1990).

6 In addition, the administration has reportedly increased the quotas on textiles and clothing that Turkey can sell in the United States.

7 Meeting with the press, December 27, 1989.
YUGOSLAVIA

Human Rights Developments

The drive for political and economic change in Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia and elsewhere produced similar aspirations in Yugoslavia. Within the six republics comprising the Yugoslav federation, there have been pressures to end the one-party state and demands for multiparty democracy and increased respect for human rights.

There is a certain historical irony that Yugoslavia should find itself behind the times in the struggle for political freedom. Yugoslavia, which rejected Soviet domination in 1948, later developed a reputation for being the freest and most liberal of the Communist states in Europe. To a certain degree, this liberality was real: Yugoslav citizens were allowed to travel, to engage in small-scale private enterprise, and to read and produce artistic and journalistic works with a latitude unknown in their Warsaw Pact neighbors. But repression in Yugoslavia has been equally real: Yugoslavia is believed to have more political prisoners than any other country in Europe with the possible exception of Turkey.

Efforts in 1990 to reform and eliminate Titoism and the apparatus of the one-party state were mixed with and, in many respects, overtaken by ethnic struggles. These conflicts not only threaten the unity of the Yugoslav federation but also gave rise to severe human rights abuses, especially in the province of Kosovo, where the government of the Serbian Republic is oppressing the Albanian population, which represents some 90 percent of the province's population.

Ethnic Albanians in Kosovo were arrested en masse, beaten and in some instances tortured in prison, and subjected to mass firings from their jobs solely on account of their ethnicity. Serbian police units repeatedly used excessive force in confronting ethnic Albanian demonstrators, killing more than 50 people in 1990 alone.

Security forces of the Serbian government attacked ethnic Albanian villages in apparent attempts at intimidation. The Serbian government suspended the Kosovo parliament and other institutions of government in which ethnic Albanians participated, shut down for extended periods the main ethnic Albanian daily paper, Rilindia, and took all Albanian-language programming off Kosovo television and radio. It embarked on a program to disenfranchise and marginalize the ethnic Albanian population in ways constituting racism, impermissible ethnic discrimination, and grave violations of the rights of ethnic Albanians to free expression and equal political participation.

In the past, Helsinki Watch reports have found much to criticize regarding the treatment of both Serbs and Albanians by earlier governments in Kosovo, including governments composed predominantly of ethnic Albanians. As recently as September 1989, when a joint Helsinki Watch/International Helsinki Federation mission visited Kosovo province, there was some basis for the view that repression by the Serbian government against ethnic Albanians was at least partly an attempt, albeit abusively carried out, to protect the Serb minority in the province from abuse that it had suffered at the hands of the Albanian majority, rather than simply to subjugate the ethnic Albanian population. By the end of 1990, however, there no longer appeared to be any justification for the claim that the Serbian government's intervention in Kosovo aimed to protect the Serb minority.

Nor did the Serbian government seriously make such a claim. Slobodan Milosevic, the Serbian President, stated in his speeches that Serbia's assertion of power over Kosovo province was a matter of Serbia reclaiming the ancient birthplace of Serbian culture. The Serbian government thus undertook an ambitious program to resettle Serbs in Kosovo in order, in effect, to retake the province. This resettlement was being accomplished by a policy of displacing ethnic Albanians from government, schools and workplaces. The policy led to severe violations of human rights -- ethnic Albanian doctors, for example, were forcibly removed from the Pristina Hospital, even directly from operating rooms -- and the imposition of a military occupation on the civilian population.

Problems also arose in the republic of Croatia, where the Croatian government showed a willingness to use excessive police force in quashing ethnic unrest among the Serb minority. From August to October, armed Serbs blocked roads and sealed off towns in parts of Croatia to prevent Croatian authorities from interfering with an unofficial referendum, in which the Serbian minority declared its autonomy within Croatia. In October, the Croatian government sent special all-Croat police units to collect arms that reserve military units stored in police stations in parts of Croatia. The Serbian population demonstrated against the arms seizures and in some cases seized the arms themselves. The Croatian government, using heavy-handed police tactics, occupied several Serb villages. Because, at least in the initial stages, the arms seizures were conducted only in Serb villages, there was good reason to question whether the large show of police strength was necessary to carry out legitimate government orders or whether it was used to intimidate the minority population.

The Yugoslav federation consists of six republics, comprising a still larger number of officially recognized nationalities, still more ethnic minorities not necessarily given official recognition, and at least ten languages. These various ethnic and linguistic groups do not live within neatly partitioned regions. There are significant numbers of Serbs in Croatia, for example, significant numbers of Croats in Serbia, and significant numbers of both among the Muslim population of Bosnia-Hercegovina. The province of Kosovo contains a small minority of Serbs and Montenegrins among its ethnic Albanians, and Macedonia has a sizable ethnic Albanian minority.

All of the republics have held multiparty elections, resulting mainly in governments with strong nationalist platforms. There were calls toward the end of 1990 from the new governments in Slovenia and Croatia for the dissolution of Yugoslavia as a federal state in favor of a loose confederation of individual ethnic states. The government of Serbia, on the other hand, strengthened by contested multiparty elections in December that affirmed the nationalist leadership of Slobodan Milosevic, opposed moves either to create a confederation or to allow secession by Croatia and Slovenia. In the final months of 1990, the Yugoslav army, which has principally Serb officers and a strong pan-Yugoslav political orientation, announced that it might move to disarm the police and militia of several republics. By year's end, it was too early to tell whether the new republic governments would allow the evolution of true multiparty politics and enduring democratic institutions that would ensure the systematic protection of human rights. Because of nationalist tensions, freedom of the press to criticize the new governments within the republics may actually have declined.8

US Policy

During the Cold War, US and Western European policy toward Yugoslavia was based on the goal of keeping it independent of the Warsaw Pact. As part of this policy, Western governments avoided criticizing Yugoslavia's human rights practices. Their aim was to keep Yugoslavia stable and thus invulnerable to Soviet pressure. With the end of the Cold War, and the growing recognition that no foreign influence may suffice to hold Yugoslavia together in its current form, such attitudes were changing.9

Helsinki Watch takes no position on whether Yugoslavia ought to remain a single federal country, a confederation, or break up entirely. Its only concern is that the human rights of all individuals, including members of minority groups, are respected throughout the territory. Accordingly, it urges that economic sanctions be imposed by foreign governments to persuade Yugoslavia and its internal republics to comply with international human rights standards.

In point of fact, the European Community is by far the most important trading partner and economic actor with respect to Yugoslavia, both now and in the foreseeable future. As a consequence, the European Community and its members have the greatest ability to pressure Yugoslavia to improve its human rights record.

The United States also has some leverage. On November 5, President Bush signed into law the legislation which appropriates foreign assistance for fiscal year 1991. It included a provision (which takes effect six months after enactment, or in May 1991) which bars bilateral assistance to Yugoslavia and also requires US representatives to international financial institutions to oppose loans to Yugoslavia unless all six of the individual republics of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia have held free and fair multiparty elections and are not engaged in a pattern of gross violations of human rights. Humanitarian assistance is exempted from this provision. The law permits the President to waive the provisions if Yugoslavia is found to be making "significant strides toward complying with the obligations of the Helsinki Accords and is encouraging any Republic which has not held free and fair elections to do so." Now that multiparty elections have been held in all the republics there is reason to fear that the provision may be deemed satisfied despite the ongoing abuses that are taking place in Kosovo. Helsinki Watch would oppose such a move until gross abuses in Kosovo are curbed.

Yugoslavia stands to receive considerable assistance from international financial institutions. Section 701 of the International Financial Institutions Act requires the US to oppose such loans to any country engaged in a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights. Again, Helsinki Watch urges the US to oppose such loans because of the violations of human rights in Kosovo.

Various members of Congress, some acting in response to ethnic constituencies in their home districts, took an interest in Yugoslavia and brought considerable publicity to human rights issues, particularly in Kosovo.10 The US ambassador to Yugoslavia, Warren Zimmermann, also scrupulously attacked violations of human rights by all perpetrators. Ambassador Zimmermann did not hesitate publicly to criticize and denounce violations; members of his staff actively sought out information on abuses and brought them before government authorities. The record of the US embassy in this regard was exemplary, especially as the crisis in Kosovo deepened.

Nevertheless, as a matter of policy, Ambassador Zimmermann and the US State Department did not support the suspension of such US economic assistance as exists. The State Department made the traditional argument that a stable, unified Yugoslavia is important to US security interests. In addition, the argument was made against economic sanctions on human rights grounds. Economic sanctions against Yugoslavia, it was said, particularly if imposed in a way that undermines the Yugoslav federal government, will inevitably tend to drive Yugoslavia to break up, with human rights virtually guaranteed to suffer. Conversely, it was argued, strengthening the Yugoslav federal government, while publicly denouncing the abuses engaged in by its constituent republics, aims at the best human rights outcome. Helsinki Watch recognizes the strengths and good intentions of this argument.

Nonetheless, Helsinki Watch does not endorse this position. As a human rights monitoring group, we do not take positions on which political arrangements within Yugoslavia or which political strategies may or may not ultimately serve to protect human rights. Rather, Helsinki Watch believes that the United States should distance itself from abusive governments and express its disapproval by ending most forms of economic support, as provided by US human rights law. Section 116 of the Foreign Assistance Act provides that governments engaged in a consistent pattern of gross violations of human rights should be given no economic assistance except that which benefits the poor, or meets basic human needs. Such gross abuses -- including torture and arbitrary killings -- are being committed in the province of Kosovo because of the policies of the Serbian government. Because the federal government in Belgrade continues to be, formally at least, the government of Yugoslavia, it must under US law be held responsible for human rights abuses that occur in the various republics.

Helsinki Watch also takes the position that sanctions should be directed not only at the government formally responsible for preventing abuse, but also at any abusing agencies, such as abusive security forces or abusive local governments. If, in fact, the federal government of Yugoslavia lacks control over the security forces of its various republics, as more and more appears to be the case, then it becomes increasingly important that to the extent possible economic sanctions be applied directly against the republic governments engaged in abuse, as in the case of development aid or loans that might bypass the central government.

Helsinki Watch thus urges that economic sanctions be used against the federal government of Yugoslavia and, when possible, against the government of the republic of Serbia which is involved in egregious human rights abuses in the province of Kosovo. We also urge that the situation in other republics of Yugoslavia be carefully monitored, especially in Croatia where there is a potentially explosive human rights situation, and that economic sanctions be applied in the future to any republic engaged in egregious human rights abuses.

The Work of Helsinki Watch

In March, Helsinki Watch released a report, Crisis in Kosovo, which criticized the Yugoslav government's imposition of a virtual military occupation in Kosovo as a reaction to the instability there. The report was based on a joint mission to Yugoslavia of Helsinki Watch and the International Helsinki Federation. Members of the mission spoke with ethnic Albanians in small villages in Kosovo as well as human rights activists, including members of the Yugoslav Helsinki Committee. They also interviewed lawyers and legislators in Belgrade. On the official level, the mission met with the President of the Presidency of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Janez Drnovsek, and with the Deputy Federal Secretary of Justice.

In October, Helsinki Watch sent another mission to Yugoslavia which visited the republics of Croatia, Serbia and Macedonia. In Kosovo, the mission participants talked with ethnic Albanians in the capital city of Pristina and in nearby villages, including the ethnic Albanian village of Polat, where in mid-September Serbian forces launched a violent attack. The Helsinki Watch team also investigated ethnic tensions between Serbs and Croats in Croatia, and discussed various problems in Serbia and Macedonia. An op-ed article by Helsinki Watch on ferment in Yugoslavia appeared in the New York Times on November 10, and a newsletter on recent developments in Yugoslavia was released in December.

8 See "Truth is a Casualty of Partisan Yugoslav Press," New York Times, September 13, 1990.

9 See Jeri Laber and Kenneth Anderson, "Why Keep Yugoslavia One Country?" New York Times, November 10, 1990.

10 For example, public statements by Senator Dole while he and other members of a US congressional delegation were in Kosovo in September received wide press attention in Yugoslavia and elsewhere. See Reuters, September 7, 1990.
MIDDLE EAST WATCH OVERVIEW

If it were not for the unchecked outrages committed by the Iraqi forces in occupwere rounded upied Kuwait after the August 2 invasion, it would be hard to say that 1990 had been a bad year for human rights in the Middle East and North Africa. Indeed, there were a number of positive developments: not least, a grudging recognition in regional capitals of the need to involve their people in decision making to a greater extent than before. Unfortunately, these developments were largely overshadowed in the West by the "rape of Kuwait," for which Saddam Hussein bore responsibility.

With the winds from Eastern Europe blowing strong, many governments acquired a new awareness of the importance of popular participation in the form of elections as a means of promoting national stability. Such diverse governments as those in Jordan, Algeria, Tunisia, Syria and Egypt all held national elections of one kind or another since the European upheaval. With the exception of local changes in Algeria, none of these polls produced a transfer of power from longstanding rulers or governing parties. But, to differing degrees, each represented a step forward toward greater openness. Middle East Watch detailed its concerns over the electoral process in Egypt in a newsletter, and commented on President Asad's evident determination to hang on to power at all costs, including through murder, torture and imprisonment of perceived dissenters, in the course of a major report on Syria.

In the most conservative states of the region, those of the Arabian Peninsula, the example set by Saudi Arabia's King Fahd, who pledged to install an appointed consultative assembly, was rapidly followed by several of his smaller neighbors. From their place of exile in Saudi Arabia, the ousted Kuwaiti ruling family, the al-Sabahs, also promised to respect their own national constitution, albeit in the future -- to restore the National Assembly suspended four years earlier and reinstitute press freedom, once Iraq's takeover of Kuwait was reversed. The impetus for these democratic gestures was, of course, the far-reaching crisis that had erupted around them; and only an optimist unfamiliar with the Middle East's chronic vacillation over democracy could assume unquestionably that these pledges will be fulfilled once the war clouds lift. But, for a human rights organization such as Middle East Watch, they were nonetheless an important breakthrough -- one to be exploited in the coming months, even if the pledges failed to address the serious deprivations of civil and political rights that persist in those nations.

The appearance in 1990 of national unity in two formerly divided states -- Lebanon and Yemen -- was an unexpected bonus for the cause of human rights. As it descended into anarchy for over a decade, Lebanon had been synonymous in the public mind with often unspeakable brutalities, including the taking of hostages, committed by one sect against another. The West has been obsessed with its own small band of hostages, but over the years thousands of Lebanese have suffered similarly. Few are aware, for instance, of the 300 or so detainees in the Khiam prison in southern Lebanon, controlled by the Israeli-backed SLA militia. Held under dismal conditions, in some cases for years, these detainees have not enjoyed the luxury of due process. A Middle East Watch report on this prison, to which virtually all outside access is barred, is nearing completion for early 1991.

Freedom from the terror which reigned for so long will suffice, for now, for most Lebanese. But Syria's violent record at home leaves cause for concern that a new form of terror will be imposed on Lebanon -- one reflected in the October massacre of some 100 prisoners taken near Gen. 'Aoun's headquarters in Ba'bda. It would also be tragic if the Pax Syriana being overseen by Damascus through Lebanese President Elias Hrawi were, in the process of restoring order, to extinguish the effervescent cultural, intellectual and political life which once distinguished Lebanon among Middle Eastern states.

In Yemen, unification of the two former states in May was accompanied by the proclamation of far-reaching political and civil liberties, to an extent unseen anywhere else in the Arab world. Despite the strains imposed by the fusing of two very different political and social systems, in the north and the south, the practical implementation of these freedoms appears to date to have gone well. Over 30 political parties are now functioning in Sana'a, the capital, all political prisoners have been freed, and freedom of speech has been guaranteed. In the process, President Mohammed Salah appears to retain widespread popular support, and to have set an important example for the rest of the Arabian Peninsula.

However, Yemen's open sympathy for Iraq in the Gulf crisis triggered retaliatory action by Saudi Arabia against the two million-strong Yemeni population in the Kingdom. Rules of residence and employment affecting Yemenis were arbitrarily changed without warning, indirectly compelling an estimated 750,000 to return home, some destitute and maltreated. Palestinians in Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states, notably Qatar and the United Arab Emirates, suffered likewise for the PLO's political support of Iraq. Many hundreds were arbitrarily expelled from countries in which they had lived sometimes for decades. Stateless Palestinians of Gazan origin face a particularly uncertain future because Israeli authorities have refused permission for them to return home and other Arab nations will not grant them citizenship. Middle East Watch expects to publish its research on this issue in early 1991.

Women in Saudi Arabia, forcibly cloistered by their menfolk and the religious police, are among those Saudis who began to stir during the latter part of 1990, in the wake of the arrival on their soil of the huge US expeditionary force. But across the Persian Gulf, Iranian women found that the improvements in their lowly social condition expected to come from President Ali Akbar Rafsanjani, who portrays himself as a modernizing, progressive cleric, were not fulfilled. Female dress codes were even more strictly enforced than before, while women continued to be barred from certain professions and educational fields.

Throughout the region, in fact, women have been the principal victims of the rise of Islamic fundamentalism. In Jordan and Algeria, Islamists made strong gains through the ballot box, putting them in a position to dictate the social agenda. For Algerian women, as a Middle East Watch mission recorded, the decaying power of the ruling FLN party and the concomitant rise of the Islamist FIS has meant an increase in attacks on women for behavior deemed inappropriate by FIS followers. In most cases, the police and local authorities responded passively, refusing to intervene.

Parliamentary elections expected to take place sometime during 1991 in Algeria, following 1990's municipal poll, could bring about an unprecedented development for the Arab world: the replacement of a ruling regime through elections. Apprehensions over the consequences for civil liberties of an Islamist-led government are, on the other hand, growing.

In Israel, the collapse of the second Likud-Labor coalition brought to power what, by general consent, is the most right-wing government in the country's history. With Cabinet Ministers who openly advocate the mass expulsion of Palestinians from the Occupied Territories at his side, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir had been expected to take a much tougher approach to the Palestinian intifada. Nearly 800 Palestinians, almost none of them armed with anything beyond stones, have been killed by the Israeli security forces during the three-year uprising, raising acute concerns about the excessive use of force. Middle East Watch issued a report on the Israeli Defense Force's inadequate investigation and prosecution of soldiers who deviate from open-fire regulations, and criticized those guidelines as being too permissive.

However, the new Likud Defense Minister, Moshe Arens, surprised his critics by initially taking a less confrontational approach than his predecessor, Labor's Yitzhak Rabin. Casualties at the hands of Israeli troops dropped sharply. Until December an informal moratorium on the use of deportations was maintained. Meanwhile, West Bank schools and some universities, closed for over two years, were gradually reopened. Middle East Watch, in a May newsletter, called for the immediate opening of all schools and universities.

On the negative side of the balance sheet, the descent of the Jewish-Palestinian conflict into more chaotic, intercommunal -- and, in the Palestinian case, intracommunal -- strife has deepened. Over 150 killings of Palestinians deemed to be collaborators with Israel were recorded during the year, almost as many as in the previous two combined. A spate of stabbing attacks on Jewish civilians by Palestinians drew long jail sentences for those involved, but deaths attributed to militant Jewish settlers in the Occupied Territories in the past rarely led to court, or serious punishment.

In the single most serious incident of the entire intifada, in October, paramilitary Border Police shot and killed at least 17 Palestinians, and wounded hundreds of others, on and around the holy Haram el-Sharif, or Temple Mount, compound in the Old City of Jerusalem. An official investigation reprimanded senior officers for lack of foresight to prevent the confrontation, but largely defended the use of lethal force. At year's end, a separate, judicial inquiry into the deaths was also underway.

While Israel continued strenuously to resist UN Security Council efforts to investigate its treatment of the Palestinians in territories captured during the June 1967 war, one of the most significant human rights developments of the year as far as Iran was concerned was the Rafsanjani government's decision to allow foreign human rights teams to conduct their own investigations. After five years of being denied entry to Iran, the UN Special Representative, Professor Reynaldo Galindo Pohl, paid two visits, in February and October. His initial report was widely regarded as inadequate in its methodology and conclusions, but a second document produced a much more detailed, and severe, indictment of Iran's abysmal record. This includes the assassination of exiled political opponents, the use of public stonings and beheadings for certain crimes, and mass executions of narcotics offenders. The government's displeasure at the second UN report notwithstanding, at the end of the year the International Committee of the Red Cross was negotiating the terms of its access to Iranian prisons. Middle East Watch had also been given approval, in principle, to conduct its own mission.

The torture and maltreatment of political prisoners continues to be an endemic problem throughout the Middle East and Maghreb regions. To take a few examples: in Iran, torture is believed to have been used to extract confessions from some of a group of over 30 prominent dissidents arrested in June and July after signing an open letter criticizing the government for the lack of freedom and for its failure to respect the rights set forth in the Iranian Constitution. The background to the arrests of members of Iran's sole remaining opposition functioning above ground was laid out in a Middle East Watch newsletter.

In neighboring Iraq, among many other issues, Middle East Watch's major report on that country documented the widespread use of torture by the mukhabarat -- even against children. It also catalogued the systematic abuses against Kurds, including the forced depopulation of Kurdish areas and the transfer of half a million Kurds. As a follow-up, Middle East Watch is now engaged in researching a book on the plight of the Kurds throughout the region; they also face discrimination in Syria, Iran and Turkey.

In Morocco, King Hassan's benign image abroad is belied by his cruel, and vindictive, treatment of those alleged to have plotted against him almost 20 years ago. At the Tazmamart prison, in southern Morocco, where over 50 of the accused plotters were detained and secretly held in medieval conditions, Middle East Watch reported that more than half of the inmates are believed to have died due to the maltreatment and conditions they were forced to endure. A mission to Morocco gathered information on abuses of the rule of law, for a report to be published in early 1991.

As elsewhere, torture is officially banned in Egypt. Its regular use against detainees held under a State of Emergency, during the term in office of former Interior Minister Zaki Badr, was nevertheless confirmed by a Middle East Watch mission in May. General Abdel Halim Moussa, who replaced Badr in January, promised reforms, including an end to torture. In practice, what has transpired is that the repression of leftists and other secular opponents of the Mubarak government has been eased, while unrestrained action is being taken against Islamic fundamentalists, some of whom are armed and violent. Hundreds of Islamists were rounded up, many of whom were reportedly tortured following the assassination of the Speaker of the People's Assembly, Riftak Mahgoub, on October 12.

Where human rights are concerned, US policy toward the region during 1990 was decidedly mixed. While sotto voce criticism was leveled at a number of countries, few were publicly condemned in a forthright fashion. Nor were economic or political sanctions applied against any country for mistreating its own people; although Syria, Libya and Iran were all censured for their support for terrorism abroad.

The notable exception to this generalization was Iraq after it annexed Kuwait. Prior to August 2, the administration went to considerable lengths to block the imposition by Congress of economic sanctions on Iraq, refusing to acknowledge the self-evident: that the Saddam Hussein regime demonstrated "a consistent pattern of gross abuses of human rights," in the language of the Foreign Assistance Act mandating sanctions. Thereafter, the Iraqi President was demonized as "a ruthless Hitler" by President Bush himself.

With respect to Israel's behavior in the Occupied Territories, the Bush administration has taken a more robust line than its predecessor, joining in UN Security Council votes of criticism, while continuing to exercise a restraining influence on the resolutions of that forum. But while denouncing atrocities perpetrated against Kuwaitis living under occupation, the administration failed to endorse international protection of Palestinians in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.

In general, though, the US has chosen to take a low-key approach toward human rights abuses in this region, despite the extremely serious abuses committed there. And where broader geostrategic interests or long-term alliances are involved, human rights are relegated to a low priority. Morocco, for instance, a recipient of military and economic aid, and a close ally, is never criticized publicly. Egypt's President Mubarak gets similar kid-glove treatment, although he receives some $2.8 billion a year in US aid.

Even regimes with whom relations are publicly distant, as with Syria prior to the Gulf crisis, or Iran, are spared a public tongue-lashing. Where was the Bush administration when Syrian troops and militiamen loyal to Syria allegedly massacred scores of General 'Aoun's troops and sympathizers after his surrender? And what did it say when Iranian Revolutionary Guards working on behalf of a hardline minister seized the relatives and political associates of former Prime Minister Mehdi Bazargan, a political moderate who the US had tried to cultivate after the 1979 revolution? Working to establish a firm and consistent US voice on human rights matters in the region is an important priority of Middle East Watch.

ALGERIA

Human Rights Developments

Algeria in 1990 continued to experience dramatic political and social changes which had a major impact on the human rights climate in that country. October 4 marked the second anniversary of urban riots that had shaken the country, leaving hundreds dead at the hands of security forces and forcing the government to accelerate its previously tentative attempts at social and economic reforms. Reforms since then have included the dismantling of the one-party state and the approval of a revised Constitution, with guarantees of freedom of association -- including the right to form political parties -- and freedom of expression, opinion and assembly.

The government's commitment to those reforms was tested in June, when it held the first elections since independence in which voters were allowed to choose among competing political parties. In those local elections, the National Liberation Front (FLN), which had held a monopoly of power for almost three decades, was decisively defeated by the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS), North Africa's first legal Islamic party. FIS won control of 32 of the 48 provinces. The government, to its credit, accepted the verdict of the polls and oversaw a peaceful transition of power at the municipal level.

Almost immediately, Abbasi Madani, the FIS leader, called for the dissolution of the National Assembly, all of whose members belong to the FLN. Faced with growing pressure from the public and the almost--complete demoralization of the FLN, President Chadli Bendjedid announced that legislative elections, originally scheduled for 1992, would be held in 1991.

The FIS victory at the polls, while a clear expression of popular disenchantment with repressive and ineffectual FLN policies, is a matter of deep concern in certain Algerian circles. Human rights and women's rights activists and multiparty advocates, who had been at the forefront of demands for reform, question the commitment of FIS to democratic rule. A number of verbal and physical attacks against women and the use of strong--arm tactics against members of rival political parties have underscored their concern. In both cases, Islamic militants have been identified as the culprits.1

The attacks against women have usually occurred during attempts by Islamic fundamentalists to force women to conform to their own strict interpretation of religious precepts, such as wearing particular clothing and limiting their participation in public life. In one incident in April in the town of Blida, several female college students were attacked by bearded men with whips, when they attempted to leave their campus to attend a rally sponsored by the communist Socialist Vanguard Party.2 In another incident in the city of Annaba, Islamic militants burned down the house of a member of a women's rights association who was leading a campaign against FIS' attempts to impose Shari'a religious law. Activists accuse the government of adopting a "hands--off" policy toward the perpetrators of such violence. (However, several Islamists received long prison sentences in January 1991 for setting fire in 1989 to the house of a women they accused of having "loose morals." The sentences, handed down in a court in Ouargla, were reported to be the first time Islamists have received stiff punishments for such attacks.)

Women in Algeria continued to experience legal discrimination. Their subordinate status is enshrined in the Family Code, enacted in 1984, which gives the sanction of law to inequalities in such areas as polygamy and divorce. Women are also affected by two provisions of the current Electoral Code: one, known as procuration (proxy voting), allows one person to vote on behalf of three others, and the second allows spouses to vote for each other. Women's rights activists note that each provision, while formally neutral as to gender, has the potential in Algerian society to work to the detriment of women.

In 1989, after widespread reports of torture of those arrested in the 1988 riots, the government ratified the UN Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment. In 1990, however, there was evidence that the practice of torture, although greatly diminished, continued in some prisons and police holding cells. The National Committee Against Torture, a respected organization created after the 1988 riots, provided evidence of torture in a prison at Blida and at the police headquarters in Tenes.

The report on the incident at Blida, written by representatives of the Committee, the Algerian League of Human Rights (LADH), the Algerian League for the Defense of Human Rights (LADDH) and the head of the local court system in Blida, stated that a number of prisoners who had escaped and then been recaptured had been subjected to torture. While prison authorities allowed the investigators to interview the torture victims, the report noted their failure to punish those responsible for the torture, and urged that all who committed acts of torture be prosecuted.

At a press conference in late October, Anouar Ben Malek, the president of the Committee Against Torture, provided details of the report to the press. He also raised objections to the amnesty, passed in July to cover all those involved in the 1988 riots. Although the amnesty law did not specifically include officials accused of torture, the government has provided an implicit amnesty by not prosecuting any of the alleged torturers. Ben Malek stated that the failure of the government to prosecute torture provided implicit approval of abuse.

His concerns were underscored when reports emerged of a second incident, in the town of Tenes, west of Algiers. In that incident 22 young men, detained on charges of rioting and destruction of property, alleged that they had been beaten and tortured in a police cell, prior to their transfer to the nearest prison. In contrast to the cooperation received in the investigation of Blida incident, representatives of the Committee Against Torture and the LADDH were prevented from meeting with the alleged victims, on the grounds that there had been no formal complaint from any of them. Human rights groups saw this as an attempt to obstruct justice, given that they had had access to the prisoners at Blida despite their having filed no formal complaint.

However, human rights groups welcomed the government's announcement on September 22 that the Delegation Générale pour la Documentation et la Securité (DGDS) had been dissolved, although some critics feared that the intelligence agency could be reconstituted in the future. The groups hoped that the dissolution of the organization, heir to the feared Military Security which had been responsible for torture on a grand scale, indicated that the government remained committed to peaceful democratic evolution.

US Policy

There is little US aid to Algeria. $130,000 was provided for the International Military Education Training program (IMET) in fiscal year 1990, and $100,000 has been requested for FY91. Still, there is a potential for US influence on human rights practices in light of the marked improvement in US-Algerian relations. In the past, Algeria's socialist system and alliances with radical governments and movements had been major obstacles to the establishment of friendly relations between the two countries. The dismantling of that system and the democratic opening provide an opportunity for the Bush administration to exercise increased leverage with the Algerian government. Unfortunately, apart from the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices, the Bush administration made no public comment on human rights matters in Algeria, either to note commendable efforts at reform or to express concern over ongoing abuses.

The Work of Middle East Watch

Middle East Watch's strategy toward Algeria has been to monitor the rapid changes and investigate specific areas of abuse. In 1989, Middle East Watch issued a newsletter that criticized the government for its failure to prosecute cases of torture, urged it to ensure freedom of expression and political association, and called upon it to respect the rights of the Berber population to their language and culture.

In 1990, a Middle East Watch researcher traveled to Algeria and raised some of these concerns with officials of the government, including the Minister of Justice. The researcher also examined the status of Algerian women and the government's response to the growing incidence of harassment and assault by Islamic extremists.

1 "Islamic militants" refers to adherents of a variety of groups. However, witnesses to these attacks have frequently accused members of FIS, the main populist movement. The leaders of FIS have usually distanced themselves from the violence. However, they have failed to unequivocally condemn these attacks, which usually went unpunished by the authorities.

2 In Algeria, male Islamic activists, the majority of whom are FIS members, usually wear beards and long robes. "Les barbus," as they are commonly known, have been blamed for a number of attacks against women.
IRAN

Human Rights Developments

Commencing with the 1979 revolution, the militant clergy who seized power under the late Ayatollah Rouhollah Khomeini systematically crushed all forms of dissent or behavior which did not conform to their own proclaimed norms. Those who have suffered most have been secular-minded women, left-wingers, the People's Mujahedin opposition group and adherents of the Baha'i faith. But repression has not been confined to these groups. A pall of intolerance and fear, which President Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani's election in July 1989 has done little to dissipate, hangs over Iran's entire 55 million-strong population.

In 1990, the government went to some lengths to alter the Islamic Republic's pariah status in the world -- an isolation brought about, at least in part, by the regime's massive human rights violations. This desire for international rehabilitation was demonstrated in a number of different, but unmistakeable, ways. Among the signals were: permitting the first United Nations' human rights team to visit the country since the revolution, freeing two American prisoners, soliciting loans from the World Bank, supporting UN sanctions against Iraq and reestablishing diplomatic relations with a number of European countries.

Unfortunately, these signs of change toward the outside world were not matched on the domestic front, where conditions remained as deplorable as in previous years, or in the regime's tolerance of opposition, from whatever quarter. A crackdown on domestic unrest, the assassination of opponents abroad, the execution of political prisoners and drug-traffickers -- the latter on a large scale -- the use of torture and forced confessions, and the curtailment of basic civil and political freedoms all continued unabated.

An undeclared moratorium on action against the remnants of the clergy's above-ground opposition ended in June, when Tehran's Islamic Revolutionary Prosecutor ordered the arrest of more than 30 signatories of an open letter to President Rafsanjani. The signatories, many of whom were associates of former Prime Minister Mehdi Bazargan, had criticized Rafsanjani's policies toward civil rights, economic reconstruction and foreign affairs. One grievance was the government's refusal to permit the operation of the Iran Freedom Movement, led by former Prime Minister Mehdi Bazargan, and the banning of its affiliate, the Association for the Defense of Freedom and the Sovereignty of the Iranian Nation (ADFSIN),3 in violation of the government's own December 1988 commitment to reactivate a basic law on political parties.

Bazargan and his associates, many of whom had served in Iran's first post-revolutionary government, were accused of having "acted as a fifth column in the interests of the enemies of the Islamic Revolution and the Iranian people" during the Gulf war. Despite their advanced age and poor health, these prisoners were placed in incommunicado detention at an undisclosed location. The treatment they encountered served to underline the force of the charges contained in their open letter. Detained at the behest of the Ministry of Islamic Guidance, rather than by the Justice Ministry, they were still being held at the end of 1990 without having been formally charged. Torture was believed to have been used on several to extract alleged confessions, one of which was broadcast on the state-controlled media. In late November, six detainees were released.

This was not the regime's first effort at staging a confession show. In April, the government announced that ten persons had been sentenced to death on charges of espionage for the United States. The "confessions" of some of their number had previously been broadcast at length on the government-controlled radio and television network, run by President Rafsanjani's brother. Middle East Watch was told in May by a senior official at the Iranian mission to the United Nations that the announcement had been only for deterrent purposes. At year's end, it remained unclear whether any of the death sentences had been carried out.

Iran's diplomatic drive for respectability abroad was only one arm of a two-pronged policy: in 1990, the regime continued its practice of liquidating exiled opponents through extrajudicial executions.4 In March, Mohammad Reza Akhavan-Jam, a former Tehran University professor who was the chief of the People's Mujahedin in Istanbul, was killed as he was driving to the Istanbul airport. In April, Dr. Kazem Rajavi, the Mujahedin's representative at the UN Human Rights Commission and an older brother of the guerrilla organization's leader, Massoud Rajavi, was assassinated in a suburb of Geneva. In October, Cyrus Elahi, a former professor of political science at Melli University who was the second-in-command of the Paris-based Flag of Freedom Organization, was slain in his home in France. Unlike the first two cases, in which police inquiries identified Iranian agents as responsible, proof was lacking in Elahi's assassination, but once again Tehran's hand was suspected. The vendetta against the regime's opponents continued with similar attacks in Sweden, Germany and Turkey.

Despite the government's proclamation about the right of political parties to operate freely, the list of bona fide parties was still limited to pro-regime or apolitical bodies, most of which were fronts for different factions of the clergy. The application of other parties that had filed for legal status met with outright rejection or bureaucratic procrastination.

Freedom of expression in Iran continued to be severely circumscribed. The Rafsanjani government upheld Ayatollah Khomeini's religious edict -- a death sentence -- against the British author Salman Rushdie, pronouncing it irrevocable. Regrettably, Britain restored diplomatic relations with Iran without securing concrete progress on either this case or that of Roger Cooper, a businessman jailed since 1985 on a variety of charges, including currency violations, espionage and -- most recently -- public morality offenses.

Censorship remained the order of the day in most cultural domains. Literature, publishing, theater, the press, music, radio, television and cinema continued to be carefully screened for their content by agents of the Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance. In an interview with the New York Times, Iran's preeminent film-director, Darius Mehrjui, spoke of the close community formed between his colleagues and the government censors in which the former "now know unconsciously what's allowed and what's not allowed."5 An Islamization campaign aimed at the "edification" of the populace lingered on, with no apparent end in sight. This pernicious brand of ideological censorship notwithstanding, Iran still possessed a lively print media which expressed often violently different points of view within the clerical factions. What cannot be published is material deemed critical of Islam or the rule of the clergy, including the concept of velayat-e-faghih, political leadership by a supreme religious figure. Nor is it possible usually to criticize the lack of freedom in Iran, or the treatment of women and religious minorities or to expound an avowedly secular point of view.

Capital punishment continued to be broadly applied. Since the introduction of a tough anti-narcotics ordinance in January 1989 which prescribed a mandatory death sentence for those caught carrying or smuggling drugs, hundreds of people have been executed on charges of being drug-traffickers or addicts. The government itself claimed that out of the 113 people it admitted to executing between March and October 1990, 71 had been involved in drug-smuggling.6 In at least one case, 46 people, some of whom were Afghan nationals, were executed in a single day, on September 5, in the northeastern city of Mashad, on charges of smuggling and distributing drugs.

Similarly, the perpetrators of such prohibited sexual acts as adultery, prostitution, pederasty, homosexuality, fornication and pimping have often been punished by such means as execution, public hanging, and stoning to death.7

Political prisoners, some of whom are nonviolent, have shared the brunt of executions with drug offenders. In addition, they reportedly have been subject to corporal punishment, mutilation, sexual abuse, and psychological torture. Thousands of political prisoners have had to endure arbitrary and indefinite pretrial detention, followed by secretly held summary trials, in which they were deprived of a defense counsel, the right to call witnesses and the right to appeal their sentences.8

In a country where women's subjugation has become one of its leading hallmarks, the year 1990 brought yet another round of harassment of women for violating the official dress code. The government implemented a new plan to enforce Islamic regulations on proper modes of attire. Those "charged" with wearing improper dress, the provocative use of cosmetics, or exposing their hair were subjected to indecent language, imprisonment, monetary fines or flogging. Women endured a multitude of legal and social restrictions concerning employment, education, child custody, divorce and inheritance.

Among the many minority communities that make up the ethnic mosaic of Iran, the Kurds continued to be severely punished for having waged an incessant war against the central government in support of a campaign for autonomy. However, a limited degree of Kurdish cultural expression is permitted, including broadcasts on state radio in Kurdish, and permission to publish certain books in the language. Circumscribed though it may be, this is more than was permitted under the monarchy. As for the status of such religious minorities as the Baha'is, Jews and Armenian Christians, the year 1990 contained mixed signals. Although the number of imprisoned or executed religious minorities continued to drop, flagrant violations of their civil, religious and cultural rights nonetheless persisted. The confiscation of property, dismissal from jobs, denial of pensions, educational restrictions, and the closure or forced takeover of religious schools constitute only a partial list of such blatant violations.9 On December 3, a Muslim convert to Christianity, the Reverend Mossein Soudmard, was hanged in Mashad after being charged with converting Muslims to Christianity, being an apostate from Islam, opening and operating a Christian bookstore and opening and operating an illegal Christian church.

Despite the cessation of military operations in August 1988, Iran and Iraq had still failed to release all of the 70,000 prisoners captured by both sides in their eight years of bloody fighting. At the year's end, at least 30,000 Iraqi prisoners were believed to remain in Iran's camps -- many of them unseen and unregistered by the Internationl Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). The slow pace of the exchange of prisoners was in clear violation of the Third Geneva Convention on prisoners of war.

On the positive side of the ledger, the major event of 1990 was Iran's endorsement of the first external investigation into its human rights practices. A Special Representative of the UN Human Rights Commission, Reynaldo Galindo Pohl, made two separate visits to Iran, in January and October. After the first visit, a 76-page report mildly critical of the Iranian government's record was released. While acknowledging the continuation of human right abuses at the hands of the government, this controversial report ruled out as "unsubstantiated" frequent allegations by opposition groups that political prisoners were being executed under the guise of being drug-smugglers.

His second mission produced a more critical report in which numerous and detailed allegations of human rights abuses were cited. It led, on December 4, to a unanimously approved resolution in the UN General Assembly's Third Committee calling on the Islamic Republic:

to intensify its efforts to investigate and rectify the human rights issues raised by the Special Representative in his observations, in particular as regards the administration of justice and due process of law in order to comply with international instruments on human rights, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which the Islamic Republic of Iran is a party, and to ensure that all individuals within its territory and subject to its jurisdiction, including religious groups, enjoy the rights recognized in these instruments.

The resolution was approved by the full General Assembly ten days later.

By its endorsement of the resolution, Iran committed itself to implement this key, operative paragraph. It also accepted, grudgingly, the continuation for a further year of UN monitoring. In return, the Iranian government's improved cooperation with the Special Representative and with the ICRC was publicly recognized. The ICRC was invited to visit prisons in Iran, although the precise terms of its access to detainees had yet to be finalized. Middle East Watch has, likewise, been given permission in principle to conduct a mission to Iran in early 1991.

The UN resolution was a watered-down version of an earlier draft, which had singled out particular abuses noted in the Galindo Pohl report. Behind the scenes, Iran was believed to have exercised pressure on several of the resolution's West European co-sponsors, warning that their trade interests would suffer if the resolution proceeded in its original form. In a further demonstration of Iran's sensitivity toward international public opinion on this score, its UN Mission worked hard to ensure that there would not be an embarassing debate at the General Assembly over the resolution. Its shortcomings notwithstanding, the resolution's passage nonetheless represented a major step towards Iran's acceptance of international human rights standards.

US Policy

Regrettably, in this delicate process of coaxing Iran back into the fold, the Bush administration appeard to be playing only a passive role. The US did not join the sponsors of the UN resolution, which included all 12 European Community nations, as well as Australia, Canada and several Scandinavian countries. Nor did it put its undoubted weight behind a similar resolution nine months earlier, at the UN Human Rights Commission in Geneva. Its customary argument for lying low on these occasions -- a thesis untested in the case of Iran -- is that to take a lead would be counterproductive to the goals involved.

Apart from a balanced overview contained in the State Department's annual Country Reports on Human Rights Practices, the only statement during 1990 by a US official on the subject of Iranian human rights came at the Geneva session. Expressing regret at Iran's lack of progress in moderating its "grave violations," a brief statement highlighted the plight of the Baha'i religious minority, a particular US concern. Apart from that, the only other pertinent announcement was a statement issued a few weeks later by the White House thanking both Iran and Syria for facilitating the release of an American hostage in Lebanon, Robert Polhill. About such outrages as the assassination in Geneva of Dr. Rajavi, or the round-up of Bazargan's associates, there was only silence. Taken together, the abiding impression was of an administration treading carefully, for fear of damaging a budding rapprochement with a one-time close ally.

US actions toward Iran -- many of which were of tangible financial benefit for the hard-pressed Rafsanjani government -- spoke much louder than its words. This was especially the case after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait on August 2, when Iran's potential value as a regional ally against Saddam Hussein was underlined. The administration's refusal to block a $750 million World Bank loan to Iran through its weight on the Bank's Executive Board was one such step. Another was the release of part of Iran's assets, frozen 11 years earlier after the capture of the US embassy in Tehran. As of May, the two sides had settled more than 3,300 cases of financial claims against one another, lodged at the United States-Iran Claims Tribunal at The Hague, and an agreement on many other outstanding mutual claims appeared to be nearing finalization. In the summer, humanitarian aid was offered to the victims of a devastating earthquake. And, in November, the ban on oil imports from the Islamic Republic was relaxed. All of this took place against the background of stepped-up overtures to Iran by the Bush administration, mostly conducted through third parties.

Nowhere was it evident that the principles enunciated to Congress by Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs John Kelly on November 9, 1989 were being applied. In the course of a major policy statement to the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Europe and the Middle East, Kelly had said that US economic sanctions would be softened only in response to changes in Iran's conduct. He added that the US would continue to speak out about human rights abuses such as torture and summary execution without proper trial. In Middle East Watch's opinion, few changes are yet evident in Iran's treatment of its own people or in its support for assassination overseas, while the Bush administration has conspicuously failed to speak out on abuses for which there was ample evidence.

The Iranian government's willingness to accept visits by such international bodies as the ICRC or the UN appears motivated more by political exigency than by a genuine moral transformation. The following political commentary published by the Persian-language weekly Keyhan Havai, with the clear blessing of the government, on the eve of Galindo Pohl's second fact-finding mission supports this view.

Even if the findings of Galindo Pohl favor the Islamic Republic, it should not be interpreted or promoted as Iran's acceptance of the dominant world order. Considering the dominance and influence of the superpowers upon the course of decision-makings in these institutions and forums, our appeal to them should not be one based on matters of principle but rather one based on exigency and repelling of criticism. Thus we believe after accomplishing our task of exposing Western propaganda on violations of human rights in Iran and withdrawing Iran's name from the list of countries [accused of] violating human rights, the Islamic Republic should seriously refrain from the practice of allowing its actions to be judged by Westerners' standards and yardsticks. We should not repeat the repetitive experience of [testing] the uselessness and inefficiency of international authorities.10

How authoritative this opinion was can be judged by the warning from Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Velayati, contained in the second Galindo Pohl report. According to the UN Special Representative, Velayati said: "International monitoring of the human rights situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran should not continue indefinitely. The country could not tolerate such monitoring for long."

What appears to have motivated the Iranian government in modifying its belligerent posture vis-a-vis the West is the need for Western capital, for post-war reconstruction and the assuaging of popular discontent. Deep discontent, fed by economic causes as well as the unending repression, threatens both President Rafsanjani's own position and the clergy's overall tenure of power. Western bankers, and the governments behind them, thus have the potential leverage to influence Iran's behavior toward the basic human rights of the Iranian people.

In the light of Iran's increasing apprehensions about world public opinion it is imperative that the Bush administration refrain from the flip-flopping policy of its predecessor. A policy of appeasement toward Tehran for the sake of its cooperation during the Persian Gulf crisis would have catastrophic consequences for human rights in Iran. Considering the abusive nature of the Iranian regime, the Bush administration must accord precedence to human rights concerns and apply effective pressure against Iran to restore basic civil and political rights to its citizens. A good starting point would be observation of the protections and rights enshrined in the 1979 constitution, as modified in 1989. The implementation of the rule rof law -- the issue at the heart of the Bazargan open letter -- is fundamental.

As the events of 1990 indicate, the United States' considerable influence in the world economy, international organizations such as the World Bank and the UN, and the global balance of power far outweighs its usual claim not to have much leverage with Tehran's clerical authorities. Iran presents a good opportunity for the Bush administration to reinterpret the dictum that "diplomacy is the art of the possible" in a positive, not a negative, sense. Given the reemerging importance of Iran on the regional and world stages after a decade of isolation, the US could -- and should -- be doing far more to promote the cause of human rights in that country.

The Work of Middle East Watch

Middle East Watch commenced the monitoring of human rights violations in the Islamic Republic in mid-1990. In May, it took up with the Iranaian authorities the case of ten alleged spies for the US Central Intelligence Agency, whose imminent execution had been announced by the state-controlled media. As previously noted, a government official responded by claiming that the executions were not, in fact, going to be carried out.

Following the first wave of arrests of some of the 90 signatories of an open letter to President Rafsanjani, in June, Middle East Watch appealed directly to the President, to intervene in the case. The Bazargan group had used purely peaceful means to press for respect by the government for constitutionally guranteed rights, such as freedom of speech and association, and adherence to the rule of law. A newsletter issued at the end of the month laid out the background to the case.

Thereafter, we continued to keep abreast of further grave develpments in the case, including the use of torture against at least half a dozen of the 30 detainees, and the televised "confession" of one of their number, Farhad Behbehani. Research was well advanced at the year's end into a planned newsletter on the longstanding Iranian practice of using extorted confessions from political prisoners to subvert the judicial process and to stigmatize, or ban, dissident political groups.

One of Middle East Watch's initial goals is to open a dialogue with the Iranian authorities, on the basis of the International Convenant on Civil and Political Rights -- to which Iran remains a party -- and the freedoms guaranteed by the country's post-revolution constitution. This would be one of the tasks of a fact-finding mission to Tehran, provisionally scheduled for the first quarter of 1991. The mission would take the opportunity to gather information on the wide range of rights violations being perpetrated in Iran, for a major report to be issued later in the year. Research for this report among the two-million-strong Iranian exile community in Western Europe and the United States began in the fall of 1990.

3 ADFSIN was established in March 1986 by Mehdi Bazargan, Dr. Ali Ardalan (Secretary General) and a score of other liberal-minded political figures who called for the rule of law and respect for civil liberties. The association was never granted official recognition and its members came under harassment after calling for an end to the Iran-Iraq war.

4 Since 1980, the Iranian government has been accused of complicity in at least 22 assassinations against Iranian nationals in Europe, the United States, the United Arab Emirates, Turkey and Cyprus.

5 Philip Shenon, "An Iranian Director Finds His Way Past a Double Censorship," New York Times, August 15, 1990.

6 These figures must be viewed with some suspicion. The opposition claims that the true figure of executions is far higher. According to the People's Mujahedin, over 550 executions were officially announced in the Iranian media between January and mid-November 1990.

7 At least five such executions were carried out in January 1990 alone.

8 In a more positive development, however, the government said that between September 3, 1989, and October 7, 1990, it granted amnesty or clemency to 4,641 political and common prisoners.

9 As two examples, the Iranian Bible Society was dissolved in February 1990 and an Armenian Christian school was transformed into a Muslim school.

10 Keyhan Havai, October 17, 1990, p. 2.
IRAQ AND OCCUPIED KUWAIT11

Any examination of the Iraqi government's human rights record in 1990, in the light of the stance adopted by the Bush administration toward that stained balance sheet, would have to conclude that this was a "before and after" portrait. For the United States, the moment of truth was August 2 -- the date when President Saddam Hussein shocked the world by invading, and occupying, neighboring Kuwait. His forces' brutal treatment of many thousands of Kuwaitis and foreigners trapped by the conflict is now familiar knowledge to most readers.

With the US and the United Nations Security Council in the vanguard, a chorus of denunciation of the Iraqi forces' abuses in Kuwait was heard during the fall. Graphic eyewitness testimony from Kuwaiti civilians to heinous human rights violations such as extrajudicial executions, torture, rape and large-scale arbitrary imprisonment filled newspaper columns and television screens around the world. UN Security Council resolution after resolution condemned the Iraqi government in unequivocal terms, calling on it to respect the various international human rights instruments to which it is a party.

Saddam's flagrant disregard for the fundamental rights of his own citizens had, however, long been familiar to Iraqis themselves, and to some outside observers. Over the past two years, the US State Department, the staff of the US Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Amnesty International and a number of Western journalists were among those who documented the regime's crimes. In February 1990, Middle East Watch issued a 193-page report, Human Rights in Iraq, cataloging the extraordinary oppressiveness of the Ba'th Party regime since its seizure of power in 1968. The report concluded that over the past two decades, apart from freedom of worship, virtually every important liberty has been denied Iraq's 17 million people.

Human Rights Developments in Iraq

Given the closed nature of Iraq, obtaining independent information about such matters as judicial procedure and the exercise of the rule of law is particularly difficult for any external observer, whether a diplomat or a human rights worker. However, during the spring of 1990, two legal cases -- one in Baghdad and the other in London -- provided a rare glimpse into the machinations of the Iraqi judicial and political system.

Farzad Bazoft, an Iranian-born journalist working for The Observer, the London weekly, had been arrested on September 15, 1989, together with a British nurse, after investigating reports of a huge explosion at the al-Qaa Qaa munitions plant. Held incommunicado for six months, Bazoft was apparently tortured to extract a televised confession of espionage on behalf of Israel and Britain -- an admission he subsequently retracted. After a summary hearing, a closed-door revolutionary court pronounced the death sentence.

Political leaders around the world, including UN Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar and British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, joined in appeals to Saddam Hussein for clemency. (To its discredit, the Bush administration did not feel it necessary to endorse these appeals.) Ignoring the international outcry, the Iraqi government hung Bazoft on March 15.

Iraqi Information Minister Latif Nasif Jasim, a close aide to the President, indicated the levity with which his government imposes the ultimate sentence when he remarked, "Thatcher wanted him alive. We sent him in a box." Iraq makes liberal provision for the use of the death penalty, including for such offenses as the propagation of Zionism or Freemasonry, or membership by former military officers in parties other than the ruling Ba'th.

Much less public attention was given a few weeks later to another case, this time before the High Court in London. Nominally, the case involved a financial dispute between the Iraqi government-owned Rafidain Bank, as the plaintiff, and a subsidiary of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK), a Kurdish guerrilla organization-cum-political-party. But court documents made clear that, in fact, it pitted the highest echelons of the Iraqi government against the PUK. Its outcome hung on the validity of the government's tendentious assertion that the rule of law and the separation of powers prevail in contemporary Iraq, in theory and practice.

The case was eventually settled, inconclusively, out of court, but not before sworn depositions had revealed that the Iraqi government had framed two Rafidan Bank employees: sentencing them to long jail sentences so as to make its own case against the PUK more plausible. When a key witness in the case, a Kurd identified only as "Hassan," fled the country for his own safety, several of his close relatives were seized in his place, and imprisoned.

In a society of victims, the Kurds stand out. The Kurdish minority is a non-Arab ethnic group, with its own language and ancient cultural identity, which numbers between three and four million in Iraq. Most live in the mountainous northeast part of the country, adjoining the Kurdish-populated regions of Iran and Turkey. At least 12 million Kurds live in Turkey, seven million in Iran and another million or so in Syria and the Soviet Union.

Upon the disintegration of the Ottoman Empire, the Kurds asserted their right to self-determination on the basis of their ethnic, linguistic and cultural cohesion -- a right recognized in the 1921 Treaty of Sèvres. However, more powerful national interests prevailed over those of the Kurds. The British, with the consent of the League of Nations, included the oil-rich, and largely Kurdish, Ottoman province of Mosul within the boundaries of a new state of Iraq. The result was an embittered, intermittently rebellious population that has been a constant thorn in the side of its host countries, as well as a tool in the hands of feuding neighboring states.

While the Kurds have rarely, if ever, been ruled with benevolence, nowhere has their repression been more devastating than in Iraq. Recent examples of their treatment include:

o Chemicals weapons slaughter. On April 15-16, 1987, March 16-17, and August 25-27, 1988, dozens of villages in Kurdish areas of Iraq were decimated by chemical weapons delivered by aerial bombardment. The US State Department reckoned the death toll in the thousands. Many of the male victims were Pesh Merga (Kurdish nationalist) guerrillas. However, investigations by the US Senate Foreign Relations Committee concluded that those clearly hors de combat -- women, children, the aged and the infirm -- comprised the overwhelming majority of victims. Well over 140,000 Kurds were forced to flee to neighboring Iran and Turkey, abandoning their possessions.

o Persecution of returning refugees. Responding in part to a series of amnesties proclaimed by Baghdad, and in part to pressure from Turkish authorities, several thousand Kurds returned to Iraq in 1989 and 1990. According to Amnesty International and Kurdish exile groups, hundreds who returned in 1989 were soon seized by the authorities and disappeared, or were forcibly transported to resettlement camps guarded by the Iraqi army, far from their homeland.12 In 1990, the treatment of returning refugees improved. Between 400 and 500 returned from Turkey in two batches, in the March-April and June-July periods. Preliminary information suggests that they came to no harm.

o Forced resettlement. In 1985, the government embarked on the latest of an historic series of attempts to alter the population composition of the rebellious northeast of the country by replacing Kurds with Arabs. According to the US State Department, about half a million Kurds had been relocated in the secret operation through the end of 1990, while hundreds of Kurdish villages and small towns were destroyed. Eyewitnesses say the Kurds' new houses are typically in desolate areas bereft of economic opportunity. By 1990, the forcible depopulation of the Kurdish countryside was largely complete. Ironically, however, in a bid to boost domestic food production following the imposition of the UN-sanctioned trade embargo, some relocated Kurdish farmers were encouraged in the fall to return to their original lands.

o Mass disappearances. In August 1983, an estimated 8,000 members of the Kurdish Barzani clan, 315 of whom were children, were arrested. (The late Mulla Mustafa Barzani was the founder and long-time leader of the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP), the largest of the Iraqi Kurdish guerrilla forces.) No information has ever been given as to the fate of those detained. The "Barzani 8,000" are merely the largest of many such disappearances. The KDP has recorded the names of 439 Kurds rounded up in late 1988 after they were unable to escape abroad following the chemical weapons attacks of that year; their whereabouts remain unknown. Other estimates of the number unaccounted for range up to 7,500.

o Extrajudicial killings. In August or September 1989, Kurdish opposition parties claim that about 60 fishermen plying their trade on Lake Dukan, in northwest Iraq, were killed under fire from Iraqi helicopter gunships. While the PUK acknowledges that it had been ferrying fighters across the lake from a nearby military camp, it insists that, in this case, unarmed noncombattants were the victims.13 The action appeared to be a repetition of the use of such gunships against Iraqi army deserters hiding out in the marshes of southern Iraq, in 1988 and 1989.

Exile sources and human rights organizations say that the persecution of the Kurds, as well as of the country's smaller Turcoman and Assyrian Christian minorities, continued into 1990, albeit on a reduced scale. In January, for instance, 30 Turcomans are believed to have been executed, on unspecified charges. Among them were four people who had returned from Turkey the previous year under official amnesties.14

Two years after the Kurds' flight, in November 1990, a Middle East Watch mission to southeast Turkey was able to visit two of the three refugee camps for the 27,000 Iraqi Kurds still temporarily housed in that region. Three mass outbreaks of food poisoning in the camps -- in Kizel Tepe, on June 8-9, 1989, Mus, in December 1989, and Diyabaker, on February 1, 1990 -- resulting in serious illness for thousands, and at least three deaths, were plausibly blamed by camp leaders on Iraqi agents intent on coercing the refugees into returning to their homeland.15

As Iraqis of all backgrounds have learned at their cost, no political dissent, however mildly expressed, is permitted under Saddam Hussein. Such is the prevailing fear of the mukhabarat, the ubiquitous secret police, that Western reporters in Baghdad found no one willing to voice for attribution any criticism of the President or his policies.

Nor is it possible for officials to disagree with his decisions, as discovered by the dozens of senior army officers reported by exile organizations to have been executed in July for opposing the decision to invade Kuwait. In June 1989, Defense Minister Adnan Khairallah Talfah, Saddam's own brother-in-law, was officially said to have been killed in a helicopter crash. However, Iraqi exiles in London are convinced that he, too, was secretly executed, for criticizing the President's decision to take a second, younger wife.

Over the 22 years of Ba'th Party rule, thousands of Iraqi professionals and intellectuals have been forced into voluntary exile in Western Europe and the United States. But even abroad, those who have engaged in political activity have not been safe. In January 1988, Shi'a Muslim leader Sayyed Mahdi al-Hakim was lured from his place of exile in Iran to the Sudan, where he was shot to death at the Khartoum Hilton. The Sudanese government later accused Iraqi embassy personnel of involvement in the murder, compelling Baghdad to close the mission.

Assassination attempts have even extended to the United States. An abortive plot against two Iraqi exiles in California in 1990 was linked to the Iraqi mission to the United Nations. Unlike their Sudanese counterparts, though, the State Department shrunk from the public condemnation of Baghdad which the evidence of official Iraqi complicity warranted.

The case began on February 17, when federal and local police in Modesto, California, arrested an Iraqi immigrant, Adni Khoshaba, in connection with a suspected assassination plot against Sargon Dadesho, an exiled Iraqi dissident active in California's Assyrian community. Three days later, Khoshaba was released on grounds of insufficient evidence. According to The Modesto Bee, which first reported the story, by the end of the week Khoshaba was traced by federal agents to the Iraqi mission in New York, where he had previously worked as a driver. From there, he left the United States.

Despite the ostensible dearth of evidence, Khoshaba was indicted in absentia by a federal court six weeks later, on charges of plotting to kill Dadesho and another unidentified Iraqi exile of Kurdish extraction. The two-count indictment charged that Khoshaba had made two round trips to New York to meet an Iraqi diplomat, who promised him $50,000 to assassinate or arrange the assassination of the two men. Hours after the indictment was made public, the State Department announced that an unnamed Iraqi diplomat had been expelled from the UN mission, for "abuse of his privileges of residence in the United States." The diplomat, it transpired, was First Secretary Ahmad Al-Amari.16

During 1990, Iraqi officials as well as the country's supporters in the United States spoke confidently of extensive revisions being drafted to the Interim Constitution of 1970. The implication was that these revisions would liberalize the treatment of citizens, improving basic rights such as freedom of expression, assembly and political participation.17 With the war against Iran over, the argument ran, the regime could afford to relax its grip. Foreign travel restrictions were eased in early 1990, providing the limited number of Iraqis who could afford to travel, and were permitted to leave, with a much-needed breath of fresh air. But by the end of 1990 there was still no sign of the promised new constitution.

One legislative change which was introduced, far from advancing personal liberties and civil rights, marked a significant regressive step by a regime which had previously proclaimed the existence in Iraq of sexual equality. On February 28, President Saddam signed a new law, Decree 111, effectively decriminalizing the murder of women alleged to have engaged in sexual relations outside marriage, as well as of their lovers, by the women's male relatives. The new law, believed by US officials to have been introduced in response to a spate of wife-killings by recently demobilized soldiers, was promulgated on March 12.

Its introduction provoked an unexpected storm of protest from women's groups in several parts of the Muslim world, as well as private diplomatic representations from Egypt, then a close ally of Iraq. Hundreds of Egyptian citizens -- migrant laborers in Iraq -- had reportedly been among the victims of the affronted Iraqi men. Apparently in response to these protests, Saddam Hussein had second thoughts and withdrew the legislation the following day, March 13.18 It was a potent example of the effectiveness of diplomatic and public pressure on the Iraqi regime, refuting standard US government arguments to the contrary.

What political changes there were in the offing in Iraq in 1990 appeared more likely to entrench further the personal position of Saddam Hussein, already head of state, chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council -- the top policy-making body -- secretary of the so-called Regional Command (the Iraqi section) of the ruling Arab Ba'th Socialist Party, and commander-in-chief of the armed forces. Foreign journalists visiting Baghdad in 1990 noted with interest the political rehabilitation of the once reviled Iraqi monarchy, overthrown in a 1958 coup; the well publicized return from exile of Saddam's disgraced eldest son, Udayy, generally regarded by Western diplomats as the heir apparent;19 and the deepening of a Ceausescu-style personality cult around Saddam.

As for the National Assembly, a legislative body with strictly limited powers, its unanimous endorsement of every proposal made by Saddam during the Gulf crisis indicated that it remained as much a rubber stamp for the executive's actions as ever.20 Elections to the Assembly were held in April 1989, and some independents were allowed to run. But all candidates were subject to prior screening by the mukhabarat to determine their support for the government.21

Hopes for a more democratic government in Iraq, committed to a reversal of the many abuses committed by the Saddam regime, depend crucially on the outcome of the confrontation in the Persian Gulf over the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait. Prospects that a hypothetical post-Saddam government might pay greater respect to human rights improved after a marathon series of meetings of Iraqi opposition groups abroad. On December 27, seventeen parties concluded an agreement in Beirut committing themselves to democracy and a multiparty system. Among the agreement's points were an end to discrimination against Shi'ites (Iraq's leadership is currently dominated by members of the country's minority Sunni Islam sect); the reversal of the "Arabization" of Kurdish towns; and a recognition of Kurdish rights, as contained in the KDP's March 11, 1970 Declaration.22

Human Rights Developments in Iraqi-Occupied Kuwait

Gross human rights abuses against Kuwaiti citizens and other residents of Kuwait commenced in the immediate aftermath of the August 2 invasion. Hundreds were killed or wounded, and thousands detained, in the takeover. Hundreds of thousands of others were forced to flee the country.

Iraqi soldiers and militia committed countless acts of theft, rape and assault on civilians. Others participated in criminal activity as law and order broke down. In an attempt to improve its public image, Iraq publicized the summary execution of a handful of accused looters and rapists.

During August, Iraq attempted unsuccessfully to find support among Kuwaiti public figures. Instead, Kuwaiti volunteers acting on their own initiative took over the running of hospitals and food cooperatives and the performance of sanitation work and gasoline distribution. Faced with these perceived challenges and in response to continued resistance -- both peaceful and armed -- Iraqi occupying authorities acted swiftly, and violently, to assert their unquestionable control in Kuwait.

Scores of people were summarily executed in September and October, including physicians, hospital volunteers and food-distribution personnel, some of them in front of their families. Scores more were killed in confrontations with Iraqi forces, or in detention. Iraq has yet to give an accounting of people killed in its custody -- either to relatives or to neutral organizations. Middle East Watch estimates that at least 600 were killed in the first three months following the invasion.

In that same time, more than 5,000 were arrested. Detainees included political leaders, such as members of the former National Assembly, as well as Red Crescent and other medical personnel and community volunteers. Political figures were detained with family members, including children as young as 13 years of age. Arbitrary arrest and detention continued unabated through the end of the year. So did the practice of holding detainees incommunicado for long periods, and the practice of illegally transferring them to Iraq. The Iraqi government gave no accounting of those it held, despite requests to do so by Middle East Watch and other organizations.

Detainees reported being housed in crowded and unsanitary makeshift detention centers. There, they were systematically tortured to extract information, gain cooperation, mute opposition or set an example to discourage others. Interviews with former detainees showed widespread, and apparently officially sanctioned, ill-treatment of those in custody, such as sleep deprivation, beatings with sticks and metal pipes, mock executions, and threats of execution or harm to family members.

While Baghdad issued an order for Iraqis who had moved to Kuwait after the invasion to leave, it did not clarify its position on the return of Kuwaitis to their country. Kuwaitis were arrested and detained when they tried to enter Kuwait -- for clearly peaceful purposes -- through desert routes from Saudi Arabia. One person known to Middle East Watch was arrested in early December while trying to return home to take his aged mother out of Kuwait. Three others were also arrested that month when they tried to enter Kuwait to be with their families. All four were held incommunicado. During December, the Iraqi government did allow several hundred Kuwaitis to return to Kuwait through Jordan and Iraq. That flow stopped, however, after the reported harassment of returnees, some of whom were active in a grassroots armed resistance.

The Iraqi invasion turned some 400,000 Kuwaiti citizens into refugees, and displaced hundreds of thousands of foreigners who had made Kuwait their home.

Collective punishment was meted out in response to individual acts of resistance. Houses were methodically burned, or deliberately destroyed by tank fire or explosives. Relatives of suspects and wanted public figures were detained and tortured to extract information on their relatives' whereabouts.

All of Kuwait's public hospitals, which constitute the overwhelming majority of health care facilities, and some of its private clinics were taken over by the Iraqi military, making access difficult for Kuwaitis, and next to impossible for victims of official abuse. A number of physicians, a hospital administrator and several medical volunteers were executed on suspicion of helping the resistance. Medical equipment and drugs were seized and shipped to Iraq, resulting in severe shortages of vital drugs. The deterioration of health care, which was further aggravated by the flight of most medical personnel, contributed to the departure of many Kuwaitis to neighboring countries, and to the death of patients for whom the health care system could no longer provide adequate help, including newly born infants.

Kuwaiti food stocks were seized and shipped to Iraq, leading to severe shortages of food, including baby formula. Food coops, which had been owned by Kuwaiti citizens, were taken over by Iraqi administrators, leading to credible charges of discrimination against Kuwaitis. The manager of one food coop and a volunteer at another were summarily executed, and dozens of other volunteers were detained. A number are known to have died while in government custody.

Free assembly and expression were banned by Iraq, and those found with illegal leaflets were killed or otherwise severely punished. Only one newspaper, al-Nida' -- a newly created mouthpiece for the occupying power -- was allowed to publish. Occupation authorities took control of the University of Kuwait campuses, replacing top university administrators and deans with Iraqis.

The rare visits by foreign journalists to Kuwait took place only with official escorts. Iraq did not allow any humanitarian organizations, including the International Committee of the Red Cross, into Kuwait. In fact, Taha Yassin Ramadan, the Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister and right-hand man to the President, went so far as to threaten with mutilation any person attempting to go to Kuwait to investigate human rights conditions without Iraq's permission.

Kuwaiti public property was seized and shipped to Iraq. There was large-scale, systematic and officially sanctioned appropriation of property belonging to Kuwaiti government institutions, including vehicles, office furniture, school and medical equipment, goods in port warehouses and military and aviation hardware. Some private property was also seized by the Iraqi government or looted. Robbery by soldiers and looting was so extensive and widespread that it could only have taken place with official sanction or as a result of gross negligence by the Iraqi authorities. One shopping mall was looted even though it was located next to a large Iraqi command post at the Sheraton Hotel.

Although the Kuwaiti dinar was previously worth three Iraqi dinars, Iraq decreed parity between the two currencies and then declared the Kuwaiti dinar unacceptable tender. All bank accounts were figured according to the new formula, drastically reducing their value.

US Policy

In the early stages of the 1980-1988 Iran-Iraq war, the US government decided to try to staunch a threatening wave of Islamic fundamentalism emanating from Tehran. From this step, undisclosed at the time, flowed a policy of pinning at least part of future US commercial and geopolitical interests in the region on the Saddam regime. The record thus shows that criticism by the Reagan and Bush administrations of the Iraqi dictator's domestic conduct was consistently muted, and economic assistance to his financially hard-pressed government -- in the form of US government-backed credits and loan guarantees running into billions of dollars -- was made freely available.

Prior to the Kuwait invasion, it seemed as if the Bush administration, aided by certain friendly members of Congress and a well oiled business lobby, was prepared to go to considerable lengths not to upset steadily improving relations with Baghdad. Attempts during the first half of 1990 by both the House and the Senate to introduce trade-sanctions legislation against Iraq -- citing that country's threats against Israel, its military build-up and its human rights record -- were consistently blocked by the administration. Just two days before the invasion, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs John Kelly testified on Capitol Hill to this end.

This conciliatory approach to dealing with the Saddam regime appeared to have been set from the top. Its pitfalls, and contradictions, were exposed most glaringly in the transcript of a conversation in Baghdad on July 25 -- eight days before the invasion of Kuwait -- between US Ambassador April Glaspie and the Iraqi President. According to the Iraqi transcript, the accuracy of which has not been challenged by the State Department, Ambassador Glaspie was conciliatory almost to the point of subservience. At one stage, she allegedly referred to the Iraq-Kuwait dispute as "an inter-Arab affair of no concern to the United States."

It was not only the State Department that was guilty of fawning on Saddam Hussein. Both the Commerce and Agriculture Departments were strong proponents of closer trade links with Iraq, a leading purchaser of US wheat and rice. Only when Iraq began to fall into serious arrears in repayments on US loans guaranteed by the Export-Import Bank did the administration reluctantly take action, in early 1990, to cut its credit line.

Congress, too, must bear its share of the blame. According to another Iraqi transcript of a meeting in Baghdad on April 12, Senator Robert Dole ingratiatingly assured the Iraqi leader that a Voice of America staffer responsible for a broadcast that had indirectly compared Saddam with the late Romanian dictator Nicolae Ceausescu had been fired. He was wrong.

This resistance to sanctions came despite the State Department's ample cataloguing of Iraqi atrocities. Published in February 1990, the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1989 was largely accurate in its findings on Iraq, although in places it appeared ready to give the Iraqi government the benefit of the doubt where such generosity was undeserved, as in the case of torture, where evidence of its unchecked and widespread practice was not reflected. Similarly, in testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on June 15, Joshua Gilder, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, pulled no punches in describing Iraqi abuses, stating:

Human rights, as such, are not recognized in Iraq. As our report details, the ordinary Iraqi citizen knows no personal security against government violence. Disappearances, followed by secret executions, appear to be common....The penalty for expressing opinions deemed objectionable by the regime is swift and brutal. We believe that over the past ten years many thousands to tens of thousands...have been arrested by the secret police on suspicion of opposition to the government....[T]here is not even the charade of due process for those charged with security-related offenses broadly defined to include such routine criminal matters as currency violations....Torture is routine, for security offenses and ordinary crimes alike, and confessions extracted under torture are admissible in court....In general, the regime is ruthless in its efforts to maintain absolute control over the population.

Apart from these commendable denunciations by the State Department's Human Rights Bureau, public criticisms of Iraqi abuses were few and far between. There was nothing comparable to the Gilder statement at venues such as the UN Commission on Human Rights, when attempts in February to put Iraq in the dock were being mounted by other Western countries, or at moments such as the Bazoft trial, when leadership from the US could have been decisive. Instead, despite protestations by officials about their use of private diplomacy for human rights concerns, it seems that the US chose to do nothing.

The response to the suspected assassination plot in California, in February, strongly indicated a desire to shield the Saddam regime from too much public opprobrium. On March 2, before the story became public, Lee Hamilton, chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, questioned Assistant Secretary Kelly about allegations that the Iraqi mission in New York had been involved in attempts to assassinate political opponents in the United States. Stonewalling, Kelly pleaded the need to preserve confidentiality on the subject.

It was only after the publication of the incident in several newspapers, and the retaliatory expulsion of a US diplomat from Baghdad, that the reluctant administration publicly confirmed the essential facts of the case. However, what was missing from the statement, delivered by Kelly to the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Europe and the Middle East, was the clear connection to the Iraqi government itself. Nor did the US government publicly protest to Baghdad about the incident.

After August 2, it was, of course, a different story. Then it seemed as if the subject of human rights in Iraq and occupied Kuwait was on every official's lips, from President Bush on down. The President's remarks in December, to the effect that he wished to bring the Persian Gulf crisis to an early resolution -- if necessary, by waging war -- because of an explosive Amnesty International report, indicated the extent to which accounts of human rights abuses had become political dynamite.

The Work of Middle East Watch

In February, Middle East Watch published the fruit of a year's research into Saddam Hussein's rights practices, in a lengthy report entitled Human Rights in Iraq. With minor updating, this comprehensive document was rereleased in the fall, in a new joint publishing venture with Yale University Press.

During the course of the year, the organization continued to monitor developments inside Iraq, raising them with the Iraqi authorities when required. In March, it protested over the absence of due process in the Bazoft case, highlighting the strong suspicion that torture had been used against the journalist. Later that month, it raised the issue of new legislation encouraging violence against women. This inquiry elicited a rare response from the government, stating that the legislation had been withdrawn.

In the High Court case in London between the Iraqi government and the PUK in May, Middle East Watch agreed to act as an expert witness for the defense. Written and verbal testimony was provided, challenging the government's central assertion that all officials, including Saddam Hussein himself, were subject to the law of the land.

The invasion of Kuwait in August provoked an intensive effort by Middle East Watch to monitor the human rights situation inside Kuwait, despite Iraq's refusal to permit access by neutral observers to Kuwait. An additional complication in accurately documenting the abuses was the exaggerations being accepted as fact by some Western officials.

Over the five-month period to the end of the year, the organization issued three newsletters based on extensive interviews with recent refugees from Kuwait in Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Egypt and the other Gulf states. The first, in August, dealt with the human rights and humanitarian law standards incumbent on all parties to the conflict, and with the foreigners used as hostages and "human shields." The second, in September, addressed the conduct of Iraqi troops in Kuwait. The third, in mid-November, provided a comprehensive overview of the violations committed by Iraqi forces -- an overview which was updated a month later.

Middle East Watch also raised with UN Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar the neglected issue of tens of thousands of Asian workers stranded in Iraq and Kuwait who faced starvation, due to the restrictive approach to the food embargo adopted by the UN sanctions committee, as well as Saddam's callous disregard for the workers' well-being and his refusal to permit access by international humanitarian organizations to distribute food. Research was also launched into the poor treatment by several Arab Pensinsula states -- all allies of the US -- of another overlooked group of victims: the tens of thousands of Palestinian civilians resident in the Gulf for decades.

During the course of the crisis Middle East Watch gave dozens of radio, television and press interviews, and took part in many other public speaking engagements.

11 By treating occupied Kuwait as part of the chapter on Iraq, Middle East Watch in no sense condones the Iraqi invasion or recognizes the declared annexation of Kuwait. Rather, this treatment reflects the organization's policy of addressing abuses according to the forces committing them rather than the geographic boundaries in which they happen to be committed. For a discussion of human rights conditions in Kuwait before the Iraqi invasion, see the separate chapter on Kuwait, infra.

12 Amnesty International also reported that 33 Assyrian Christians and their families who returned from Turkey and Iran to Iraq in late 1988 and early 1989, under various amnesties, were said in March 1989 to have disappeared. Most were from Dohuk province. Amnesty International, Iraqi Kurds: at risk of forcible repatriation from Turkey and human rights violations in Iraq, June 1990, p. 5.

13 Interview by Middle East Watch with Dr. Latif Rashid, European representative of the PUK, January 3, 1990.

14 Amnesty International, ibid, p.5.

15 The mission observed overcrowding, a lack of schooling and employment, and poor sanitation in the camps.

16 Middle East Watch interview with Sargon Dadesho, November 1990.

17 Amended in 1973 and 1974, the Interim Constitution is Iraq's basic legal document. Draft revisions were said to have been in preparation in 1989 as well, but never materialized.

18 Letter to Middle East Watch from Dr. Abdul Amir Al-Anbari, Ambassador of Iraq to the United Nations, April 12, 1990.

19 Udayy Hussein had been responsible for the killing of his father's favorite bodyguard in 1989, and was subsequently sent into exile in Western Europe. No charges were ever brought against him after the then Minister of Justice publicly pleaded with Saddam to display clemency to his son.

20 See Middle East Watch, Human Rights in Iraq, February 1990, p. 38.

21 Testimony by Joshua R. Gilder, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, at a hearing entitled "US Relations with Iraq"; 15 June, 1990.

22 The 17 parties that took part in three months of meetings in Damascus and Beirut ranged from the Communists to the Islamists, together with the five-party Iraqi Kurdistan Front and a dissident Ba'th faction.
IRAQ AND OCCUPIED KUWAIT11

Any examination of the Iraqi government's human rights record in 1990, in the light of the stance adopted by the Bush administration toward that stained balance sheet, would have to conclude that this was a "before and after" portrait. For the United States, the moment of truth was August 2 -- the date when President Saddam Hussein shocked the world by invading, and occupying, neighboring Kuwait. His forces' brutal treatment of many thousands of Kuwaitis and foreigners trapped by the conflict is now familiar knowledge to most readers.

With the US and the United Nations Security Council in the vanguard, a chorus of denunciation of the Iraqi forces' abuses in Kuwait was heard during the fall. Graphic eyewitness testimony from Kuwaiti civilians to heinous human rights violations such as extrajudicial executions, torture, rape and large-scale arbitrary imprisonment filled newspaper columns and television screens around the world. UN Security Council resolution after resolution condemned the Iraqi government in unequivocal terms, calling on it to respect the various international human rights instruments to which it is a party.

Saddam's flagrant disregard for the fundamental rights of his own citizens had, however, long been familiar to Iraqis themselves, and to some outside observers. Over the past two years, the US State Department, the staff of the US Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Amnesty International and a number of Western journalists were among those who documented the regime's crimes. In February 1990, Middle East Watch issued a 193-page report, Human Rights in Iraq, cataloging the extraordinary oppressiveness of the Ba'th Party regime since its seizure of power in 1968. The report concluded that over the past two decades, apart from freedom of worship, virtually every important liberty has been denied Iraq's 17 million people.

Human Rights Developments in Iraq

Given the closed nature of Iraq, obtaining independent information about such matters as judicial procedure and the exercise of the rule of law is particularly difficult for any external observer, whether a diplomat or a human rights worker. However, during the spring of 1990, two legal cases -- one in Baghdad and the other in London -- provided a rare glimpse into the machinations of the Iraqi judicial and political system.

Farzad Bazoft, an Iranian-born journalist working for The Observer, the London weekly, had been arrested on September 15, 1989, together with a British nurse, after investigating reports of a huge explosion at the al-Qaa Qaa munitions plant. Held incommunicado for six months, Bazoft was apparently tortured to extract a televised confession of espionage on behalf of Israel and Britain -- an admission he subsequently retracted. After a summary hearing, a closed-door revolutionary court pronounced the death sentence.

Political leaders around the world, including UN Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar and British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, joined in appeals to Saddam Hussein for clemency. (To its discredit, the Bush administration did not feel it necessary to endorse these appeals.) Ignoring the international outcry, the Iraqi government hung Bazoft on March 15.

Iraqi Information Minister Latif Nasif Jasim, a close aide to the President, indicated the levity with which his government imposes the ultimate sentence when he remarked, "Thatcher wanted him alive. We sent him in a box." Iraq makes liberal provision for the use of the death penalty, including for such offenses as the propagation of Zionism or Freemasonry, or membership by former military officers in parties other than the ruling Ba'th.

Much less public attention was given a few weeks later to another case, this time before the High Court in London. Nominally, the case involved a financial dispute between the Iraqi government-owned Rafidain Bank, as the plaintiff, and a subsidiary of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK), a Kurdish guerrilla organization-cum-political-party. But court documents made clear that, in fact, it pitted the highest echelons of the Iraqi government against the PUK. Its outcome hung on the validity of the government's tendentious assertion that the rule of law and the separation of powers prevail in contemporary Iraq, in theory and practice.

The case was eventually settled, inconclusively, out of court, but not before sworn depositions had revealed that the Iraqi government had framed two Rafidan Bank employees: sentencing them to long jail sentences so as to make its own case against the PUK more plausible. When a key witness in the case, a Kurd identified only as "Hassan," fled the country for his own safety, several of his close relatives were seized in his place, and imprisoned.

In a society of victims, the Kurds stand out. The Kurdish minority is a non-Arab ethnic group, with its own language and ancient cultural identity, which numbers between three and four million in Iraq. Most live in the mountainous northeast part of the country, adjoining the Kurdish-populated regions of Iran and Turkey. At least 12 million Kurds live in Turkey, seven million in Iran and another million or so in Syria and the Soviet Union.

Upon the disintegration of the Ottoman Empire, the Kurds asserted their right to self-determination on the basis of their ethnic, linguistic and cultural cohesion -- a right recognized in the 1921 Treaty of Sèvres. However, more powerful national interests prevailed over those of the Kurds. The British, with the consent of the League of Nations, included the oil-rich, and largely Kurdish, Ottoman province of Mosul within the boundaries of a new state of Iraq. The result was an embittered, intermittently rebellious population that has been a constant thorn in the side of its host countries, as well as a tool in the hands of feuding neighboring states.

While the Kurds have rarely, if ever, been ruled with benevolence, nowhere has their repression been more devastating than in Iraq. Recent examples of their treatment include:

o Chemicals weapons slaughter. On April 15-16, 1987, March 16-17, and August 25-27, 1988, dozens of villages in Kurdish areas of Iraq were decimated by chemical weapons delivered by aerial bombardment. The US State Department reckoned the death toll in the thousands. Many of the male victims were Pesh Merga (Kurdish nationalist) guerrillas. However, investigations by the US Senate Foreign Relations Committee concluded that those clearly hors de combat -- women, children, the aged and the infirm -- comprised the overwhelming majority of victims. Well over 140,000 Kurds were forced to flee to neighboring Iran and Turkey, abandoning their possessions.

o Persecution of returning refugees. Responding in part to a series of amnesties proclaimed by Baghdad, and in part to pressure from Turkish authorities, several thousand Kurds returned to Iraq in 1989 and 1990. According to Amnesty International and Kurdish exile groups, hundreds who returned in 1989 were soon seized by the authorities and disappeared, or were forcibly transported to resettlement camps guarded by the Iraqi army, far from their homeland.12 In 1990, the treatment of returning refugees improved. Between 400 and 500 returned from Turkey in two batches, in the March-April and June-July periods. Preliminary information suggests that they came to no harm.

o Forced resettlement. In 1985, the government embarked on the latest of an historic series of attempts to alter the population composition of the rebellious northeast of the country by replacing Kurds with Arabs. According to the US State Department, about half a million Kurds had been relocated in the secret operation through the end of 1990, while hundreds of Kurdish villages and small towns were destroyed. Eyewitnesses say the Kurds' new houses are typically in desolate areas bereft of economic opportunity. By 1990, the forcible depopulation of the Kurdish countryside was largely complete. Ironically, however, in a bid to boost domestic food production following the imposition of the UN-sanctioned trade embargo, some relocated Kurdish farmers were encouraged in the fall to return to their original lands.

o Mass disappearances. In August 1983, an estimated 8,000 members of the Kurdish Barzani clan, 315 of whom were children, were arrested. (The late Mulla Mustafa Barzani was the founder and long-time leader of the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP), the largest of the Iraqi Kurdish guerrilla forces.) No information has ever been given as to the fate of those detained. The "Barzani 8,000" are merely the largest of many such disappearances. The KDP has recorded the names of 439 Kurds rounded up in late 1988 after they were unable to escape abroad following the chemical weapons attacks of that year; their whereabouts remain unknown. Other estimates of the number unaccounted for range up to 7,500.

o Extrajudicial killings. In August or September 1989, Kurdish opposition parties claim that about 60 fishermen plying their trade on Lake Dukan, in northwest Iraq, were killed under fire from Iraqi helicopter gunships. While the PUK acknowledges that it had been ferrying fighters across the lake from a nearby military camp, it insists that, in this case, unarmed noncombattants were the victims.13 The action appeared to be a repetition of the use of such gunships against Iraqi army deserters hiding out in the marshes of southern Iraq, in 1988 and 1989.

Exile sources and human rights organizations say that the persecution of the Kurds, as well as of the country's smaller Turcoman and Assyrian Christian minorities, continued into 1990, albeit on a reduced scale. In January, for instance, 30 Turcomans are believed to have been executed, on unspecified charges. Among them were four people who had returned from Turkey the previous year under official amnesties.14

Two years after the Kurds' flight, in November 1990, a Middle East Watch mission to southeast Turkey was able to visit two of the three refugee camps for the 27,000 Iraqi Kurds still temporarily housed in that region. Three mass outbreaks of food poisoning in the camps -- in Kizel Tepe, on June 8-9, 1989, Mus, in December 1989, and Diyabaker, on February 1, 1990 -- resulting in serious illness for thousands, and at least three deaths, were plausibly blamed by camp leaders on Iraqi agents intent on coercing the refugees into returning to their homeland.15

As Iraqis of all backgrounds have learned at their cost, no political dissent, however mildly expressed, is permitted under Saddam Hussein. Such is the prevailing fear of the mukhabarat, the ubiquitous secret police, that Western reporters in Baghdad found no one willing to voice for attribution any criticism of the President or his policies.

Nor is it possible for officials to disagree with his decisions, as discovered by the dozens of senior army officers reported by exile organizations to have been executed in July for opposing the decision to invade Kuwait. In June 1989, Defense Minister Adnan Khairallah Talfah, Saddam's own brother-in-law, was officially said to have been killed in a helicopter crash. However, Iraqi exiles in London are convinced that he, too, was secretly executed, for criticizing the President's decision to take a second, younger wife.

Over the 22 years of Ba'th Party rule, thousands of Iraqi professionals and intellectuals have been forced into voluntary exile in Western Europe and the United States. But even abroad, those who have engaged in political activity have not been safe. In January 1988, Shi'a Muslim leader Sayyed Mahdi al-Hakim was lured from his place of exile in Iran to the Sudan, where he was shot to death at the Khartoum Hilton. The Sudanese government later accused Iraqi embassy personnel of involvement in the murder, compelling Baghdad to close the mission.

Assassination attempts have even extended to the United States. An abortive plot against two Iraqi exiles in California in 1990 was linked to the Iraqi mission to the United Nations. Unlike their Sudanese counterparts, though, the State Department shrunk from the public condemnation of Baghdad which the evidence of official Iraqi complicity warranted.

The case began on February 17, when federal and local police in Modesto, California, arrested an Iraqi immigrant, Adni Khoshaba, in connection with a suspected assassination plot against Sargon Dadesho, an exiled Iraqi dissident active in California's Assyrian community. Three days later, Khoshaba was released on grounds of insufficient evidence. According to The Modesto Bee, which first reported the story, by the end of the week Khoshaba was traced by federal agents to the Iraqi mission in New York, where he had previously worked as a driver. From there, he left the United States.

Despite the ostensible dearth of evidence, Khoshaba was indicted in absentia by a federal court six weeks later, on charges of plotting to kill Dadesho and another unidentified Iraqi exile of Kurdish extraction. The two-count indictment charged that Khoshaba had made two round trips to New York to meet an Iraqi diplomat, who promised him $50,000 to assassinate or arrange the assassination of the two men. Hours after the indictment was made public, the State Department announced that an unnamed Iraqi diplomat had been expelled from the UN mission, for "abuse of his privileges of residence in the United States." The diplomat, it transpired, was First Secretary Ahmad Al-Amari.16

During 1990, Iraqi officials as well as the country's supporters in the United States spoke confidently of extensive revisions being drafted to the Interim Constitution of 1970. The implication was that these revisions would liberalize the treatment of citizens, improving basic rights such as freedom of expression, assembly and political participation.17 With the war against Iran over, the argument ran, the regime could afford to relax its grip. Foreign travel restrictions were eased in early 1990, providing the limited number of Iraqis who could afford to travel, and were permitted to leave, with a much-needed breath of fresh air. But by the end of 1990 there was still no sign of the promised new constitution.

One legislative change which was introduced, far from advancing personal liberties and civil rights, marked a significant regressive step by a regime which had previously proclaimed the existence in Iraq of sexual equality. On February 28, President Saddam signed a new law, Decree 111, effectively decriminalizing the murder of women alleged to have engaged in sexual relations outside marriage, as well as of their lovers, by the women's male relatives. The new law, believed by US officials to have been introduced in response to a spate of wife-killings by recently demobilized soldiers, was promulgated on March 12.

Its introduction provoked an unexpected storm of protest from women's groups in several parts of the Muslim world, as well as private diplomatic representations from Egypt, then a close ally of Iraq. Hundreds of Egyptian citizens -- migrant laborers in Iraq -- had reportedly been among the victims of the affronted Iraqi men. Apparently in response to these protests, Saddam Hussein had second thoughts and withdrew the legislation the following day, March 13.18 It was a potent example of the effectiveness of diplomatic and public pressure on the Iraqi regime, refuting standard US government arguments to the contrary.

What political changes there were in the offing in Iraq in 1990 appeared more likely to entrench further the personal position of Saddam Hussein, already head of state, chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council -- the top policy-making body -- secretary of the so-called Regional Command (the Iraqi section) of the ruling Arab Ba'th Socialist Party, and commander-in-chief of the armed forces. Foreign journalists visiting Baghdad in 1990 noted with interest the political rehabilitation of the once reviled Iraqi monarchy, overthrown in a 1958 coup; the well publicized return from exile of Saddam's disgraced eldest son, Udayy, generally regarded by Western diplomats as the heir apparent;19 and the deepening of a Ceausescu-style personality cult around Saddam.

As for the National Assembly, a legislative body with strictly limited powers, its unanimous endorsement of every proposal made by Saddam during the Gulf crisis indicated that it remained as much a rubber stamp for the executive's actions as ever.20 Elections to the Assembly were held in April 1989, and some independents were allowed to run. But all candidates were subject to prior screening by the mukhabarat to determine their support for the government.21

Hopes for a more democratic government in Iraq, committed to a reversal of the many abuses committed by the Saddam regime, depend crucially on the outcome of the confrontation in the Persian Gulf over the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait. Prospects that a hypothetical post-Saddam government might pay greater respect to human rights improved after a marathon series of meetings of Iraqi opposition groups abroad. On December 27, seventeen parties concluded an agreement in Beirut committing themselves to democracy and a multiparty system. Among the agreement's points were an end to discrimination against Shi'ites (Iraq's leadership is currently dominated by members of the country's minority Sunni Islam sect); the reversal of the "Arabization" of Kurdish towns; and a recognition of Kurdish rights, as contained in the KDP's March 11, 1970 Declaration.22

Human Rights Developments in Iraqi-Occupied Kuwait

Gross human rights abuses against Kuwaiti citizens and other residents of Kuwait commenced in the immediate aftermath of the August 2 invasion. Hundreds were killed or wounded, and thousands detained, in the takeover. Hundreds of thousands of others were forced to flee the country.

Iraqi soldiers and militia committed countless acts of theft, rape and assault on civilians. Others participated in criminal activity as law and order broke down. In an attempt to improve its public image, Iraq publicized the summary execution of a handful of accused looters and rapists.

During August, Iraq attempted unsuccessfully to find support among Kuwaiti public figures. Instead, Kuwaiti volunteers acting on their own initiative took over the running of hospitals and food cooperatives and the performance of sanitation work and gasoline distribution. Faced with these perceived challenges and in response to continued resistance -- both peaceful and armed -- Iraqi occupying authorities acted swiftly, and violently, to assert their unquestionable control in Kuwait.

Scores of people were summarily executed in September and October, including physicians, hospital volunteers and food-distribution personnel, some of them in front of their families. Scores more were killed in confrontations with Iraqi forces, or in detention. Iraq has yet to give an accounting of people killed in its custody -- either to relatives or to neutral organizations. Middle East Watch estimates that at least 600 were killed in the first three months following the invasion.

In that same time, more than 5,000 were arrested. Detainees included political leaders, such as members of the former National Assembly, as well as Red Crescent and other medical personnel and community volunteers. Political figures were detained with family members, including children as young as 13 years of age. Arbitrary arrest and detention continued unabated through the end of the year. So did the practice of holding detainees incommunicado for long periods, and the practice of illegally transferring them to Iraq. The Iraqi government gave no accounting of those it held, despite requests to do so by Middle East Watch and other organizations.

Detainees reported being housed in crowded and unsanitary makeshift detention centers. There, they were systematically tortured to extract information, gain cooperation, mute opposition or set an example to discourage others. Interviews with former detainees showed widespread, and apparently officially sanctioned, ill-treatment of those in custody, such as sleep deprivation, beatings with sticks and metal pipes, mock executions, and threats of execution or harm to family members.

While Baghdad issued an order for Iraqis who had moved to Kuwait after the invasion to leave, it did not clarify its position on the return of Kuwaitis to their country. Kuwaitis were arrested and detained when they tried to enter Kuwait -- for clearly peaceful purposes -- through desert routes from Saudi Arabia. One person known to Middle East Watch was arrested in early December while trying to return home to take his aged mother out of Kuwait. Three others were also arrested that month when they tried to enter Kuwait to be with their families. All four were held incommunicado. During December, the Iraqi government did allow several hundred Kuwaitis to return to Kuwait through Jordan and Iraq. That flow stopped, however, after the reported harassment of returnees, some of whom were active in a grassroots armed resistance.

The Iraqi invasion turned some 400,000 Kuwaiti citizens into refugees, and displaced hundreds of thousands of foreigners who had made Kuwait their home.

Collective punishment was meted out in response to individual acts of resistance. Houses were methodically burned, or deliberately destroyed by tank fire or explosives. Relatives of suspects and wanted public figures were detained and tortured to extract information on their relatives' whereabouts.

All of Kuwait's public hospitals, which constitute the overwhelming majority of health care facilities, and some of its private clinics were taken over by the Iraqi military, making access difficult for Kuwaitis, and next to impossible for victims of official abuse. A number of physicians, a hospital administrator and several medical volunteers were executed on suspicion of helping the resistance. Medical equipment and drugs were seized and shipped to Iraq, resulting in severe shortages of vital drugs. The deterioration of health care, which was further aggravated by the flight of most medical personnel, contributed to the departure of many Kuwaitis to neighboring countries, and to the death of patients for whom the health care system could no longer provide adequate help, including newly born infants.

Kuwaiti food stocks were seized and shipped to Iraq, leading to severe shortages of food, including baby formula. Food coops, which had been owned by Kuwaiti citizens, were taken over by Iraqi administrators, leading to credible charges of discrimination against Kuwaitis. The manager of one food coop and a volunteer at another were summarily executed, and dozens of other volunteers were detained. A number are known to have died while in government custody.

Free assembly and expression were banned by Iraq, and those found with illegal leaflets were killed or otherwise severely punished. Only one newspaper, al-Nida' -- a newly created mouthpiece for the occupying power -- was allowed to publish. Occupation authorities took control of the University of Kuwait campuses, replacing top university administrators and deans with Iraqis.

The rare visits by foreign journalists to Kuwait took place only with official escorts. Iraq did not allow any humanitarian organizations, including the International Committee of the Red Cross, into Kuwait. In fact, Taha Yassin Ramadan, the Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister and right-hand man to the President, went so far as to threaten with mutilation any person attempting to go to Kuwait to investigate human rights conditions without Iraq's permission.

Kuwaiti public property was seized and shipped to Iraq. There was large-scale, systematic and officially sanctioned appropriation of property belonging to Kuwaiti government institutions, including vehicles, office furniture, school and medical equipment, goods in port warehouses and military and aviation hardware. Some private property was also seized by the Iraqi government or looted. Robbery by soldiers and looting was so extensive and widespread that it could only have taken place with official sanction or as a result of gross negligence by the Iraqi authorities. One shopping mall was looted even though it was located next to a large Iraqi command post at the Sheraton Hotel.

Although the Kuwaiti dinar was previously worth three Iraqi dinars, Iraq decreed parity between the two currencies and then declared the Kuwaiti dinar unacceptable tender. All bank accounts were figured according to the new formula, drastically reducing their value.

US Policy

In the early stages of the 1980-1988 Iran-Iraq war, the US government decided to try to staunch a threatening wave of Islamic fundamentalism emanating from Tehran. From this step, undisclosed at the time, flowed a policy of pinning at least part of future US commercial and geopolitical interests in the region on the Saddam regime. The record thus shows that criticism by the Reagan and Bush administrations of the Iraqi dictator's domestic conduct was consistently muted, and economic assistance to his financially hard-pressed government -- in the form of US government-backed credits and loan guarantees running into billions of dollars -- was made freely available.

Prior to the Kuwait invasion, it seemed as if the Bush administration, aided by certain friendly members of Congress and a well oiled business lobby, was prepared to go to considerable lengths not to upset steadily improving relations with Baghdad. Attempts during the first half of 1990 by both the House and the Senate to introduce trade-sanctions legislation against Iraq -- citing that country's threats against Israel, its military build-up and its human rights record -- were consistently blocked by the administration. Just two days before the invasion, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs John Kelly testified on Capitol Hill to this end.

This conciliatory approach to dealing with the Saddam regime appeared to have been set from the top. Its pitfalls, and contradictions, were exposed most glaringly in the transcript of a conversation in Baghdad on July 25 -- eight days before the invasion of Kuwait -- between US Ambassador April Glaspie and the Iraqi President. According to the Iraqi transcript, the accuracy of which has not been challenged by the State Department, Ambassador Glaspie was conciliatory almost to the point of subservience. At one stage, she allegedly referred to the Iraq-Kuwait dispute as "an inter-Arab affair of no concern to the United States."

It was not only the State Department that was guilty of fawning on Saddam Hussein. Both the Commerce and Agriculture Departments were strong proponents of closer trade links with Iraq, a leading purchaser of US wheat and rice. Only when Iraq began to fall into serious arrears in repayments on US loans guaranteed by the Export-Import Bank did the administration reluctantly take action, in early 1990, to cut its credit line.

Congress, too, must bear its share of the blame. According to another Iraqi transcript of a meeting in Baghdad on April 12, Senator Robert Dole ingratiatingly assured the Iraqi leader that a Voice of America staffer responsible for a broadcast that had indirectly compared Saddam with the late Romanian dictator Nicolae Ceausescu had been fired. He was wrong.

This resistance to sanctions came despite the State Department's ample cataloguing of Iraqi atrocities. Published in February 1990, the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1989 was largely accurate in its findings on Iraq, although in places it appeared ready to give the Iraqi government the benefit of the doubt where such generosity was undeserved, as in the case of torture, where evidence of its unchecked and widespread practice was not reflected. Similarly, in testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on June 15, Joshua Gilder, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, pulled no punches in describing Iraqi abuses, stating:

Human rights, as such, are not recognized in Iraq. As our report details, the ordinary Iraqi citizen knows no personal security against government violence. Disappearances, followed by secret executions, appear to be common....The penalty for expressing opinions deemed objectionable by the regime is swift and brutal. We believe that over the past ten years many thousands to tens of thousands...have been arrested by the secret police on suspicion of opposition to the government....[T]here is not even the charade of due process for those charged with security-related offenses broadly defined to include such routine criminal matters as currency violations....Torture is routine, for security offenses and ordinary crimes alike, and confessions extracted under torture are admissible in court....In general, the regime is ruthless in its efforts to maintain absolute control over the population.

Apart from these commendable denunciations by the State Department's Human Rights Bureau, public criticisms of Iraqi abuses were few and far between. There was nothing comparable to the Gilder statement at venues such as the UN Commission on Human Rights, when attempts in February to put Iraq in the dock were being mounted by other Western countries, or at moments such as the Bazoft trial, when leadership from the US could have been decisive. Instead, despite protestations by officials about their use of private diplomacy for human rights concerns, it seems that the US chose to do nothing.

The response to the suspected assassination plot in California, in February, strongly indicated a desire to shield the Saddam regime from too much public opprobrium. On March 2, before the story became public, Lee Hamilton, chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, questioned Assistant Secretary Kelly about allegations that the Iraqi mission in New York had been involved in attempts to assassinate political opponents in the United States. Stonewalling, Kelly pleaded the need to preserve confidentiality on the subject.

It was only after the publication of the incident in several newspapers, and the retaliatory expulsion of a US diplomat from Baghdad, that the reluctant administration publicly confirmed the essential facts of the case. However, what was missing from the statement, delivered by Kelly to the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Europe and the Middle East, was the clear connection to the Iraqi government itself. Nor did the US government publicly protest to Baghdad about the incident.

After August 2, it was, of course, a different story. Then it seemed as if the subject of human rights in Iraq and occupied Kuwait was on every official's lips, from President Bush on down. The President's remarks in December, to the effect that he wished to bring the Persian Gulf crisis to an early resolution -- if necessary, by waging war -- because of an explosive Amnesty International report, indicated the extent to which accounts of human rights abuses had become political dynamite.

The Work of Middle East Watch

In February, Middle East Watch published the fruit of a year's research into Saddam Hussein's rights practices, in a lengthy report entitled Human Rights in Iraq. With minor updating, this comprehensive document was rereleased in the fall, in a new joint publishing venture with Yale University Press.

During the course of the year, the organization continued to monitor developments inside Iraq, raising them with the Iraqi authorities when required. In March, it protested over the absence of due process in the Bazoft case, highlighting the strong suspicion that torture had been used against the journalist. Later that month, it raised the issue of new legislation encouraging violence against women. This inquiry elicited a rare response from the government, stating that the legislation had been withdrawn.

In the High Court case in London between the Iraqi government and the PUK in May, Middle East Watch agreed to act as an expert witness for the defense. Written and verbal testimony was provided, challenging the government's central assertion that all officials, including Saddam Hussein himself, were subject to the law of the land.

The invasion of Kuwait in August provoked an intensive effort by Middle East Watch to monitor the human rights situation inside Kuwait, despite Iraq's refusal to permit access by neutral observers to Kuwait. An additional complication in accurately documenting the abuses was the exaggerations being accepted as fact by some Western officials.

Over the five-month period to the end of the year, the organization issued three newsletters based on extensive interviews with recent refugees from Kuwait in Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Egypt and the other Gulf states. The first, in August, dealt with the human rights and humanitarian law standards incumbent on all parties to the conflict, and with the foreigners used as hostages and "human shields." The second, in September, addressed the conduct of Iraqi troops in Kuwait. The third, in mid-November, provided a comprehensive overview of the violations committed by Iraqi forces -- an overview which was updated a month later.

Middle East Watch also raised with UN Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar the neglected issue of tens of thousands of Asian workers stranded in Iraq and Kuwait who faced starvation, due to the restrictive approach to the food embargo adopted by the UN sanctions committee, as well as Saddam's callous disregard for the workers' well-being and his refusal to permit access by international humanitarian organizations to distribute food. Research was also launched into the poor treatment by several Arab Pensinsula states -- all allies of the US -- of another overlooked group of victims: the tens of thousands of Palestinian civilians resident in the Gulf for decades.

During the course of the crisis Middle East Watch gave dozens of radio, television and press interviews, and took part in many other public speaking engagements.

11 By treating occupied Kuwait as part of the chapter on Iraq, Middle East Watch in no sense condones the Iraqi invasion or recognizes the declared annexation of Kuwait. Rather, this treatment reflects the organization's policy of addressing abuses according to the forces committing them rather than the geographic boundaries in which they happen to be committed. For a discussion of human rights conditions in Kuwait before the Iraqi invasion, see the separate chapter on Kuwait, infra.

12 Amnesty International also reported that 33 Assyrian Christians and their families who returned from Turkey and Iran to Iraq in late 1988 and early 1989, under various amnesties, were said in March 1989 to have disappeared. Most were from Dohuk province. Amnesty International, Iraqi Kurds: at risk of forcible repatriation from Turkey and human rights violations in Iraq, June 1990, p. 5.

13 Interview by Middle East Watch with Dr. Latif Rashid, European representative of the PUK, January 3, 1990.

14 Amnesty International, ibid, p.5.

15 The mission observed overcrowding, a lack of schooling and employment, and poor sanitation in the camps.

16 Middle East Watch interview with Sargon Dadesho, November 1990.

17 Amended in 1973 and 1974, the Interim Constitution is Iraq's basic legal document. Draft revisions were said to have been in preparation in 1989 as well, but never materialized.

18 Letter to Middle East Watch from Dr. Abdul Amir Al-Anbari, Ambassador of Iraq to the United Nations, April 12, 1990.

19 Udayy Hussein had been responsible for the killing of his father's favorite bodyguard in 1989, and was subsequently sent into exile in Western Europe. No charges were ever brought against him after the then Minister of Justice publicly pleaded with Saddam to display clemency to his son.

20 See Middle East Watch, Human Rights in Iraq, February 1990, p. 38.

21 Testimony by Joshua R. Gilder, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, at a hearing entitled "US Relations with Iraq"; 15 June, 1990.

22 The 17 parties that took part in three months of meetings in Damascus and Beirut ranged from the Communists to the Islamists, together with the five-party Iraqi Kurdistan Front and a dissident Ba'th faction.
KUWAIT BEFOR THE IRAQI INVASION AND THE GOVERNMENT IN EXILE
Human Rights Developments

The Emir of Kuwait dissolved the National Assembly on July 3, 1986, during the Iran-Iraq war, citing concerns that national security was being compromised by open debate. Although the war ended in July 1988, the Kuwaiti government continued in 1990 to resist calls to restore parliamentary rule and to relax the severe restrictions imposed on freedom of expression and assembly. It continued to rule by decree, to tolerate torture, and to permit secret trial of security cases by special tribunals whose decisions were not subject to appeal. Although the August 2 Iraqi invasion eliminated the Kuwaiti government's power to continue many of these practices, it did not lead to any willingness on the part of the Emir and his government-in-exile to give firm commitments of reform should Kuwait be liberated.

The beginning of 1990 witnessed intensified calls for the restoration of the National Assembly. When the Emir had dissolved the Assembly, he had also suspended some key provisions of the 1962 Kuwaiti Constitution, including Article 107, which stipulates that when the Assembly is dissolved, elections for a new legislature must be held within two months. Otherwise, the article mandates, "the dissolved Assembly shall be restored to its full constitutional authority and shall meet immediately as if the dissolution had not taken place. The Assembly shall then continue functioning until the new Assembly is elected." Free of Article 107's constraints, the government took full advantage of Article 71, which allows the government to rule by decree "if the National Assembly is not in session or is dissolved," provided that decrees are not contrary to the Constitution. Opposition members maintained that suspension of Article 107 was unconstitutional, as were government decrees banning or severely restricting free speech and assembly.

A major source of discontent were restrictions on press freedom guaranteed by Article 37 of the Constitution. Since radio and television were owned by the state and usually reflected only government views, Kuwaiti newspapers and the foreign media were the only sources of independent information. Kuwaiti newspapers were privately owned and enjoyed more freedom than in any of the surrounding countries. Once the National Assembly was dissolved, the government enacted a law giving itself the authority to close a newspaper for up to two years or to revoke its license. It also subjected newspapers to a system of strict prior censorship, with prison penalties of up to three years and fines of up to five thousand Kuwaiti dinars ($17,150) for violators.

Such censorship continued in 1990, with a Ministry of Information official placed in every newspaper office to review articles. Censorship also extended to foreign publications. Two Jordanian newspapers, al-Ra'y and al-Dustur, were banned in January for reporting on the campaign in Kuwait to restore the National Assembly. Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)33 agreements ratified by Kuwait after the National Assembly was dissolved added more restrictions on the Kuwaiti press by banning from all GCC countries publications critical of any member state.

Although Article 44 of the Constitution gives individuals "the right to assemble without permit or prior notification," Law 31 of 1970 subjects to fines and imprisonment "anyone who participates in a mass gathering of at least five people in a public place with the intention of disturbing public safety and who remains assembled after an order by public authorities to disperse is issued." Through a liberal interpretation of the law, the government banned all public assembly, and on January 9, 1990, banned any meeting that discusses "concrete national issues," including in diwaniyyas, the traditional Kuwaiti semi-public living rooms. It threatened legal action against violators.

Despite the government practice of forcibly dispersing them, peaceful meetings calling for restoration of parliamentary rule continued to be held in 1990. On January 8, two thousand people peacefully assembled in al-Jahra to hear speeches by former members of the National Assembly; they were disrupted by security forces who beat some, including Ahmed al-Shrai'an, a 70-year-old former Assembly member. On January 22, another peaceful assembly was forcibly dispersed by the police and ten were arrested; they were released two weeks later without charges having been filed.

Calls to restore democracy continued, and on April 22, the government announced plans to form a 75-member National Council: 25 to be appointed by the Emir and 50 to be chosen in an election to be held in June. The powers of the National Council as outlined in the royal decree were limited in comparison to the constitutionally mandated powers of the dissolved National Assembly. One of the Council's purposes, according to Crown Prince and Prime Minister Shaikh Saad, was to propose "limitations of freedom," since "an excess of freedom turns into anarchy." Despite promises by the government that the new National Council would not replace the dissolved National Assembly, a May 13 decree by the Emir designated the National Assembly Building as the venue for the new Council, giving credence to opposition fears.

On May 5, twenty-six former members of the National Assembly announced that they would boycott the elections as unconstitutional. On May 7, Ahmed al-Baqer, a former member of the Assembly, and a companion were arrested for distributing leaflets critical of the proposed National Council. The following day, security forces forcibly dispersed a diwaniyya meeting assembled to hear Dr. Ahmed al-Khatib, another former member of the Assembly. Eight people were arrested, including Dr. al-Khatib and other former members of the Assembly who were in attendance. Other former members were arrested when security forces dispersed further peaceful meetings on May 14 and 16. They were all released on bail and received a royal pardon without being charged or convicted.

National Council elections took place without incident on June 10. Under the Kuwaiti system of limited male franchise, only 62,123 were eligible to vote -- equivalent to eight percent of all citizens, or three percent of the total population of two million. Sixty-two percent of this small electorate -- 38,683 men -- took part in the election. Some members won with as few as 150 votes. No political parties were permitted, although voters were able to choose from among 348 candidates competing for the 50 elected seats.

A campaign by the Kuwaiti government against Shi'a community activists, started in September 1989, continued in 1990. Following bomb attacks that left one man dead during the annual Muslim pilgrimage in July 1989, Saudi Arabia arrested hundreds of Shi'a pilgrims, including many Kuwaitis. Sixteen Kuwaiti nationals were later executed in Saudi Arabia, on September 21. In protest, Kuwaiti Shi'as demonstrated in Kuwait demanding the return of the bodies of those killed and family visits for those still in detention. The Kuwaiti government responded by arresting more than 20 Shi'a leaders in September and November. Seyed Muhammed Baqer al-Musawi, a religious leader, was arrested, charged with planning terrorist acts and held incommunicado for most of his time in jail from September 23, 1989 until he was acquitted -- with three other defendants -- by a court on June 18, 1990. There were credible reports that the four were subjected to torture and ill-treatment by the State Security Intelligence Service.

Thirteen more Shi'a leaders were arrested on February 14 and 18, and released on bail on March 3, without being formally charged with any crime. Detainees included relatives of the sixteen Kuwaitis executed in Saudi Arabia and two members of the dissolved National Assembly: Hassan Habib al-Salman and Abdel Muhsen Jamal.

In September 1989, the government dissolved the board of directors of the Social and Cultural Association -- the only officially sanctioned philanthropic Shi'a society in Kuwait. Its deputy director, Khalil Musa al-Musa, was later arrested, on November 13, 1989, and detained for a month without charge, then rearrested in February 1990 and released in March on bail, again without ever being charged with a crime.

In 1990, the government continued to use the State Security Court for state security offenses. The Court is staffed by part-time judges who almost always meet in secret and whose decisions are not open to appeal.

It has been argued by some in Kuwait, including privately by government officials, that certain restrictions on freedom of the press, parliamentary debate and Shi'a activity were imposed partly in deference to the Iraqi government. It was contended that Iraq, recently at a war with Iran and engaged in severe repression of its own Shi'a, Kurdish and secular dissidents, would not tolerate free discussion, whether at home or within earshot of its citizens. Others put the blame on pressure from conservative Saudi Arabia.

Following the August 2 Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, the Kuwaiti government-in-exile continued to come under critical scrutiny by the exiled Kuwaiti opposition, providing one measure of how the ruling al-Sabah family still fell short of democratic norms. Taking the lead in these criticisms were the Constitutional Movement, which includes 32 former members of the National Assembly, and the Committee of Forty-Five, a group of Kuwaiti business leaders, intellectuals, professors and former members of the National Assembly. These groups challenged restrictions on basic freedoms and the failure to reinstate the National Assembly.

In response to these criticisms, and to demonstrate national unity, the Kuwaiti government-in-exile called for a popular conference to be held in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, between October 13 and 16. It was attended by 1,200 Kuwaitis from all walks of life. When the opposition finally agreed to take part in the conference, one of its leaders said that, while liberation of Kuwait was the primary and most urgent national task, the opposition did not see any reason why political reform could not start before liberation. He called for restoration of the 1962 Constitution and the 1986 National Assembly. Since the Emir had not called for new National Assembly elections within two months of the Assembly's dissolution, he argued, the dissolved Assembly should be re-convened in an open, emergency session. He also called for an expanded national-unity coalition government -- accountable to the reconvened National Assembly -- to formulate an effective policy to liberate Kuwait and to help Kuwaiti refugees.

The opposition program enjoyed wide support, even among religious groups and senior government officials, but the government as a whole was apparently not prepared to accede to the principal opposition demands. In his speech on the first day of the conference, the Crown Prince said that, after liberation, "guided by the Constitution of 1962, Kuwait will take the necessary measures to consolidate democracy and allow for more extensive participation on the part of the masses." This was one of the few concessions that the government made to the opposition, although its phraseology was weaker than the opposition wanted. In the same speech, the Crown Prince went on to argue that the critical situation in Kuwait precluded open debate and democratic reform, making clear that these would have to await liberation. Even then, he indicated, there would have to be restrictions on freedom of expression to preserve "national unity."

While no opposition member was allowed to address the conference, a moderate figure was permitted to take the podium -- Abdel Aziz al-Saqer, chairman of the Kuwait Chamber of Commerce and a former speaker of the National Assembly. While confirming that the al-Sabahs were guaranteed by the Constitution to be the royal family of Kuwait, he said that popular participation based on freedom of dialogue and majority rule was fundamental for the remaking of Kuwait. Popular participation, he noted, was clearly enshrined in the Constitution, which also separates the three branches of government and limits their powers. He also declared that "a free Kuwaiti press is a prerequisite for dialogue, to play the important role of a true medium between the people and the government, to oversee the execution of policy and to express the message of a free Kuwait to the world." And he pointed out that, in the final analysis, the Iraqi invasion itself was a disastrous result of the authoritarianism of the Iraqi regime. In a symbolic gesture, the government accepted that al-Saqer's speech would be considered an official document of the conference.

In closed sessions, according to participants, the opposition complained about the royal family's monopoly on government power, the government's haphazard information policy, and the failure to include qualified citizens more directly in the running of embassies and refugee-welfare programs. The opposition argued that, because of the absence of parliamentary oversight, defense policy was chaotic, public-finance decisions were not subject to scrutiny, and information policy under the Minister of Information -- a member of the royal family -- reflected only the family's views while alienating traditional allies of Kuwait. In response, the government promised to consult with the opposition and others in a systematic way, to improve its information policy, and to make room at the embassies for Kuwaiti professionals.

In the final communiqué, the conference affirmed the political leadership of the al-Sabah family. In its only reference to the Constitution, it also said that Kuwaiti society, after liberation, would be based on "our national unity and legitimate system that we have chosen and accepted, strengthened by consultation, democracy and popular participation and guided by our 1962 Constitution."

After the conference, some in the opposition accepted the government's position that issues of political reform would have to await liberation, while others flatly rejected this position or decided to wait and see whether the government would fulfill some of its promises. While following the conference some opposition figures were hesitant about voicing their disagreements, others were not. They continued to complain that the government -- the royal family in particular -- wielded all the real power, and that there was no mechanism for allowing popular oversight of government policy or holding government officials accountable for their actions. They also complained that the publicly funded media -- even after the replacement of the Minister of Information on November 25 -- reflected only the thinking of the government, especially the royal family, and not the views of the Kuwaiti people as a whole.

Contrary to some oblique references made by the government during the conference to the effect that it would marginalize or even dissolve the National Council, the government decided to keep the Council intact, even though its formation during the summer of 1990 had created a political crisis in Kuwait. However, following the conference, the Council was featured less prominently in the government-sponsored media. A government spokesman said that since the Constitution does not restrict the Emir's power to form, by election or appointment, any council or committee that he sees fit to create, the Council could continue in existence but would not be a substitute for the National Assembly.

On November 21, the Crown Prince announced the formation of a new body, the Supreme Advisory Council, containing 35 appointed members. It is headed by the Crown Prince himself and includes four other members of the royal family, four members of the opposition, a former speaker of the National Assembly, the president of the National Council, five members of the cabinet, other senior government officials, and several pro-government notables. The Advisory Council's mandate is "to help the Crown Prince/Prime Minister by offering advice on all the issues he consults it on, especially as they relate to the liberation of Kuwait." Many in the opposition criticized the Advisory Council as an empty gesture, since it does not have any power to challenge government decisions.

US Policy

The United States maintained close relations with Kuwait during and after the Iran-Iraq war. In 1987, the US provided naval escorts to protect Kuwaiti shipping against attacks by Iran. Apart from its heavy financial cost, the operation took the lives of 37 Americans, according to the US Navy, when the USS Stark was accidentally hit by an Iraqi missile. The US was also one of the main suppliers of arms to the Kuwaiti military, the second largest customer for civilian imports, and the fourth largest customer for Kuwaiti exports.

Perhaps because of these close relations, the State Department chose to comment publicly on Kuwaiti human rights issues only once in 1990 before the invasion, and then only in weak terms. On April 24, after the Kuwaiti government had announced plans to form the National Council, a State Department spokesman said that the United States supported reforms that increased popular political participation but that it remained "up to the government and people of Kuwait to decide on the specific types of reform without outside interference."

Even following the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, the Bush administration took care not to criticize the lack of Kuwaiti democracy. In a televised interview with David Frost taped on December 16, President Bush was asked about US support for democratic reform in Kuwait once the nation was liberated. The President responded by noting US support for democracy generally, but carefully avoided any critical reference to Kuwait. He then dismissed the issue, observing that none of the countries in the region was a democracy, and stating that the real issue was Iraqi aggression.

The Work of Middle East Watch

Middle East Watch monitored developments in Kuwait throughout the year. It was in close contact with some of the key figures in the movement to restore parliamentary life, who where either founding or current board members of the Arab Organization of Human Rights, one of the important regional organizations with which Middle East Watch closely cooperates. Given restrictions on speech and assembly in Kuwait, forces involved in the move to revive the National Assembly expressed their need for contact with Middle East Watch.

On May 10, Middle East Watch protested in a letter to the Emir the arrest of members of the dissolved National Assembly and others for peacefully voicing their criticism of the government. It deplored the arrests as contrary to promises made by the government to allow public participation in political life. The same day, Middle East Watch issued a newsletter, "Widespread Arrests in Kuwait."

Following the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, Middle East Watch, in addition to monitoring Iraqi abuses in Kuwait (see chapter on Iraq and Occupied Kuwait, supra), kept in touch with the Kuwaiti government-in-exile, members of the Kuwaiti opposition and representatives of Kuwaiti humanitarian and professional groups. When the Kuwaiti government called for the Popular Conference in Jeddah, Middle East Watch sent a representative. Members of the opposition were especially keen on the presence of neutral observers. In the final communiqué, the conference called upon Human Rights Watch, among other groups, to monitor human rights conditions in occupied Kuwait and to try to prevail on the Iraqi government to allow human rights observers to enter the country.

32 For a discussion of Iraqi abuses during the occupation of Kuwait, see the chapter on Iraq and Occupied Kuwait, supra.

33 The GCC is made up of Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.
MOROCCO

Human Rights Developments

Morocco continued to experience major human rights violations during 1990. As in past years, members of certain opposition groups were subjected to prolonged illegal detention, torture, and convictions in courts that showed little inclination to safeguard the rights of defendants. Authorities also cracked down on individuals who called attention to human rights abuses, bringing several journalists to trial and in effect expelling four foreign human rights monitors from the country.

None of Morocco's best-known human rights cases was resolved during 1990. Among them are the prisoners in the secret detention center of Tazmamart, whose existence the government continues to refuse to acknowledge. The fortress in southern Morocco holds under deplorable conditions a group of soldiers who were sentenced in 1971 and 1972 for participating in two coup attempts. Many are being held after the expiration of their sentences, while others have died without their families being informed.

The year 1990 was also one in which a number of developments put human rights in Morocco on the national and international agenda as never before. First, in February, King Hassan II and his Ministers of Interior and Justice held meetings with representatives of Amnesty International. But after Amnesty published a report on Morocco, the government took out advertisements in European dailies to denounce the organization. Partly in response to his sparring with Amnesty, the King announced in May the formation of a Consultative Council on Human Rights to "assist" him on human rights questions. Finally, the publication four months later in France of a biography of the King which focused on human rights abuses in Morocco set off a protracted controversy that kept the spotlight on the subject in both Morocco and France.

Moroccan prisons house more than 300 accused political opponents of the government, according to Amnesty International, many of them held for the peaceful expression of their beliefs. In 1990, the continuing nature of the repression was illustrated by the prosecution of members of the Islamic organization al-Adl w'al-Ihsan (Justice and Charity), which, according to its founder, Abdesalam Yassine, seeks to Islamicize society through nonviolent means.

Arrests of suspected members of al-Adl w'al-Ihsan began in the fall of 1989 and continued until the following spring. At least 40 members were put on trial in five different cities, mostly on charges related to forming or belonging to an unauthorized association and distributing literature connected with the association. Nearly all of the charges were of a nonviolent nature. The courts convicted at least 30 alleged members and gave them prison sentences of up to two years, although on appeal some of the convictions were overturned and some of the prison sentences were shortened.

At the trials, the defense accused the police and prosecutors of various irregularities of criminal procedure. Among the alleged irregularities were some that have long been commonplace in Morocco, including violations of the legal procedures for conducting searches and falsification of the recorded date of arrest to prolong garde-à-vue (preliminary incommunicado) detention without appearing to exceed the legal time limit.

The courts hearing the al-Adl w'al-Ihsan cases were largely unresponsive to efforts by defense teams to raise these procedural irregularities. In this respect they behaved in a manner typical of the Moroccan judiciary, which routinely covers up police and prosecutorial misconduct by refusing to investigate and act upon blatant improprieties.

Reports of torture continued during 1990. Abuses affect not only suspects under interrogation, but also prisoners serving sentences, who have launched numerous hunger strikes to protest physical abuse and other forms of mistreatment. The reluctance of Moroccan courts to entertain defense motions alleging that confessions had been extracted under torture in effect condones the continuation of such abuse.

Morocco's opposition press has been able to describe these and other violations on a regular basis, although at some risk. At least three defamation cases were initiated in 1990 against publishers who had printed articles critical of the judiciary. The Moroccan Press Code defines defamation broadly to include "any allegation or imputation concerning a fact which impugns the honor or reputation of a person or body."

Ahmed Bendjelloun, director of the opposition newspaper at-Tariq (The Path), was sentenced to four months in prison in May for publishing an article criticizing a local court of appeals for showing a lack of independence in its handling of a dispute involving the dismissal of two labor officials. The same month, Mustapha el-Alaoui, director of al-Usbu' as-Sahafa w'as-Siyasi (The Week in Press and Politics), was sentenced to three months in prison for "defamation of the courts and tribunals." Both Bendjelloun and al-Aloui filed appeals. In October, the director and editor of Al-Ittihad al-Ishtiraki (Socialist Unity), the daily of the leading opposition leftist party, the Socialist Union of Popular Forces, went on trial for a 1989 article describing poor conditions in the Casablanca courts.

Morocco also struck out against foreign human rights monitors. In March, two delegates of Amnesty International were effectively expelled from Morocco. The action came one month after Amnesty had infuriated Moroccan authorities by publishing a critical report on detention procedures shortly after its delegates had met with King Hassan and top government officials to discuss Amnesty concerns. The government complained that Amnesty's report failed to incorporate adequately the comments and promises made by officials in those meetings. The government then took out advertisements in European newspapers to denounce Amnesty for publishing its report so soon after the meetings with officials. (Amnesty explained that "[t]he government's responses...failed to address Amnesty International's concerns or indicate a commitment to make the necessary changes in the penal system and practice to end widespread and serious human rights violations.")

The following month, the government expelled two representatives of the Paris-based human rights organization the Association for the Victims of Repression in Exile. The authorities accused the two of entering the country on false pretenses by using tourist visas. On a previous trip that one of the two had made in 1989, airport police searched her belongings as she was leaving the country and confiscated documents and photographs of victims of ill-treatment in detention.

Neither incident aroused as much controversy as Morocco's furious response to the publication in Paris in September of journalist Gilles Perrault's Notre Ami Le Roi (Our Friend the King), an unflattering biography of King Hassan that described in detail some of the human rights abuses endemic to his 30-year reign. In an orchestrated fashion, the Moroccan government, and many private Moroccan citizens, denounced what they described as an anti-Morocco campaign being waged in France. The government protested to the French government about the publicity that the book was receiving in the French media, and canceled the elaborate "Temps du Maroc" festival in France that had been long in planning. Rebroadcasts in Morocco of French TV-5 were blocked for a while, as were sales of French newspapers and magazines.

Obviously concerned about the effect of human rights reports on the image of Morocco, King Hassan announced in May the creation of the Consultative Council on Human Rights, a body composed of members of the government, opposition parties, human rights groups and labor organizations. Members of two of Morocco's independent rights organizations agreed to participate, while the third declined to join the body on the grounds of its official sponsorship.

In announcing the Council's formation, the King charged it with determining the accuracy of allegations about human rights abuses in Morocco. At the same time, the King signaled that certain acts would fall outside the Council's definition of human rights abuse, although those acts clearly would seem to be prohibited by internationally recognized human rights instruments. For example, in a reference to the disputed issue of sovereignty over the Western Sahara, the King said,

If we some day learn or read that a Moroccan has said such a region is no part of Moroccan territory, it can but be a case of a renegade, an outlaw who could not be considered as a detainee or a political prisoner.

Other types of speech were also to be considered unprotected:

He who, through a poster, a newspaper or a speech, calls for a regime other than the constitutional monarchy, I think it is not a political act he is undertaking, but rather a subversive act he is committing against the people's will and the Constitution.

Through the end of 1990, the Council had shown few signs of independence from the government. In its inaugural sessions, it created committees to look at police and preventive custody, as well as prison conditions; at year's end it formed a commission to investigate the riots that erupted in several cities on December 14 and 15, in which security forces killed a disputed number of civilians. However, the Council's deliberations were not made public, and it had yet to issue any report to indicate how seriously it intends to investigate allegations of abuse.

US Policy

The United States is in a unique position to encourage Morocco to improve its human rights practices. While France has the closest ties to Morocco of any Western country, Morocco remains highly sensitive to perceived interference on human rights matters by its former colonizer. The United States, meanwhile, sends Morocco $120 million annually in aid, and maintains a friendly relationship with the King, whom it considers to be an Arab moderate and an ally in the region.

Yet, as is commonly the case with its allies outside the public limelight, the Bush administration exerted no public pressure on Morocco to improve its poor human rights record in 1990. Middle East Watch is aware of no occasion during the year when an administration official took a public stand on human rights abuses in Morocco. Meanwhile, private bilateral discussions, to the extent that they have taken place, have singularly failed to ameliorate Morocco's human rights performance. The sole -- and important -- exception to the administration's public silence was the State Department's annual Country Reports on Human Rights Practices, published in February. The chapter on Morocco observed that "the human rights situation did not improve significantly in 1989, and appears to have deteriorated in several areas." It noted that the number of reports of torture remained "high," and that "[t]he government often ignores guarantees of procedural due process." The report was particularly critical of attacks on freedom of speech and the press: "The constitution provides for freedom of expression; however, political meetings are closely watched, criticism of the monarchy and Islam is not tolerated, and, in the opinion of most observers, neither foreign policy nor domestic politics is fully open to free discussion."

Morocco stands to receive approximately the same $120 million package in fiscal year 1991 that it received in fiscal years 1989 and 1990. That includes $80 million in economic and development assistance, divided in equal parts between loans and grants, and $40 million in military assistance. The package makes Morocco the third largest recipient of US aid in the Middle East, trailing, distantly, behind Israel and Egypt.

King Hassan is notoriously stubborn in the face of international pressure. He has resisted international campaigns to resolve well known human rights cases, such as the plight of the family of Gen. Mohammed Oufkir. Eighteen years after the general reportedly led a coup attempt -- after which he died in suspicious circumstances -- his widow and six children remain under house arrest merely because of their relation to him. In 1987, King Hassan had even promised French President François Mitterand that the Oufkir family would be released within a few weeks.

While the King has so far declined to improve Morocco's human rights image by reducing the severity of abuses, 1990 saw him more determined than ever to improve that image by waging battle on the level of public relations, including, as noted, his exchanges with Amnesty International, his formation of the Consultative Council on Human Rights, and the campaign against Notre Ami le Roi.

In this atmosphere, the Bush administration should use the leverage provided by its aid package and cordial relations to pressure King Hassan to shift his efforts from the public-relations domain to that of actual improvements in human rights practices.

The Work of Middle East Watch

Middle East Watch conducted a preliminary fact-finding mission to Morocco in March 1990. In April, it released a newsletter revealing newly corroborated details about the deplorable conditions under which at least 58 prisoners have been held in a secret detention center in Tazmamart. Many of the original group, who were sentenced for involvement in two failed coup attempts in the early 1970s, have died in Tazmamart or continue to be held beyond the expiration of their sentences. None of the prisoners sentence to three years or more has been released.

Middle East Watch will publish a full report on human rights in Morocco during 1991.
SYRIA AND SYRIAN-OCCUPIED LEBANON

Human Rights Developments

Celebrating his twentieth anniversary in power, President Hafez al-Asad of Syria strengthened his ties with the United States, restored relations with Britain, broadened his control over Lebanon, won large amounts of new aid from Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, and even met in November with President Bush. Once seen as an enemy of the West, Asad became a Western ally when he sent his troops to join the US-led campaign against the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. For human rights advocates, however, neither President Asad's anniversary nor his diplomatic successes were cause for jubilation: Syria's long-standing and serious rights violations continued unabated. Expectations that President Asad might relax his harsh rule were quashed in the spring, when a major speech affirmed an uncompromising line and defended the national State of Emergency which has suspended legal and constitutional protections since 1963.

At least twelve different security agencies -- including Military Intelligence, Air Force Intelligence, General Intelligence and Political Security -- continued to keep tight screws on Syrian dissent in 1990. Arresting suspects mostly singly or in twos and threes (in previous years there had sometimes been big roundups), security forces interrogated at least 1,000 people and took several hundred into long-term custody for their nonviolent association and expression. Virtually none of those arrested were formally charged, tried or sentenced, and many remained in indefinite incarceration.

Some 7,500 political prisoners continued to languish in Syrian jails at the end of 1990. Of these, at least 2,500 were held in Tadmur Military Prison, notorious for its bad conditions and the harsh treatment that prisoners must endure, and over 2,000 were in Syrian detention facilities in Lebanon. (By year's end, some two-thirds of Lebanon was effectively under the control of Syrian troops, which had maintained a large presence in the country since 1976. Hundreds of other prisoners, including some abducted from Lebanon, were jailed in al-Mezze Military Prison, al-'Adra Prison, Saydnaya Prison, Kafr Sussa Detention Center, the Military Interrogation Branch's prison and other facilities in Syria.

At least 21 persons, including former President Dr. Nur al-Din al-Atassi, have been locked away for over 20 years and at least five others for 18 years or more. Hundreds of others have been imprisoned since the early 1980s, including 90 doctors and 70 engineers.

Syrian interrogators continued regularly to torture and severely mistreat prisoners. Munir Fransis, a 30-year-old engineer taken prisoner in early April, died of internal bleeding in Muwassa'a Hospital of Damascus on about April 14 after an extremely severe beating. Authorities reportedly later arrested a doctor at the hospital because he refused to sign a certificate that the prisoner had died of natural causes. Security forces had arrested Fransis along with 14 others in late March in the town of Yabrud, north of Damascus, after slogans apeared on town walls comparing Asad with Nicolae Ceausescu, the fallen Romanian dictator. Among those arrested was Samir Haddad, 33, also an engineer from Yabrud. Shortly afterward he was reported in critical condition due to kidney failure and other physical damage, almost certainly resulting from torture.

Syrian prisoners sometimes have died soon after release or suffer permanent injury from mistreatment while incarcerated. Khidr Jabr, a former Syrian army officer, died on March 23, one week after his release from custody, apparently as a result of injuries sustained during his 12-year imprisonment for allegedly belonging to the League for Communist Action. Security forces have regularly tortured Riyad al-Turk, a lawyer and general secretary of the opposition Communist Party-Political Bureau, since he was imprisoned in 1980, breaking his bones, impairing his hearing and eyesight, and weakening his heart. The torturers have so systematically ruined his body that they had to rush him to the hospital on at least six occasions when he was on the verge of death, most recently in 1988. Many rights organizations have taken up his case, but Syrian authorities have refused out of hand even to consider his release.

Needless to say, Syrian citizens continued to be denied freedom of association and freedom to form political parties. In fact, the mere possession of opposition publications has been grounds for arrest and imprisonment. The government and the ruling Ba'th Party still control all "private" organizations, including trade unions, professional societies, cultural associations -- even sports and recreational clubs.

The Asad regime has also imposed tough censorship on mass media and book publishers as well as restrictions on imports of books, magazines and all other written or visual materials. For example, the authorities have banned Nujum al-Nahar, an international prize-winning film by Syrian director Osama Muhammad, as well as a number of other books and films by distinguished Syrian intellectuals.

The Asad regime also continued to discriminate against several minorities, while filling its ranks with an inner-circle of privileged 'Alawis, the President's minority group. Officials continued to block the free expression of Kurdish language and culture, and to deny tens of thousands of Syrian Kurds their citizenship rights. Bars on travel and emigration for Syrian Jews remained in place. And an estimated 2,500 of Syria's 30,000-strong Palestinian population continued to be imprisoned and mistreated for non-violent political expression.

There were some small cracks in this system of repression and political control. In December 1989 for the first time in over a decade, a small number of mothers and wives of political prisoners and the disappeared assembled in protest in front of the Presidential Palace. In an unusual act of restraint, security forces did not interfere, nor, according to available information, were the participants later arrested or victimized. On December 10, 1989, International Human Rights Day, a new Syrian human rights group, the Committees for the Defense of Democratic Freedoms and Human Rights in Syria (Lajan al-Difa' 'an al-Hurriat al-Dimoqratia wa Huquq al-Insan fi Suria), issued a communiqué announcing its formation. The new group, said to be composed of committees in a number of Syrian cities, remained clandestine in 1990. On March 8, it issued a second communiqué on the 27th anniversary of the State of Emergency, followed by others during the course of the year, including an open letter to members of the new People's Assembly in late September. Committees also formed in Paris and other cities abroad.

According to various sources, including the French weekly L'Express, Syrian women held another demonstration on February 19, demanding the release of political prisoners. As many as 100 women, from several Syrian cities and various political orientations, assembled in front of the Presidential Palace and asked to see Asad. When officials denied their request, the women refused to disperse and some cried out in protest. Police then violently broke up the demonstration, and three women had to be taken to the hospital with injuries.

According to Damascus radio, the Syrian cabinet in January abolished all martial law requirements "except those relating to state security." As a result, martial law no longer applied to those committing economic crimes, such as smuggling, official corruption, hoarding scarce goods and speculating on the currency black market -- offenses which previously had brought the death penalty in some cases. But most applications of martial law remain unchanged, including those directed to expression and association deemed to threaten state security. In a similar move in March, the government restricted the application of State of Emergency regulations to "security" issues, again leaving the most objectionable parts of the law in place.

Two Communist Party leaders belonging to the official National Progressive Front made statements in February revealing that pressure for democratization has developed within the ruling coalition. In an interview with the Kuwaiti publication al-Watan, Yusuf Faisal called for a "party system based on pluralism and allowing public freedoms," while Khaled Bakdash stated that "martial law must be lifted and the supremacy of the law respected in every area."34

On March 4, President Asad announced special new courts to investigate cases of abuse of authority by civil servants, principally corruption, though theoretically abuses of human rights as well.35 Well informed sources in Damascus reported that the government had also given the go-ahead to several new political parties, including a Nasirist party, a "moderate" Islamic party, and a liberal pro-business party.36 By the end of 1990, however, no new party had become visibly active. Nor had the courts tackled serious governmental wrongdoing.

On March 8, President Asad gave a long-awaited speech on the anniversary of the Ba'th Party's seizure of power in 1963.. While some observers expected some democratic initiatives, the speech contained nothing new. In fact, President Asad gave a lengthy justification for the State of Emergency and its continuation in force.37

Since the previous term of the People's Assembly (the Syrian parliament) expired in the spring, the government held new elections on May 22. It also increased the number of assembly seats from 195 to 250 "to provide more seats for independents." Syria has not seen free elections since the 1950s and the Assembly has been largely a rubber stamp, but some observers thought Asad would use the balloting to broaden his political base and encourage a modest increase in political pluralism.

Decree No. 5, issued in March, granted most Syrian citizens of voting age (without a criminal record) the right to present themselves as candidates.38 In practice, they could only run as individuals -- independent of any party affiliation -- unless they were running under the banner of the ruling National Progressive Front, whose parties alone retained the right to field candidates.

Over 9,000 candidates ran for office during the three-week official campaign period, including (in addition to Front candidates) many business figures and professionals, members of well known families, and traditional leaders. Because opposition parties could not run candidates, relatively few politically controversial candidates -- for example, those known as human rights advocates or as sympathetic to opposition candidates -- presented themselves. In addition, the authorities weeded out some of the more controversial candidates by forcing 43 independents to withdraw. At least one person who put forward his candidacy -- Faisal Kheir Beik -- ended up in jail. An independent candidate from Jabla, an 'Alawi area south of Lataqia on the Mediterranean coast. Beik was arrested just before the elections, and by the end of 1990, more than seven months later, had still not been released. He had not been charged or tried.

Campaign posters, including many by independents, covered walls and lampposts throughout Syria's cities. Although only the Front could hold legal campaign rallies, candidates held receptions in private homes and some wealthier ones gave banquets. Many candidates criticized corruption, shortages, inflation and the lack of democracy, but not in ways that challenged the regime. Expressions of fidelity to President Asad were commonplace campaign rhetoric, among independents as well as Front candidates.

During the campaign, the controlled press predictably avoided controversial issues, such as any hint of criticism of the security services, the armed forces, Asad, or Syrian foreign policy. However, the editors of two official newspapers, Tishrin and al-Thawra, provided space to the two Communist Parties, as members of the Front, to make electoral commentary. The parties used the opportunity to call for freedom of the press and an end to martial law. The demand for freedom of the press was particularly appropriate since the party's own newspaper, reportedly deprived of newsprint by the government, could publish only sporadically during the election campaign.

The results of the polling presented no great surprises. A high Ba'th Party official, Dr. Sulaiman Qaddash, had announced well before the elections that independents would win a third of the seats and the Front two-thirds. The official tally reflected these proportions almost exactly -- 84 independents and 166 Front candidates. The Ba'th Party won 134 seats, giving it a comfortable majority even without its allies in the Front.

One independent elected from Damascus had close ties to the Syrian Social Nationalist Party, a right-wing Lebanese party favoring the incorporation of Lebanon into Syria. In addition, three independents elected from the Kurdish regions north of Aleppo were identified with the left-wing Kurdish Worker's Party of Turkey. Both parties, though allies of the regime, had no previous access to the Assembly. Given these results, and the many traditional leaders and business figures entering the new parliament as independents, Asad seems to have cautiously broadened his base, while making few real concessions to democracy.

Only a handful of cases of obvious fraud in the vote counting came to light. The President's brother, Jamil al-Asad, was elected in Lataqia with more votes than there had been voters. When the error was discovered, officials felt obliged to organize a second election.

Possibly in partial response to a campaign by barred parties for a boycott by voters, turnout was sparse, forcing elections to be extended to a second day. According to official figures, the turnout was 40 percent of the eligible voters. Those who observed empty polling stations in Damascus and other Syrian cities guessed that the turnout was considerably lower -- probably 10 to 20 percent.

In late August, international newspapers carried stories of popular discontent with the Asad regime's support for the United States, Saudi Arabia and other conservative Arab states opposing Iraq's annexation of Kuwait. Especially at issue was the dispatch of Syrian troops to Saudi Arabia. Many Arab newspapers, including the Saudi newspaper al-Hayat, reported demonstrations on August 25 in Deir al-Zor and other towns near the Syrian-Iraqi border. The Syrian government was also said to have reinforced its military units in the areas of unrest, dispatching 5,000 troops that had been stationed near Homs.39 Damascus promptly denied these reports. With very tight security in eastern Syria, Middle East Watch has been unable to confirm these reports, except the dispatch of troops to the border area. Security forces made tens of arrests in late August, but it appears that no large and organized demonstrations took place.

As in previous years, many of Syria's worst rights abuses in 1990 occurred in Syrian-occupied Lebanon. There, Syrian troops and Syrian-supported militias attacked unarmed civilians, carried out summary executions, and abducted Palestinian, Lebanese and other nationals. Two Syrian security forces -- Special Forces and Military Intelligence -- operated extensively in Lebanon, and the head of Military Intelligence, Gen. Ghazi Kana'an, was widely considered to exercise paramount authority.

Syrian security personnel detained and arrested hundreds, normally without charge or trial, and routinely mistreated and tortured prisoners during interrogation. In addition to a number of local interrogation centers, including al-Mafraza in West Beirut and Madrasa al-Amrikan in Tripoli, Syrian security forces maintained a large center for interrogation and detention in the Lebanese town of 'Anjar, near the Syrian border.

By transporting important prisoners to Damascus, Syrian forces routinely violate the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, a treaty ratified by Syria, which sets forth standards governing an occupying power. Once in Syria, the prisoners face further interrogation and detention in such grim facilities as al-Mezze Prison and the Military Interrogation Branch's prison. Syrian security forces also reportedly seized property, extorted protection money and used violence to settle private scores with inhabitants of the areas of Lebanon under their control. They also were deeply involved in Lebanon's increasing opium cultivation and heroin production.40

On October 13, Syrian forces, along with elements of the Lebanese army under the authority of Lebanese President Elias Hrawi, attacked the forces of rebel Gen. Michel 'Aoun and his predominantly Maronite Christian supporters in East Beirut and a surrounding enclave. The Syrians and their allies defeated the 'Aoun forces in a major assault that day. Widespread reports suggested that during and immediately after the offensive, on October 13 and 14, Syrian forces and a pro-Damascus Christian militia headed by Elie Hobeika executed at least 240 prisoners, including civilians, in the area of 'Aoun's headquarters in Ba'bda and in the nearby towns of Dahr al-Wahash, Bsous, Houmal and Beit Meri.41

By the end of 1990, according to many reports, Syrian forces had largely withdrawn from the Metn area where they had committed the worst abuses. They installed in their place two pro-Syrian militias -- the forces of Elie Hobeika and those of the Syrian Social Nationalist Party. The return of these forces, which had been ousted from the area by local residents several years earlier, stirred fears of further reprisals against those considered anti-Syrian. (Hobeika's forces earned a grim reputation in 1982 as authors of the Sabra and Shatilla massacres.) Although the Lebanese government set up a joint Syrian-Lebanese commission of inquiry into the events of October 13 and 14, few thought that it would produce anything other than a cover-up.42

Syrian forces were also said to have abducted 14 high-ranking Lebanese military officers loyal to Gen. 'Aoun. One was released into the custody of the Lebanese authorities and the remaining 13 were said to be in detention in various Syrian prisons. Among those held were: Gen. Fouad 'Aoun, Col. Amer Shehab, Col. Karam Moussaba', Lt. Col. Fouad Ashkar and Lt. Col. Fayez Karam.

At year's end, Syrian forces controlled the Greater Beirut area and were extending their occupation to areas in the north and south. All of Lebanon, with the exception of the Israeli "security zone" in the south, was believed likely to fall under Syrian authority. The international media generally greeted this as a welcome end to sectarian strife and rule by the Lebanese militias. But Syria's long record of rights violations in Lebanon, including those that took place in 1990, gives cause for grave concern.

US Policy

The Bush administration's relations with Syria warmed rapidly throughout 1990, although US sanctions based on Syria's "evident support for international terrorism" remained in place. Among the reasons were reduced Soviet support for the Syrian regime, and a US desire to pursue the Mideast peace process, reduce the anarchy in Lebanon, and seek release of the Western hostages being held there. As ties improved, the administration remained largely silent on Syria's human rights violations, with the exception of a forthright catalogue of Syrian abuses published in February in the State Department's annual Country Reports on Human Rights Practices.

As in the past, the State Department claimed to be expressing human rights concerns privately to the Syrian government. Off the record, US officials said that public diplomacy would only be counterproductive in the Syrian case; they talked of a "major démarche" to Syria on rights issues.

Had the US government chosen to defend human rights in Syria, it would have been in a strong position to do so. With declining support from the Soviet Union and a weak domestic economy, Syria keenly pursued closer ties with the West, an end to sanctions and renewed economic assistance. President Asad, a longtime enemy of Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein, needed no coaxing to join the international coalition to oust Iraqi forces from Kuwait. In light of the gravity of Syrian abuses which the State Department's own Country Reports amply documented, the lack of serious public diplomatic efforts revealed the low priority that the Bush administration gave to Syrian human rights.

In contrast to 1989, when closer ties met opposition among US lawmakers, members of Congress and other well known political figures joined in the parade of visitors to Damascus in 1990. Senator Arlen Specter traveled to Damascus as leader of a delegation on January 14-15, returning with Senator Richard Shelby for more talks on January 30.43 On March 14-16, former President Jimmy Carter visited Damascus, followed on April 8-9 by another high-level congressional delegation led by Senator Robert Dole.44 And on May 24-25 a delegation led by former Senator Charles Percy also stopped off in Damascus.

All delegations met President Asad and Foreign Minister Faruq Shara'. Middle East Watch learned that closer US-Syrian ties were typically on the agenda, as were Syrian hopes for broadened economic links and renewed economic aid. On April 9, Damascus Radio reported on President Asad's meeting with the Dole group and affirmed that the President was seeking better relations with the United States.45

Meanwhile, the State Department conducted its own intense diplomacy with Damascus, led by US Ambassador to Syria Edward Djerijian. One positive result was the release in late April of two US citizens held hostage in Lebanon. US officials, including President Bush, publicly thanked President Asad for these releases. In late May, veteran journalist Patrick Seale said talks between Washington and Damascus were of "unprecedented intimacy."46 Rumors began to circulate that relations would soon be normalized and sanctions abandoned. Damascus gave further sign of its good will by appointing its first ambassador to Washington in several years. The new envoy, Walid Mu'allim, took up his post in Washington on June 14.

US-Syrian relations warmed still further after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. The Bush administration enlisted Syrian support and military forces for the campaign to roll back Iraq, securing Syrian agreement for an initial contingent of 3,000 to 4,000 Syrian troops and up to a full division later. From that time forward, US-Syrian relations edged toward an overt alliance. In late August, Ambassador Djerijian told a visiting journalist: "The US-Syrian relationship has really evolved. We have built up a dialogue, a relationship in which both sides have interests in common ground."47

In mid-September, Secretary of State James Baker paid a visit to Damascus which included a four-and-a-half hour meeting with President Asad followed by an airport press conference. In conversations with a reporter before his official meetings, Secretary Baker admitted that President Asad's record was something of an embarrassment, commenting that "we are not embracing Syria and everything it has done." However, he emphasized the many advantages of dealing with Asad, noting that "Syria has been very supportive" of US policy goals.48 The Baker visit was followed on November 7 by a visit by Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs John Kelly.

These meetings -- and the general climate of relations between the two countries -- produced a remarkable lack of official commentary on Syria's human rights record. At most, the State Department mentioned Syrian "support for terrorism" as a barrier to normalized relations and economic assistance. Even that did not stop Syria from benefiting from a large new aid package rumored to be $1 billion or more given by Saudi Arabia and Kuwait's government in exile -- aid which was unlikely to have been given without US agreement.49

Many observers believe that Syria's greatly expanded occupation in Lebanon was another payoff for closer relations with the United States. Although the State Department has denied any prior US approval of the Syrian move to oust Gen. 'Aoun, knowledgeable sources agreed that Syria could not -- and would not -- have extended its position in Lebanon without at least tacit US blessing.50 Not surprisingly, Syria's rights violations in Lebanon were downplayed in most official US commentary, which referred to Syria's "presence" in the country rather than its "occupation" and which spoke in such upbeat phrases as, "this ends a sad chapter of Lebanon's history." After the reported October 13-14 execution of at least 240 civilian and military prisoners following the defeat of Gen. 'Aoun's forces, a State Department spokesman said the US had told Syria that it had a special responsibility to ensure that such abuses did not take place in areas of Lebanon which its forces control.

The culmination of this rapproachment took place on November 23, when President Bush met with President Asad on the way home from a Thanksgiving visit to US troops in the Persian Gulf. While the meeting was a clear plum for Asad, the Bush administration took steps to limit the political damage. The meeting took place in Geneva, not Damascus -- a sign that Bush did not want to identify himself too closely with the Syrian leader. By announcing the meeting only two days beforehand and holding it just after Thanksgiving, the White House was able to minimize publicity, and avoid some of the inevitable embarrassing comparisons between Asad and another nearby rights violator: Iraqi strongman Saddam Hussein.

The Bush-Asad meeting, after at least two years of nego-tiations, marked a historic turn in US-Syrian relations. More than 13 years had passed since Asad had last met a US chief executive. In the meantime, Syria had often been castigated by Congress and the White House. Now, in the midst of smiles, hand-shakes and expressions of mutual support, Syria was Washington's friend, and human rights violations passed unmentioned.

The Work of Middle East Watch

On September 9, Middle East Watch published a major report entitled Human Rights in Syria. Based on a three-week clandestine visit to Syria and extensive interviews with exiles and other sources outside the country, the report documented the sorry history of rights violations under Assad's rule -- the routine torture, deaths in custody, disappearances, family hostages and collective punishment. It named and described the major security services, prisons and interrogation centers, and gave a detailed estimate of the number of political prisoners and their places of incarceration. The report also discussed the legal system, the state of emergency and the special courts, as well as the widespread practice of detention without charge or trial. And it provided information on the persecution of minorities, restrictions on all forms of association and broad censorship. The report concluded with an analysis of US-Syrian relations, raising questions about the emerging alliance and its impact on Syrian human rights practices.

An op-ed article in the Washington Post later that month, on the eve of Secretary Baker's visit to Damascus, drew attention to the charges inherent in the US policy of establishing close ties with Syria without exacting a price in terms of improved human rights for Syrians themselves. The parallel drawn with the US experience with Saddam Hussein in Iraq proved to be a thesis which found a strong echo in Congress and elsewhere in the US media.

Middle East Watch has now embarked on researching Syria's record of human rights violations in Lebanon. Some two thirds of Lebanon -- historically claimed as part of "Greater Syria" -- has been controlled by Syrian forces for the past 15 years. The consolidation of Lebanese President Hrwawi's authority, following the surrender of the rebel Christian, Gen. 'Aoun, in the fall served also to strengthen Syria's own grip on the country's institutions. In the aftermath of 'Aoun's surrender, we documented the murder of dozens of captured soldiers and civilans loyal to the Christian leaders.

34 al-Watan, February 9 and 11, 1990. Communist deputies apparently made the same point in the People's Assembly, the Syrian parliament.

35 Radio Damascus, March 4, 1990, in FBIS, March 6, 1990.

36 See al-Watan, February 4, 1990.

37 Radio Damascus, March 8, 1990, in FBIS, March 9, 1990.

38 Only those who had been citizens for over five years could run.

39 Al-Hayat, August 30, 1990; see also Clifford Krauss, "Protests in Syria Reported Halted, New York Times, August 30, 1990; "Scores Said Killed in Pro-Iraq Demonstration in Syria," Mideast Mirror, August 30, 1990.

40 See Middle East Watch, Human Rights in Syria, September 1990, Appendix VI, pp. 194-97. The US State Department's annual International Narcotics Control Strategy Report documents the growth in opium cultivation and draws links to the Syrian government. When asked about Syrian drug connections, even for background only, State Department officials tended to respond with a brisk "no comment."

41 Amnesty International expressed concern at "over thirty" cases of extrajudicial executions. The international press as well as Lebanese and other private sources suggested that the toll of executions was in the range of 240, including women, children, priests and other noncombatants. These reports also included allegations of looting and sexual abuse.

42 See Le Monde, October 21-22, 1990.

43 Senator Specter, a strong supporter of Israel, urged other Republic senators to talk to President Asad as well, according to sources in Senator Robert Dole's office. Senator Specter also wrote letters to several major newspapers, including the New York Times, urging more dialogue with Asad in the interest of the peace process.

44 Accompanying Senator Dole were Senators Charles Grassley, James McClure, Frank Murkowski, Howard Metzenbaum and Alan Simpson.

45 "Assad Tells Visiting Senators He Wants Better US Ties," New York Times, April 10, 1990.

46 Mideast Mirror, May 24, 1990, quoting al-Qabas.

47 John Kifner, "Syrian Gains are Seen in the Shift Toward US," New York Times, August 25, 1990.

48 Thomas Friedman, "Baker will got to Syria for Help against Iraqis," New York Times, September 11, 1990.

49 Thomas Friedman, "Assad Assures Baker of Support in Gulf," New York Times, September 15, 1990.

50 On October 16, the Washington Post reported on the complex diplomatic charade by which the US agreed to the Syrian offensive while denying it had agreed to anything. Nora Boustany, "Lebanon Says US Approved Syrian Move Against Aoun," Washington Post, October 16, 1990.
THE FUND FOR FREE EXPRESSION

At the end of 1990, the Fund for Free Expression had a change in leadership, as its longtime chairman and executive director assumed new positions on the Fund's board. The Fund has also begun a more comprehensive program to monitor and protect freedom of expression around the world and in the United States.

The Fund for Free Expression was founded in 1975, under the leadership of Robert L. Bernstein, as a group of writers, editors, publishers, attorneys and civic leaders concerned with human rights abuses. The Fund was the parent organization of Helsinki Watch, founded in 1978, and Americas Watch, founded in 1981. With the more recent establishment of Asia Watch, Africa Watch and Middle East Watch, and with the creation in 1987 of a new parent organization, Human Rights Watch, the Fund's focus shifted to special projects -- for example, joining with the Association of American Publishers in sponsoring US exhibits at Moscow Book Fairs and undertaking a mission to South Africa to assess the impact of the inclusion of books and educational materials in the trade embargo. The Fund has also served as the United States sponsor of international anti-censorship organizations such as ARTICLE 19 and Index on Censorship.

The Fund's expanded program will address freedom-of-expression issues that cut across country lines, working closely with the five regional divisions of Human Rights Watch and with other organizations in the field. It will undertake a series of projects focused on the relationship between curbs on free expression and various global social problems -- such as AIDS, famine and attacks on the environment -- with the goal of establishing censorship and information policies as an important element in the debates about these issues. For example, as Helsinki Watch has documented, the appalling number of pediatric AIDS cases in Romania grows directly out of the Ceausescu regime's refusal to acknowledge even the existence of AIDS, and its efforts to impede the exchange of information among physicians. As Africa Watch and ARTICLE 19 have reported, famine is often less the result of natural disasters than of misguided governmental policies that go unexamined because of curbs on the press and other democratic institutions.

The first such global study by the Fund for Free Expression, examining the link between censorship and governmental corruption in selected countries, will be the subject of a newsletter early in 1991.

The Fund will also expand its work in the United States. In 1990, Congress came within a few votes of amending the First Amendment to punish flag-burning; there were criminal charges filed against the director of an art museum in Cincinnati and a rap group in Florida; and the National Endowment for the Arts barely survived after a barrage of criticism over grants for allegedly obscene or politically controversial work. In such a climate, it is important and timely for the Fund to establish a more visible and aggressive presence on US free speech issues.

Reflecting its unique status as a component of a worldwide human rights organization, the Fund's domestic priorities will be to bring an international perspective to bear on American censorship controversies and to monitor US government efforts to restrict the "free trade of ideas" -- for instance, censorship of books and magazines sent to US troops in the Persian Gulf, or exclusion of foreign visitors on the basis of their viewpoints and political activities. The Fund will also undertake a series of reports on selected US freedom-of-expression issues, such as the effect of restrictive court decisions on the freedom of the student press, or curbs on government funding of the arts.

The Fund will also undertake special projects relating to freedom of expression. The first of these is to assist in the creation of a new organization of American academic leaders concerned about abuses of academic freedom and other human rights of their colleagues around the world. While educators are heavily represented among the world's political detainees, and universities are at special risk from repressive regimes, teachers and scholars have to date lacked a broadly based group to focus on their human rights problems, to keep the academic community informed about abuses, and to encourage a greater sense of responsibility among academics to act in such matters.

In addition to its other work, the Fund for Free Expression administers grants to writers in financial need as a result of political persecution, under the terms of legacies from the estates of the late writers Lillian Hellman and Dashiell Hammett. In 1990, seventeen grants of $10,000 each were awarded to writers from Afghanistan, China, Guatemala, Indonesia, Malawi, Romania, the United States and several other countries.

The Fund's new chairman is Roland Algrant, succeeding Founding Chairman Robert L. Bernstein. Its new executive director is Gara LaMarche, succeeding Sophie C. Silberberg, who was named along with Robert Wedgeworth as new Vice-Chairs of the Fund. Lydia Lobenthal is the Fund's associate.
THE PRISON PROJECT

The Human Rights Watch Prison Project, established in 1988, cuts across the five regional divisions of Human Rights Watch to focus on a single issue: prison conditions worldwide. The Prison Project has investigated conditions for sentenced prisoners, pretrial detainees and those held in police lock-ups. It examines prison conditions for all prisoners, not just political prisoners.

Of the countries where investigations have been undertaken, the Prison Project has been able to secure access to prisons in about half. The Project has a set of self-imposed rules for prison visits: the investigators undertake such visits only when they and not the authorities can suggest institutions to be visited, when they can be confident that they will be allowed to talk privately with inmates of their choice, and when they can gain access to an entire facility. These rules are adopted to avoid being shown model institutions or their most presentable parts. When no access is possible, reporting is based on interviews with former prisoners, lawyers and prison experts, and on documentary evidence.

In previous years, the Project conducted studies in Brazil, Czechoslovakia, Indonesia, Mexico, Poland and Turkey. In 1990 the Project sent missions to Egypt, India, Israel and Jamaica. In Israel and Jamaica, the delegations were allowed to visit prisons; in Egypt and India, no such permission was granted. In addition, follow-up missions to Czechoslovakia and Poland were conducted in 1990, with access to prisons in both countries. An examination of conditions in a range of US prisons was also begun in 1990, and additional investigation is planned for 1991.

In addition to pressing for improvements in prison conditions in each country on which it reports, the Prison Project plans to use the findings of its studies as part of an effort to place the problem of prison conditions on the international human rights agenda -- so that a government's claims to respect human rights will be assessed in part on the basis of how it treats all of its prisoners. As a first step, the results of the European and US studies will be presented during the human rights conference in Moscow scheduled for the fall of 1991.

The work of the Prison Project is guided by the Prison Advisory Committee, whose chairman is American University Law Professor Herman Schwartz. Other members are: Nan Aron, Vivien Berger, Haywood Burns, Alejandro Garro, William Hellerstein, Edward Koren, Sheldon Krantz, Benjamin Malcolm, Diane Orentlicher, Norman Rosenberg, David Rothman, Rita Simon, and Clarence Sundram. The director of the Project is Joanna Weschler.
THE WOMEN'S RIGHTS PROJECT

In 1990, Human Rights Watch established an international Women's Rights Project. The Project, in conjunction with the five regional divisions of Human Rights Watch, will report on abuses of the basic rights of women worldwide. At least at the outset, the Project intends to address issues of violence against women and gender-specific discrimination in employment, education and civil status. In all of these cases, in accordance with the mandate of Human Rights Watch, the Project will limit its focus to instances in which the state plays a role, by legally sanctioning violations of women's rights or by routinely tolerating abusive practices in which the risk factor is being female.

The Women's Rights Project opens new territory for Human Rights Watch, territory which is vast and virtually unexplored by the international human rights community. Consistent with the approach of Human Rights Watch as a whole, the Project will not attempt to chart this territory in the abstract, but will confront issues as they arise in the course of particular country studies. For that reason, in selecting the initial set of countries for examination, we consider an important factor to be the existence of domestic women's rights groups that have begun the process of thinking through and addressing these issues. With these groups, we will assess the cultural sensitivities and other local factors surrounding women's issues, explore the relevant legal framework and determine the areas in which a contribution from Human Rights Watch could be most effective.

The Project conducted its first investigation in October, when a researcher traveled to Algeria to examine rising violence against women and gender discrimination in family law. A report from her trip is expected in early 1991. Other countries likely to be examined include Brazil, where the common-law "defense of honor" exculpates a husband who murders or injures his wife; South Korea, where the government has tolerated the practice of employers in the textile and electronics industries who at times provide extra pay to male workers to beat women protesting low pay and adverse working conditions; and Jordan, where a wife's perceived adultery is legally punishable by death at the hands of her husband or male relative.

In addition to these country-specific issues, we are considering studies that span several countries or regions. Topics under review are the widespread problems of rape in detention and other forms of gender-specific torture and humiliation in custody, and violence against women as a form of counterinsurgency or an aspect of war. We also hope to examine the particular problems of women refugees.

Human Rights Watch established the Women's Rights Project because violence and discrimination against women is an epidemic problem, affecting women of every class and race in virtually all nations of the world. Although most states have committed themselves to respect human rights and in some cases to end discrimination against women, we believe that not enough work has been done by international human rights organizations to expose women's rights abuses and ensure that they are treated as an integral part of any assessment of a government's respect for human rights.

Human Rights Watch has already established a special-focus project on prison conditions. We have found through the Prison Project's work that by singling out an often-forgotten element of a nation's human rights record we can have a greater impact than would be possible were the issue presented as one of many others. We believe that this will hold true in the field of women's rights as well.

Recognition is growing in the United States government that the issue of women's rights, and in particular the issue of violence against women, needs to be addressed as part of both the international and domestic human rights agenda. Congress has required the State Department to include women's rights in its international human rights reporting, and in 1990, for the first time, the issue of violence against women was included in the State Department's annual Country Reports on Human Rights Practices. In addition, both houses of Congress held hearings on the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women and on violence against women in the United States, and Senator Joseph Biden introduced a bill to "combat violence against women on the street and in the homes." Unfortunately, the violence hearings in particular were hampered by a lack of hard information, reflecting the absence of any systematic reporting by nongovernmental institutions. The Women's Rights Project is designed to meet the growing interest in this issue and help to provide the solid information that has been in such short supply.

To guide the work of the Project, Human Rights Watch is establishing a Project Advisory Committee which will include representatives of each of the five regional Watch committees and several persons who have been active in efforts to promote women's rights in the United States and around the world. Members of the Advisory Committee will participate in certain investigative missions, and help to refine the issues and areas that the Project should emphasize.

The Women's Rights Project is directed by Dorothy Q. Thomas and staffed by Dionne Morris. It is based in Human Rights Watch's Washington offices.

THE CALIFORNIA COMMITTEE OF HUMAN RIGHT WATCH AND THE LOS ANGELES OFFICE
Nineteen-ninety was the first full year of operation for the Los Angeles office of Human Rights Watch. The office, which opened in May 1989, grew out of the efforts of the California Committee of Human Rights Watch -- a group of concerned Californians who, since 1987, have actively promoted and participated in our work. The office and volunteer members of the California Committee provide research and campaign support to all five regional divisions of Human Rights Watch by undertaking tasks that are best performed from California. Key elements of this support are their responsibility for Americas Watch's research on Mexico and for examining violations of human rights by the US Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) along the US-Mexico border. They also seek to enhance local awareness of and support for international human rights by sponsoring public educational programs in San Francisco and Los Angeles.

During 1990, research on Mexico was the cornerstone of the Los Angeles office's work. The office released the first comprehensive report on human rights conditions in Mexico by an international nongovernmental organization. That report generated substantial press interest in both Mexico and the United States. In September, a representative from the office testified on human rights in Mexico before a joint hearing of the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittees on the Western Hemisphere and on Human Rights and International Organizations. A report on prison conditions in Mexico and a critique of the first six months of Mexico's new governmental National Human Rights Commission will be published in early 1991.

In the fall of 1990, research began on abuses by the US Border Patrol and by other agencies of the INS during the arrest and detention of undocumented aliens in the United States. That report, too, will be published in early 1991. In December, a staff member published an op-ed article in the San Diego Union regarding the shooting of a Mexican youth by the Border Patrol. The office also submitted an amicus curiae brief to the US Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit regarding human rights violations committed by those acting at the behest of the US government in the course of the abduction and transport to the United States of Mexican gynecologist Humberto Alvarez Machaín.

In January, on behalf of Asia Watch, a member of the California Committee participated in a mission to the Cambodian refugee camps in Thailand to interview refugees about human rights violations by all sides to the Cambodian conflict. Findings from that mission were published in an Asia Watch newsletter and incorporated into Asia Watch's testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. Since her return, the Committee member has spoken several times about human rights conditions in Cambodia.

Work on China was also a priority of the California Committee. Two California Committee members made numerous presentations about human rights conditions in China. Much of these efforts were part of a drive for the release of Wang Ruowang, a Shanghai writer who was detained following the events in June 1989; he was released in October. In January, a Los Angeles office staff member spoke at a press conference promoting a review of guidelines for granting visas to Chinese students in the wake of the Tiananmen Square massacre and continuing widespread human rights violations in that country. In April, she also participated in a press conference announcing the passage of a California Assembly Resolution denouncing continuing human rights abuses in China.

In June, a member of the California Committee served as a delegate to the International Helsinki Federation Conference on Human Rights in Moscow. She then traveled to Kiev to meet with local human rights leaders and to explore human rights issues created by rising secessionist movements and ethnic tensions, as well as by the nuclear disaster at Chernobyl.

Since the invasion of Kuwait, the Los Angeles office has helped disseminate Middle East Watch newsletters on the human rights situation in Kuwait, the humanitarian aspects of the international embargo against Iraq, and related issues.

As part of a public education series, the California Committee and the Los Angeles office hosted several human rights monitors as well as members of the Human Rights Watch staff and boards. In January, the California Committee hosted Carlos Escobar, a Peruvian lawyer who had gained international attention for his efforts to prosecute those responsible for military atrocities in Peru -- efforts that required him to leave Peru for his safety. In October, the Committee and the office organized a statewide speaking tour for Gibson Kamau Kuria to draw attention to the declining human rights situation in Kenya. Kuria, a leading Kenyan human rights lawyer, was imprisoned in 1987 for representing a political prisoner; in July, again facing detention, he was granted refuge in the US embassy in Nairobi, where he remained until he was allowed to leave the country. In the year's final forum, Mariclaire Acosta, director of the nongovernmental Mexican Commission to Defend and Promote Human Rights, joined a member of the Los Angeles office in discussing human rights in Mexico.

Forums involving Human Rights Watch staff and board members included a discussion in February of human rights in El Salvador three months after the murder of six Jesuit priests and their two associates, one in April on human rights abuses in Iran, Iraq and Israel, and one in September on emerging human rights concerns in the Soviet Union. In addition, in May, Lawrence Weschler spoke about his recently released book, A Miracle, A Universe, which documents the extraordinary efforts made by human rights activists in Brazil and Uruguay to confront and overcome the legacies of repression and torture in their countries.

In 1990, the California Committee successfully raised its operating budget in California through a combination of private contributions, foundation support, and a fund-raising dinner to honor co-chair, Stanley Sheinbaum, on his 70th birthday.

Jane Olson and Stanley Sheinbaum are co-chairs of the California Committee. Its Executive Committee also includes Raquel Ackerman, Mike Farrell, Paul Hoffman, Joseph LaBonte, Daniel Levy, Lynda Palevsky, Clara A. "Zazi" Pope, Francis Wheat and Diane Wittenberg. The remainder of the California Committee is comprised of Lynn Alvarez, Edward Asner, Geoffrey Cowen, Dolores A. Donovan, Sandy Elster, Brenda Freiberg, Jonathan M. Gordon, Arthur N. Greenberg, Kristin Hubbard, Lucy Hubbard, Rosanne Keynan, Clifford L. Klein, Sharon Lloyd, Abraham F. Lowenthal, Beatriz Manz, Felicia Marcus, Hon. Dorothy W. Nelson, Hon. James F. Nelson, Steven A. Nissen, Lucille Polachek, Claire Pollack, Cruz Reynoso, David W. Rintels, Vicki Riskin Rintels, Ramona Ripston, William Rothbard, Orville Schell, Hon. Phillip R. Trimble, Nancy Wheat, Stanley Wolpert and Zohreh Zarnegar.

Ellen Lutz is the director of the Los Angeles office and Larry Siems is an associate.
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH AND CONGRESSIONAL CASEWORK
Throughout 1990, Human Rights Watch continued to work closely with three casework groups composed of members of Congress -- the Congressional Friends of Human Rights Monitors, the Congressional Committee to Support Writers and Journalists, and the Congressional Working Group on International Labor Rights. All three groups are bipartisan and bicameral. Human Rights Watch initiated the formation of these groups to enable concerned Members of Congress to write letters and urgent cables to governments that violate the basis rights of human rights monitors, writers, journalists and unionists. Human Rights Watch supplies the groups with information about appropriate cases of concern; the groups, in turn, determine which cases they would like to act upon.

The Congressional Friends of Human Rights Monitors, which was formed in 1985, is composed of 32 Senators and 143 Members of the House of Representatives. During 1990, the committee took up the cases of dozens of human rights monitors who had been killed, disappeared, arrested arbitrarily, assaulted, or harassed. During the year, the committee acted on behalf of human rights monitors in Colombia, Cuba, Guatemala, Honduras, Kenya, Mexico, Nigeria, Peru, the Philippines, Romania, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan and Turkey.

The Congressional Committee to Support Writers and Journalists, which was formed in 1988, is composed of 15 Senators and 74 Members of the House of Representatives. The committee protested dozens of cases of killings, abductions, illegal detentions, violent attacks, and acts of censorship against writers and journalists around the world. Letters or cables were sent to the governments of Bangladesh, Burma (Myanmar), Cameroon, China, Colombia, Cuba, Haiti, Iraq, Israel, Kenya, Pakistan, Paraguay, the Philippines, Romania, Singapore, South Africa, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Turkey, Uganda, Vietnam and Zambia.

The newest group, the Congressional Working Group on International Labor Rights, was formed in March 1990, and is made up of seven Senators and 43 Members of the House of Representatives. During its first year, it protested numerous cases of labor rights abuses, including murders, abductions, illegal detentions, beatings, illegal firings, and unwarranted bans on unions. The committee wrote to many governments, including Brazil, China, Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Malaysia, Paraguay, Peru, South Africa, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Turkey and Zimbabwe.