ARGENTINA
The Report on Argentina is generally accurate and reflects the climate that has permitted Argentines full enjoyment of democratic freedoms since the inauguration of a civilian government in late 1983. In 1985, however, there were a number of disturbing signs that right wing elements linked to the military dictatorship of 1976-83, were embarked on a destabilization campaign against the government and against democratic institutions.
The Report makes no reference to several instances of leafletting against the government in military barracks; and to the participation of officers on active duty in frequent public denunciations of what they called "permissive democracy" or "pornographic democracy." There are references in the Report, however, to the wave of threats against democratic politicians and human rights activists, culminating in a series of bombs in public places that eventually forced President Raul Alfonsin to declare a 40-day state of siege in order to guarantee the parliamentary and local elections of early November. Surprisingly, the Report attributes these bombings to "unknown assailants, generally believed to be nongovernmental." In fact, some alleged perpetrators have been arrested and are facing charges. In other cases, even when the actual assailant may not be known, everybody in Argentina knows that the purpose is to create an impression of instability and chaos, thereby preparing the ground for another coup d'etat. In April 1985, both President Alfonsin and Minister of Interior Antonio Troccoli publicly discussed these golpista groups and clearly associated them with intelligence operatives of the past dictatorship. The handful of individuals who have been apprehended for these actions all formerly worked for the military government's intelligence services.
The failure to discuss such activities by military officials and former military officials is an important omission because, until 1983, the Reagan Administration made every effort to present the human rights performance of the military dictatorship in the best possible light, minimizing the significance of the military's crimes, and hastening to see "dramatic improvements" where there were none.
The Report gives relatively short shrift to the prosecution of the commanders-in-chief of the Armed Forces, which took place in a public trial between April and September 1985, and culminated in sentencing in December. The trial had landmark significance because it demonstrated the ability of Argentina's judiciary to handle it with all the seriousness and impartiality of a competent and functioning judiciary, as the Report well states; but it was also significant because it produced a mountain of irrebuttable evidence about the magnitude of the violations of fundamental rights that were the deliberate and planned essence of the "dirty war against subversion." Neither the production of evidence at the trial, nor any other development, has elicited expressions of regret by the Reagan Administration for having supported the most criminal regime ever to govern Argentina.
The Report is factually wrong about the status of 14 prisoners (now only 11) who remained in prison after the change of government. Though it is true that they are serving long sentences for violent crimes, it is also true that those sentences -- some imposed by military courts, others by federal judges appointed by the dictatorship -- followed proceedings lacking in minimum due process; among other things, all those prisoners were forced to confess under torture. The prisoners have exhausted all judicial remedies. A bill introduced in both houses of the Congress that would afford them new opportunities for review and reduction of sentence has been stalled because the government does not want to give the impression of leniency to the left while the trials of the generals are going forward.
The Report is wrong in noting the criticism by Argentine newspaper owners of the arrest in October of two journalists, among 12 individuals arrested under state of siege powers. It was clear that their role as journalists had nothing to do with the arrests (one of them continued to publish his column in La Prensa while in custody) but arose from governmental suspicion of their involvement, with other civilians and officers, in the wave of bombing attacks and the plan to destabilize the government before the November elections.
Though the section on freedom of movement is accurate, it fails to mention a significant development. Many Argentines who returned from exile after receiving official assurances that they were free to do so, have faced imprisonment or have had to leave the country because a few eager judges ordered their prosecution for alleged involvement in subversive activities during the years of the dictatorship. Other Argentines who intended to return have refrained from doing so for fear of similar actions. In one case, a man who survived a concentration camp in Cordoba and provided testimony about torture, illegal arrest and executions by the Armed Forces there, was accused of activities with guerrilla groups that allegedly took place before his own "disappearance."
