CHILE
The State Department's Country Report on Chile for 1985 is essentially a reprise of the analysis provided for the previous year, a mixture of careful accuracy and evasive or simply misleading presentation.* While the relevant facts do appear, for the most part, the Report's presentation of the Chilean context distorts the sources of terror and instability in Chile and tends to excuse the government.
The Report's introductory passage contains its main thesis, noting that "Most fundamental political freedoms are severely limited" but attributing Chile's abysmal human rights situation to a "lack of progress toward a transition to democracy and [to] terrorist violence." The introduction describes Pinochet's refusal to negotiate with eleven parties which in August 1985 had produced a National Accord for the Transition to Full Democracy, and also the government's failure to promulgate electoral laws which would define the mechanisms for transition. Elsewhere in the Report the regime's putative "transition," and the Constitution on which that process is to be based, are given brief attention. But the Report implicitly accepts the 1980 Constitution as a legitimate, if flawed, vehicle for transition, although several constitutional provisions would severely limit the "democracy" to be achieved and although the opposition considers the Constitution unacceptable. As in past
Because these reports are developed during the year in question and drafts are submitted to Washington before year's end, we assume that the thinking represented by the 1985 Report reflects the opinions of former Ambassador to Chile James Theberge and his staff and may diverge to some extent from current Embassy and State Department attitudes on Chile.
14
reports, the plebiscite which approved the Constitution is presented without criticism, as if an open political process had occurred free of repression and intimidation and with full possibility to promote public awareness of the measures being voted on. Such a presentation seriously distorts the Chilean experience and the problems posed for a transition to authentic democracy.
On the matter of terrorism, the Report is deliberately misleading. Its treatment of Political Killings is devoted largely to the activities of "left and right-wing terrorists," and even when deaths occurred -- as in September -- due to police attacks on peaceful demonstrators, the Report emphasizes those cases in which "circumstances" were supposedly "unclear." By referring to "left and right-wing terrorists," moreover, the Report creates two illusions which suggest that extreme government reprisals are, if not justified, at least understandable. The first illusion is that leftist violence is a major threat and is generally directed against persons, mainly civilians; the second illusion is that in Chile there are rightist squads independent of the government. The first illusion promotes suspicion of Chile's sizeable political left as a whole, the second promotes the idea that Pinochet is besieged from all sides with his security forces in the middle.
The sporadic and generally symbolic actions of the tiny leftist paramilitary groups in Chile are, in the great majority of cases, directed against government or military buildings and electrical towers; they have rarely included attacks on persons -- as a rule, military policemen. In a number of cases, bombings and murders officially attributed to these groups have been revealed as government provocations to justify crackdowns on peaceful dissent. It is worth noting, in this regard, that of over 5,000 persons arrested in 1985 in political cases -- of whom more than 1,000 were selectively sought out or kidnapped — only 0.6% were subsequently even accused of terrorist activity, according to the Catholic Church's human rights office.
As to so-called "right-wing terrorists," there is no evidence that they exist as entities separate from the security forces. Indeed in
15
several cases of paramilitary violence by rightist "unknowns" the perpetrators have by now been exposed as government agents, and no human rights organization in Chile believes that current activity by such groups is independent. The Report's presentation of this phenomenon is its most egregious evasion, epitomized in its description of a famous triple murder in March 1985 as the work of "unidentified civilians." The case has been pursued by a civilian judge whose investigations — aided even by Chile's secret police — revealed the "civilians" to be members of the military police, or carabineros. So obvious was carabinero involvement, and so explosive was the national outrage, that the director of police was forced to resign from his post and from the government. The State Department's delicacy on this matter is ludicrous.
That delicacy also appears elsewhere in the Report, as when it is used to support the contention that abuses diminished after the lifting of the seven-month state of siege on June 16. It is suggested that, during the last half of 1985, Chile's courts became active in protecting victims and/or bringing security personnel to justice and only later is it clarified that no security personnel have been found guilty. It is stated that "in the final six months of 1985 the uniformed police used considerably less violent means" of controlling demonstrators. But "considerably less" is hardly none, or even little. Nor does the Report anywhere clarify that in the latter half of 1985 more people were arrested, more killed, more sent into internal banishment than during the previous six months, under the state of siege. Thus a fiction is created that, after a harsh first half, 1985 saw an improvement in human rights conditions, when in nearly all respects except for the right of independent press publication the reverse was true.
We might quibble with less dangerous inaccuracies in the Report: its assertion that Chile has "a vigorous private sector" and that the regime's economic policies are "generally responsible;" its assertion that minority rights are respected; its claim that responsibility for attacks against religious persons has been "difficult to place," and so on. The/Report's principal flaw, however, is that while it presents
16
the Pinochet regime in Chile as brutal and intransigent it also reinforces the government's own contention that Pinochet stands between order and chaos. On the contrary, "disorder" in Chile stems directly from policies of state violence and economic mismanagement which amount to the traumatization of an entire society. We look forward with interest to a possible improvement in next year's Report. Recent Administration statements suggest a recognition that the approach embodied in the Report for 1985 does not advance democracy or human rights in Chile.
As in previous years, we take serious exception to the Report's description of a major human rights group, the Chilean Commission for Human Rights, as devoting "its efforts not only to human rights issues but also to political issues." Presumably this refers to its support for an end to the Pinochet dictatorship and its replacement by democratic government. Elsewhere, the State Department claims that promoting democracy is promoting human rights; in the Chilean case, its stand has been different. The implication is damaging. We reiterate our demand that the State Department withdraw this irresponsible statement.
17
