CUBA
The Report on Cuba accurately depicts the situation in a country where the rights of free speech and association are sharply curtailed, where independent political activity is not tolerated and where prison conditions continue to be very poor.
The Report describes in detail, as it should, the treatment of long-term political prisoners (the Plantados), who refuse political reeducation and who suffer severe mistreatment in Cubans prisons. It also cites the testimonies of several former Cuban prisoners who have charged that physical and psychological torture is often practiced in Cuban prisons.
In its eagerness to condemn the Castro Government, however, the State Department sometimes goes too far. Consider, for example, its treatment of the subject of disappearances. To our knowledge there were no reported cases of disappearances in Cuba in 1985. Rather than simply acknowledging this, the Report states:
When individuals are arrested by the Cuban secret police, friends and family risk retribution if they ask about them. Rarely are individuals tried publicly for political crimes; sentences are also often secret.
When those Cubans who have been able to emigrate and become citizens of another country return to Cuba to visit relatives, their new citizenship is not acknowledged by the Cuban Government. If arrested, they are denied contact with consular officials. If they disappear, the Cuban Government refuses to provide any information about them to authorities of their new countries of citizenship.
20
If the State Department is aware of cases of disappearances in
1985,	it should cite them. If there are none, the Report should simply move on to the next subject.
Considering the great difficulty in obtaining information about human rights in Cuba, which the Report acknowledges, the State Department is extremely confident in making a broad range of assertions about rights abuses. To give one example, the Report cites, but does not identify "credible reports...that the use of executions to deter political dissent continues." We note, as we have in the past, the contrast between the tone used in this Report, and that used in other sections dealing with allies of the United States.
When progress is acknowledged, such as the increased dialogue between Cuban Government and the Catholic Church, the developments are characterized as "random" and explained as the Government's effort "to obtain the Church's endorsement for its views on extraneous issues, such as the foreign debt of Latin American countries."
The Report is incomplete and in some cases misleading in its discussion of several issues that involve U.S.-Cuban relations. It discusses a series of negotiations in 1985 between a delegation from the U.S. Catholic Bishops Conference and the Cuban government regarding the release of a select group of prisoners. It notes accurately that President Castro substituted many new names for those presented to him by the Bishops in January 1985. The Report concludes that the necessary steps to establish the eligibility of these prisoners for resettlement are still in progress, but that, by January
1986,	all but a few of these people were still in prison. What the Report does not say is that the delay in processing these applications, now for almost one year, has been caused by a mutual reluctance of the Cuban Government and the U.S. Interest Section (Embassy) in Havana to cooperate with each other.
Similarly, the Report's discussion of the breakdown in a bilateral prisoner exchange agreement between the United States and Cuba fails to note that it was the inauguration by the United States of Radio Marti that precipitated the collapse of the agreement. The
21
Report says only that "Cuba unilaterally suspended the agreement, thus preventing the reunification of thousands of families." The Report should have made it clear that Cuba is still willing to allow these ex-prisoners to emigrate, but that the United States has refused to cooperate because the Cuban government refuses to accept back several thousand Cubans from the U.S. who were part of the Mariel boatlift in the Spring of 1981.
Finally, while the Report is accurate in saying that the government of Cuba routinely "refuses permission for any outside organization" to investigate human rights issues, it should have noted that in October a delegation sponsored by the Center for Development Policy in Washington visited Cuba. While not a human rights delegation per se, human rights was one of two items on its agenda. The delegation included Patricia Derian, formerly Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, and representatives of three human rights groups, the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, Americas Watch and The Washington Office on Latin America.
22
