GUATEMALA
The State Department has improved its reporting on Guatemala and the Report for 1985 is a fairer assessment that it presented in any of the last several years. At several places the Report points out the responsibility of the armed forces for the murder, disappearances and torture of civilians. Also, it discusses particular cases in which the armed forces murdered civilians, as when it notes that in Patzun "the local military commander carried out a series of abductions and assassinations" and when it discusses the killings of two leaders of an association of families of the disappeared, the Mutual Support Group (GAM). The Report correctly notes that, "The officer corps is still immune from prosecution, and the justice system is unable to respond to human rights violations by government officials." It says that, "the illegal detention of individuals suspected of being insurgents or insurgent sympathizers continues to be a serious problem." And, reversing what the State Department has said previously, the Report acknowledges the compulsory nature of service in the civilian patrols. As the Report says: "The Government claims that service in the civil defense patrols is voluntary. However, in many rural areas it is required of able-bodied males." The Report goes on to quote Archbishop Penados about "obligatory service" in the civilian patrols. In previous years the Country Reports have quoted U.N. Special Rapporteur Lord Colville's ludicrous claim that the patrols are voluntary and that men are "shamed" into joining by their communities. This was Colville's explanation for the fact that every able-bodied male in Indian highland communities performs onerous unpaid service in these patrols.
Despite the improvements in the Report, shortcomings remain. The Report cites figures on killings and disappearances that purport
30
to show that there has been a decline in such abuses as compared to the previous year. It does not indicate the source of these figures or the limits on their usefulness. To the best of our knowledge, the figures in the Report are taken from the Guatemalan press. As the press in Guatemala is more diverse and more enterprising than in neighboring El Salvador, it is indeed an important source of information on human rights abuses. On the other hand, the Guatemalan press is far from a source of comprehensive information. Communication is highly restricted in Guatemala because of the multiplicity of languages, the lack of roads in many parts of the country, the absence of telephones from many communities, and the fear that has pervaded the country for many years.
In addition, the Guatemalan press censors itself. When government forces are responsible for killings, this is rarely pointed out — though sometimes, it is clear from the way a story is presented (e.g., a story might say that a large group of heavily armed men in trucks came into a village and killed some residents who were pointed out by informers; every Guatemalan would understand that the reference to trucks means that it was the army).
At present, it is not possible to obtain reliable, comprehensive figures on the political violence in Guatemala. Aside from the difficulties in communication, the country lacks a domestic human rights monitoring organization to collect such information. In the past it has been too dangerous to establish such a group. The GAM, which was established in 1984, and has itself been severely victimized, is the first human rights group in recent years to persist for a significant period within Guatemala, but it has not developed into a monitoring organization.
Rather than report a decline in killings and disappearances, it would have been fairer to say that, to the limited extent that the Guatemalan press is able to gather such data, it has reported a smaller number of killings and disappearances than during the previous year.
Another shortcoming in the Report is its repeated emphasis on the difficulty in attributing responsibility for killings and
31
disappearances. It would be fairer to point out that when the evidence points to guerrilla responsibility, the press shows no hesitation in noting this. On the other hand, when the evidence points to army involvement, the press avoids attributing responsibility. The Report further clouds this issue by quoting self-serving statements by the armed forces about individuals who have supposedly pretended to disappear. Even if there was such a case, it should not be cited in such a fashion as to suggest that it is representative. To imply that it is representative serves the cause of the armed forces in explaining away disappearances -- a phenomenon that originated in Guatemala twenty years ago and that has victimized more persons in Guatemala than in any other country in the hemisphere.
A welcome aspect of the Report is its respectful treatment of the Mutual Support Group. Such associations, which demand a proper accounting of the disappeared and the punishment of those responsible for their disappearances, may cause considerable annoyance to officials like President Vinicio Cerezo of Guatemala who was not involved in the disappearances and who lacks the power over Guatemala's armed forces to meet their demands. Similarly, they may annoy U.S. Embassy officials with assertions that the U.S. should be held responsible for disappearances because of its support for past military governments. Whether or not the demands of such groups can be met by the officials to whom they are addressed, and whether or not those demands are made in what seems a strident fashion, the emergence and survival of an organization such as the Mutual Support Group is itself an essential part of the effort to end Guatemala's terrible record of gross abuses of human rights. The Department of State has not always responded to the GAM in as appropriate a fashion as in the Country Reports. We hope that the tone of this Report will characterize its future dealings with the organization.
32
