HONDURAS
The Report on Honduras offers a highly selective vision of the human rights situation of that impoverished and victimized country. Although some individual categories, such as "Torture" and "Freedom of Movement," list minor cases of abuse, far more serious abuses are omitted. Furthermore, the language of the Report paints a rosy picture of a tranquil, well-oiled democracy for a year when the machinery of Honduras's civilian government has broken down in a number of remarkable ways. The Report makes no mention of the existence of Nicaraguan counter-revolutionary forces in Honduras, nor of the large number of serious human rights abuses attributed to them, against Honduran citizens as well as Nicaraguan refugees. And it ignores the damaging effect of the rampant process of militarization in Honduras today, which has usurped the influence of the civilian government and turned the country into a sporting field for the armies of the United States, Honduras, and the Nicaraguan contra forces and has occasionally elicited strikes by Nicaraguan government forces against contra bases in Honduras.
It is generally acknowledged that there was an improvement in the human rights conditions of Honduras during 1985. Nonetheless, serious abuses did continue. The State Department Report states that "[n]o disappearances were documented in 1985...." In fact, the private Committee for the Defense of Human Rights (CODEH) documented ten disappearances over the year, five of them of a clearly political nature. One of these appeared to be an instance of forced recruitment by the Nicaraguan counterrevolutionary forces. The others all followed detentions by the police investigative unit, the DNI.
The Report describes an atmosphere of religious and political freedoms, when in fact major leaders within the Catholic Church
37
and the trade union movement report a pattern of widespread harassment of their followers by the military, especially in rural areas. This harassment often includes illegal detention, and sometimes torture. Peasant union activists Victor Borgas, Fermin Lobo, and Felix Mendoza. were three of the torture cases reported in 1985. The National Peasant Union (UNC) also reports that its members are frequently harassed by the armed forces under the guise of applying Antiterrorist Law 33. According to the head of the union, 1,560 of his members have been arrested under this law since it was put into effect in 1982.
The State Department Report misrepresents the traditional role of the Honduran Armed Forces when it calls them "strongly supportive of the democratic process and of broadly-based social and economic development." Several leading military figures, including former Armed Forces Commander Gustavo Alvarez (ousted by his military colleagues in March 1984), have sought to expand or maintain their powers through anti-democratic means in recent years, and the Armed Forces lead the way in stifling Honduran domestic opposition. The Report makes a factual error when it calls the country's Public Security Force, the FUSEP, "fundamentally a civilian police force." The FUSEP is an official branch of the Armed Forces, functions in a military or paramilitary fashion, and works closely with other branches of the Armed Forces, particularly in intelligence matters.
Perhaps the most serious lapse in the Report is its treatment of Honduras's grave refugee situation. The Report perpetuates the Reagan Administration's double standard in dealing with refugees from Nicaragua and those from El Salvador; the Report lists "at least 65,000 from Nicaragua and more than 20,000 from El Salvador and Guatemala." But Americas Watch figures, backed by international organizations working directly with the refugees, indicate that there may well be 65,000 Nicaraguans living in Honduras if non-refugees, scattered refugees, refugees in camps and contra combatants are included, while there are nearly 20,000 Salvadorans living in refugee
38
camps alone, and many more if non-refugees and scattered refugees are included.
The Report deals with the Salvadoran refugees' situation in a scandalous manner. It states that "[i]n August, several casualties resulted from efforts by government forces to detain Salvadoran guerrillas operating in refugee camps near Colomoncagua." The August incursion into the camps was a case of harassment and intimidation of the Salvadoran refugees by the Honduran troops. No Salvadoran guerrilla presence was ever established, and ten refugees who were taken into custody as suspected guerrillas were all eventually released after no evidence whatsoever was produced against them. In the course of the incursion, the troops killed three refugees, including a 3-month-oId infant, and wounded many more. The State Department's characterization of the incursion contradicts the extensive testimony of eyewitnesses, both refugees and international relief workers, collected by Americas Watch, the Lawyers Committee and U.S. journalists.
The State Department Report holds that "During 1985, President Suazo and the current military leadership have demonstrated increasing sensitivity to the importance of strengthened human rights." But over the course of his term of office, President Suazo steadily abandoned his stated belief in principled democratic rule, culminating in his grandstanding attempt to retain his hold on office through seizing control of aspects of the nominating and electoral process for the November presidential elections. Suazo was foiled in his attempt, but the exercise demonstrated just how feeble the courts, the Congress, and other Honduran democratic institutions were. The armed forces have battened off unprecedented amounts of military aid from the United States, which has effectively increased both its power and prestige vis-a-vis the civilian government, to the detriment of civil liberties and human rights.
39
