HAITI
«
This year's Report on Haiti is more candid and comprehensive than previous reports. The Report acknowledges the absolute power that was exercised by the now ousted dictator, Jean Claude Duvalier, and his palace favorites. As in previous years, however, the Report commits errors of omission and interpretation. Nowhere in the Report is it acknowledged that 1985 was a very bad year for human rights in Haiti.
The Introduction notes that an amnesty on April 19, 1985 freed thirty-seven political prisoners. The Report does not note, however, that they were all illegally detained; that some had been detained incommunicado for over eighteen months; and that several had been severely tortured. The Report notes that the amnesty left several persons unaccounted for, but it neglects to add that the Haitian government had admitted earlier in 1985 that four of these prisoners had "disappeared" while detained at the Casernes Dessalines: Joseph Pardovany, Meres Briole, William Josma and Roc Charles Derose.
The Introduction reports that soldiers shot four school-children to death and wounded fourteen persons in Gonaives on November 27, 1985. It errs, however, in stating that officials have been arrested for these killings. In fact no formal charges have been lodged against any of those involved, though their identities are known by townspeople.
The Report fails to mention the execution of Dr. Lionel Laine by the security forces in the Casernes Dessalines on October 14, 1985.
The Report is incorrect in asserting that non-political prisoners are not abused in detention. In fact, severe beatings and abuse are used as a regular interrogation technique at the Criminal Investigation office in the Francois Duvalier Barracks in Port-au-
33
Prince. Even at the National Penitentiary there are no medications, prescription drugs and virtually no medical care.
The Report understates the systematic abuse of Constitutional protections against arbitrary arrest or detention. Warrant requirements and the preliminary hearing requirements for warrantless detentions are usually disregarded, as are the right to consult counsel and to receive visitors.
The Report should categorically state that fair public trials do not occur in Haiti, instead of simply implying this. In both political and non-political cases the general practice is to detain suspects in custody for an extended period during which they may suffer physical abuse. Detainees are released eventually without explanation after long incommunicado imprisonment.
The Report incorrectly characterizes the 18,200-member Tontons Macoutes (Volunteers for National Security) as a national militia performing security functions. In fact the Macoutes have existed to spy on, extort from, and generally terrorize impoverished Haitians. For years, the Country Reports have suggested that the Macoutes were out of the control of central government authorities and the regular military. In reality, the six-person Council of Directors of the VSN has been dominated by regular military officers.
The Report correctly characterizes the substantial limits on freedom of the press and free speech. It correctly observes that all of Haiti's major dailies have been pro-government and pro-Duvalier, and that they received substantial under-the-table subsidies. Far too much is made, however, of the independence of the emerging weekly newsmagazines that circulate primarily in the capital. Their circulation is small, and they have all admitted to practicing severe self-censorship to avoid confrontations with the regime. No mention is made that little direct censorship of the print media was required in 1985 as harsh laws had been passed against the press on May 7, 1984, and they suffered severe harassment during 1984.
The Report's assertion that Haiti's embryonic trade union movement has continued to thrive is incorrect and misleading. The Duvaliers, son like father, physically eliminated legitimate trade
34
unionists from the country. A crackdown in November 1980 wiped the slate clean, and laid the foundation for the formation of a paper labor organization in 1984 -- the Federation of Unionized Workers (FOS). While the Report claims that the total membership of FOS is approximately 2,800, the Federation's own President, Joseph Senat, claims only about 1,700. The most viable component of the FOS continues to be the 380-member Union of Drivers, which was heavily infiltrated by the Macoutes and the Secret Police and has never taken positions contrary to those of the regime.
Since independent human rights organizations continued to be subjected to considerable harassment in 1985, the Report's assertions concerning the National Commission on Human Rights are inappropriate. In 1985 the Commission failed to take any action even mildly independent or critical of the government. By its own admission the Commission would not act on "political cases," cases involving "national security," or other cases of "immediate importance to the government." In interviews with visiting delegations from human rights organizations in the United States, Commission members professed little concern regarding either harsh prison conditions and beatings, or the disappearance of four political prisoners whose whereabouts were acknowledged as unknown. The Commission failed to produce a comprehensive list of political prisoners held in the three major prisons despite promises over a two-year period to do so.
The Report's observations regarding the economic situation in Haiti are predictable and read like the Strategy Statement of the Agency for International Development. The devastating poverty of Haiti is acknowledged but the hemisphere's worst income inequality is not mentioned. The need to expand the "assembly industry" is asserted, but no mention is made of agricultural self-sufficiency. No mention is made that health and nutrition levels have worsened over the last decade. While the harmful effects of Haiti's unique import licensing requirements and government import monopolies are discussed, no mention is made of the massive, institutionalized corruption and diversion of even food aid for the short-term gain of
35
Duvalier cronies. In the Haitian context, these economic and social issues have been directly linked to civil and political rights because those who have questioned corruption have frequently become victims of human rights abuses. This makes it particularly unfortunate that the Department of State refrained from discussing these matters or glossed over them.
36
