INDONESIA
The Report on Indonesia is an inadequate and often misleading account of human rights abuses. It contains important factual errors, fails to credit reliable accounts of abuses, and omits discussion of vital issues. As a result, it does not reveal the extent to which political life is controlled by President Soeharto and a small group of military leaders. The Report also fails to portray clearly the increased level of abuses committed during recent efforts by the government to enhance control.
One of the Report's most serious omissions is in the discussion of ex-political prisoners -- estimated by the government at 1.5 million -- arrested during the 1960s. Although the Report briefly mentions that the government has restricted the movement of these persons, it does not indicate the range and severity of abuses that they suffer. While the majority had been accused of sympathies or affiliations with the Indonesian Communist Party or "groups based on the same principles," more than 99 percent were never formally charged or tried. (By the end of 1979, most had been released, some after having been detained for more than 13 years.) Ex-detainees may not become teachers, university lecturers, journalists, or lawyers, and may not be employed by the government or in sensitive industries.
The government has placed similar limitations upon family members of ex-detainees, and has restricted employment for former members of proscribed unions. For example, the Caltex Pacific oil company was recently ordered to fire more than 600 workers for their alleged connections with a now-defunct oil workers union once associated with the Indonesian Communist Party. Several hundred workers for Pertamina, the Indonesian state oil company, were also dismissed. According to sources in Pertamina, some of the fired
42
workers merely had family members associated with the union, which was banned some twenty years ago. The government has indicated that firings in the industry will continue, and could spread to other sectors.
The Report makes an important error with regard to ex-detainees when it states that persons "convicted" of involvement in the 1965 coup attempt may be allowed to regain their right to vote, provided they pass a stringent government review of their present and former activities. In fact, the vast majority of those eligible for this review -- announced in Presidential Decree 63 of 1985 -- had never been formally charged or tried, let alone convicted of involvement in the coup attempt.
In the section on arbitrary arrest, detention or exile, the Report correctly notes that the powers of the security authority, Kopkamtib, supercede protections of Indonesia's Criminal Procedure Code. However, the Report is incorrect in asserting that no cases of Kopkamtib exercising its extralegal powers were reported during 1985, and the assertion appears to reflect a misunderstanding of the overlap between Kopkamtib and army hierarchies. During political trials held in 1985, defense lawyers and defendants reported that army officers -- rather than the police -- had made arrests using Kopkamtib powers. Kopkamtib personnel conducted initial investigations and interrogations of detainees.
The Report also omits any discussion of the Tanjung Priok incident, other than a passing reference to it as a "riot". The incident occurred on September 12, 1984 (it was not mentioned in the Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1984, when government troops killed dozens of civilians in the Tanjung Priok port area on the outskirts of Jakarta. According to eyewitness accounts, a large unarmed group of Muslims was protesting what they believed to be the groundless detention of three local Muslim religious leaders and a youth when troops opened fire upon them without warning. The number of dead remains unclear, with estimates ranging from about thirty to several hundred. The government claimed that a Muslim mob attacked two local security posts after being whipped
43
into a frenzy by fanatics. Official reports state that soldiers exercised utmost restraint, and shot at civilians only after giving appropriate warnings. The event is of major human rights significance for several reasons. It caused considerable outrage among human rights observers within the country and abroad; resulted in private publication of a "White Paper" questioning the government's version of events and calling for an inquiry; and was followed by political show trials involving persons associated with established and constitutional opposition groups. Many of these persons had publicly questioned the government's interpretation of the state ideology and had opposed legislation establishing it as the sole principle for social organizations.
The Report devotes a large portion of the section on torture to an attempt to question the authenticity of a manual that Amnesty International believes was issued by Indonesian authorities in East Timor. The manual appears to permit the use of torture and threats on the lives of prisoners in East Timor; in its 1985 study of East Timor, Amnesty International carefully describes why it is convinced the document is authentic. The State Department seems to consider its discussion of Amnesty International as a substitute for considering the substantive issue, as the section omits any reference to reports of continued torture on East Timor. Indeed, the Report contains almost no information on abuses in East Timor or Irian Jaya, although serious abuses continued in both territories in 1985. For example, the Report makes no mention of de facto detention centers to which former Atauro prisoners have been sent or to conditions in the centers. It also fails to discuss reports of torture in the Lautem district of East Timor in 1985 and of the continued application of "summary justice" outside of Dili, the capital of East Timor. In this regard, a report in the Indonesian daily Sinar Harapan is instructive:
Since the only district court in East Timor is in Dili, the attorneys and police often execute justice on the spot [emphasis added], far from Dili, because it would
44
cost time and money to bring the persons to Dili for trial.
With regard to Irian Jaya, the Report fails to discuss the use of incommunicado detention and reports of killings of non-combatants in the Paniai highlands in mid-1985.
While the State Department can rightly claim that reports have been difficult to confirm, the Indonesian government is primarily responsible for preventing verification, as it severely limits access to the territories. In ignoring the reports of abuses, the State Department helps the Indonesian government to resist pressure to open the territories to impartial observers.
In its section on denial of fair public trial, the Report correctly states that cases involving political issues nearly always result in convictions. However, the Report's discussion of cases tried under the Subversion Law is inadequate and misleading. The Report lists the charges against several defendants involved in political trials in 1985, and then describes in detail procedural objections by the lawyers in one such case, that of Lt. General H.R. Dharsono:
Dharsono's attorneys claimed [emphasis added] the retired general was not permitted to meet with legal counsel for most of the seven months he was held preceding his trial.... However, during the trial, he was given full opportunity to air his views and those of defense witnesses as well; although the court permitted only 6 of the 12 witnesses the defense sought to testify.
This passage is misleading in using the Dharsono case as an example. Although he was not permitted to call all his exculpatory witnesses, Dharsono was treated far more gingerly than other defendants in political trials. For example, A.M. Fatwa — whose case is mentioned in passing -- was forced to read his 1200 page defense summary in continuous and protracted court session extending into the late evening. After three straight days of this, he
45
collapsed. Sect)ndly, the Report's description implies that Dharsono received his "day in court," and ignores the substance -- or lack thereof — of the charges against Dharsono and other defendants in political trials. Court records and press reports show that many defendants were convicted of crimes they did not commit and that the Subversion Law, both on its face and as applied, violates international norms of free expression. The only suggestion of this in the Report appears not in the section on fair trials, but in the portion dealing with freedom of speech. The reference is restrained, at best, as it simply notes that the "Government brought to trial several well-known figures whom it accused of possibly subversive acts while speaking their views."
The Report fails to mention subversion trials in East Timor, despite strong indications of the denial of due process. By the end of 1985, some 200 Timorese suspected of involvement in the independence movement had been tried and convicted. Remarkably, all the defendants were reported to have pleaded guilty, and none have appealed their convictions. Accordingly, there is reason to fear that the government has employed coercion. A recent statement by the Indonesian Chief Judge in Dili gives substance to this fear:
If all trials proceeded as they do here in East Timor, the job of our law enforcement officers would be very easy indeed.
The Report accurately describes institutional restrictions on trade union activity, including the high degree of government involvment in the trade union federation. However, the Report should also have stated that both the present and former structure were imposed by the government, and that independent voices within the government-structured labor federation have been systematically silenced. Over the past decade, press reports have revealed that officials -- or employers acting with the support of authorities -- have replaced independent-minded factory-level union boards, fired and/or detained independent workers elected to lead factory-level locals.
46
and crushed attempts to establish legally-permitted locals. These measures have often been undertaken with the active involvement of security and police officials.
The Report mentions that a recent reorganization of labor relations has taken place, but does not indicate that the change was engineered by the Ministry of Manpower and that it was aimed at bringing labor under even greater government control. In an effort designed ultimately to eliminate sectoral trade unions completely, the government threw its weight behind a consolidation of the 21 craft-based unions into 10 "departments." The new labor organization will be more centralized and hierarchical, and reports indicate that union leaders will be appointed — rather than elected — at all but the factory level. International labor organizations were both surprised and dismayed at the changes. (These events took place rather late in 1985; we will examine next year's Report to see if it compensates for the failure to mention them in the Report published in February 1986.)
In the section on the government's attitude toward investigation of alleged human rights violations, the Report seriously understates the pressures directed at Indonesian lawyers working on behalf of human rights. The Report does mention that the government refused to permit a foreign donation to a legal aid group in 1985; that the Jakarta City government withdrew funding to another such organization, "reportedly as a cost cutting measure"; and that new legislation requiring government approval of foreign funding is likely to result in a reduction of contributions to legal aid groups generally. However, this inadequately describes government hostility toward civil rights lawyers. The consequences for effective advocacy in political trials should have made the State Department treat this issue more thoroughly.
In a November, 1984, statement, the Head of Indonesia's National Intelligence Coordinating Board (Bakin), General (Retired) Yoga Sugama, expressed the policy of the government in this area: he said that individuals influenced by liberal democratic ideas were pretending to be human rights advocates in order to undermine
47
governmental authority. He also claimed that they threatened the continuity of national development. The government demonstrated this attitude in several acts of harassment and intimidation against civil rights lawyers in 1985. These included denials of permission to leave Indonesia, threats of discipline against those lawyers found to be "insulting the courts," suspension of a prominent advocate in Surabaya, and prosecution of a prominent attorney on charges widely regarded as frivolous. Even the largely controlled Indonesian press has criticized such intimidation, news of which does not appear in the Report.
Although it understates the hostility of the government toward outside human rights groups, the Report indicates accurately that the government considers human rights investigations to be interference in internal affairs. • The Report correctly indicates that the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has reached an agreement with the government on several important humanitarian issues. It does not mention, however, that humanitarian access to detainees in East Timor is still limited, especially in outlying areas. Also, the Report is silent on access by humanitarian organizations to prisons in Irian Jaya or to hundreds of Islamic political prisoners held elsewhere in Indonesia. The government has thus far given no indication that it is prepared to permit access to these prisoners by international humanitarian groups.
48
