ISRAELI-OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
The State Department's Report on Israel and the Occupied Territories presents a generally accurate overview of conditions in Israel-proper and those in the Occupied Territories. However, inaccuracy and superficiality distort the Report's account of several important issues. Because our expertise pertains to the Occupied Territories, our critique focuses on the State Department's account of human rights conditions there.
The Report opens with a description of Israel as "a parliamentary democracy which guarantees by law and reflects in practice the civil, political, and religious rights of its citizens." While a footnote on the first page indicates that "sharply differing sociopolitical environments" in Israel and the territories occupied by Israel since 1967 require that human rights conditions in the Occupied Territories be treated separately, the Report proceeds, under the over-inclusive heading "Israel and the Occupied Territories," to present a quite favorable account of conditions that in fact prevail within Israel-proper only. It is important to note that these observations pertain solely to the situation within Israel's pre-1967 borders.
Regarding political killing, the Report states that "[p]olitical killing is not condoned by the Israeli Government." This statement, though generally accurate, fails to account for the government's less than decisive response to the deaths of two Arabs following the intercepted hijacking of an Israeli civilian bus on April 12, 1984. Of the four Palestinians involved in the hijacking, two were killed when the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) stormed the bus, but two others were photographed being led away from the scene by IDF personnel. Hours later, the two were dead, apparently the victims of gun-butt blows to the head delivered during the course of interrogation.
49
In the wake of this much-publicized incident, Israel's Defense Minister appointed an inquiry commission, which issued its findings in May 1984. Pursuant to the commission's findings, the IDF's Chief Advocate General decided to prosecute a number of IDF pesonnel, including Brigadier General Yitzhak Mordechai; the charge was "unreasonable use of force." After a lengthy trial. General Mordechai was acquitted. The court's opinion noted that General Mordechai's purpose was to obtain vital information (i.e. the possible presence of explosives on the bus) and that his actions were dictated by operational necessity.
The acquittal of Brigadier General Mordechai should not be read as a general condonement of life-threatening brutality in the course of interrogation; the IDF's Chief Advocate General warned against such a broad interpretation following the proceedings. Nevertheless, the acquittal appears to deliver a message to those who undertake time-urgent interrogation of terrorists; namely, that official sanctions are not likely to be imposed. It also suggests that then-Defense Minister Moshe Arens spoke for the government when, in the immediate aftermath of the intercepted hijacking, he said: "Our response on Thursday night is Israel's response to terrorism...every terrorist who undertakes an operation inside Israel should know that he is not going to come out of it alive."
Perhaps the most notable shortcoming in the State Department's Report is its cursory and inaccurate discussion of torture and other forms of official mistreatment of prisoners and detainees in the Occupied Territories. The discussion begins with the optimistic assertion that "[tjorture is forbidden by Israeli law and there is no evidence that torture is condoned by the Israeli authorities." To substantiate this assertion, the Report credits the Israeli courts with the conviction of "two former officials of Farah prison [a detention center in the West Bank]" accused of having abused prisoners. The Lawyers Committee has identified two cases in which prison officials at Farah were convicted of abusing prisoners. One of these officials. Captain Muhammed Ghadir, was fined and sentenced to four months' probation. When the Chief Military Prosecutor appealed the
50
leniency of the sentence, the military court of appeals sentenced him to two months' actual imprisonment, two months' probation, a lowering of his rank, and no fine. Mr. Ghadir, though demoted, never served his prison term; his appeal to the court for a pardon was granted. At no point was he suspended from employment at Farah, where he continues to work today.
The other prisoner-abuse case at Farah involved a police investigator, Moshe Biton. Following his conviction, Mr. Biton was sentenced to four months' imprisonment and eight months' probation, and was fired from his job. According to recent reports, Mr. Biton actually served the assigned prison term.
The prosecution of these two cases suggests that formal mechanisms for investigating and prosecuting complaints against prison and police officials function independently. But the final outcome of the Ghadir case suggests, nonetheless, a reticence to impose serious sanctions on those found guilty of abusing prisoners and detainees.
Moreover, the investigative mechanisms currently in place fail to ensure that complaints against members of Israel's intelligence service, the Shin Bet, will be pursued and, where appropriate, prosecuted. The Shin Bet, which oversees interrogation of security detainees, is under the direct supervision of the Prime Minister and is accountable to neither the IDF nor the Israel Police.
In addition to casting Israel's safeguards against the abuse of prisoners and detainees in a simplified, optimistic light, the State Department Report fails to mention any of the specific allegations of abuse commonly reported by residents of the Territories who have been recently detained in Israeli prisons. The Report summarily acknowledges that a West Bank affiliate of the International Commission of Jurists, Law in the Service of Man, has "alleged" that prisoners at Farah are "systematically abused." Rather than outlining the alleged abuses, the Report simply states that the Government of Israel has denied all charges of systematic abuse.
Testimony taken by the Lawyers Committee and other organizations in 1985 suggests a pattern of mistreatment of prisoners.
51
particularly of pre-trial detainees at Farah and other facilities in the Territories. Many former detainees claimed to have been beaten, kicked, and spat upon. Repeated cold showers and sleep deprivation are other techniques reportedly associated with the interrogation process.
One practice repeatedly described to Lawyers Committee investigators is the "hooding" of detainees. This practice involves leaving detainees for lengthy periods with their hands cuffed behind their backs and their heads covered by a burlap sack. Many former detainees reported that they were subjected to this treatment for several days in succession, with the sacks removed only for a few minutes at mealtimes. Often they claimed to have been held in a corridor along with several other hooded detainees, where they were forced to stand for hours at a time. Even when allowed to sit or lie down, blankets and other bedding materials were reportedly denied to them, even in cold weather.
Isreali officials disavow claims of physical abuse during interrogation, but they acknowledge that prisoners have occasionally been hooded where, in one official's words, "the needs of the investigation or the security of the prisoner demand it." There is some evidence, moreover, that hooding has at least partially been replaced by blindfolding, a somewhat less extreme method of isolating detainees from one another.
The State Department also gives unduly brief attention to the IDF's arrest practices in the Territories. The Department's Report observes that, in the wake of demonstrations, the throwing of stones at Israeli vehicles, and more serious incidents of violence, "[a] sizable number of Arabs are often detained." Its only additional observations about this practice are contained in a single sentence: "Such detentions usually do not result in formal charges and are not prolonged."
Lawyers Committee investigators heard numerous accounts from human rights monitors and residents of the Occupied Territories regarding the IDF's arrest practices in 1985. According to these accounts, stone-throwing incidents and public demonstrations are
52
frequently followed by late-night arrests of substantial numbers of individuals, many of whom appear to have been singled out largely according to demographic characteristics such as age, gender, and place of residence. Adolescent and young adult males living in refugee camps and university communities are frequent targets of such arrest sweeps.
Several West Bank residents interviewed by the Lawyers Committee claimed to have been subjected to repeated arrests following incidents in their communities. Detention periods for these individuals have reportedly varied from a few days to several weeks, quite frequently lasting approximately 18 days, the full period of detention without judicial authorization allowed under Israeli military law. In several cases reported to the Lawyers Committee, these lengthy, sometimes repeated periods of detention have substantially disrupted the academic performance of high school students as well as the employment relations of older detainees.
In its reference to the IDF*s practice of demolishing or sealing the homes of suspected terrorists, the State Department fails to mention the most disturbing ramification of this practice. The Report cites the number of houses of West Bank and Gaza residents destroyed in the wake of security violations, and indicates that "such action is usually taken before the suspect has been put on trial." Omitted from the description of this practice is any indication of the numbers of individuals in addition to the suspected terrorist who are affected by this practice. While the IDF occasionally seals or destroys only the room where the suspected terrorist was believed to sleep, entire homes have been demolished in many instances, displacing entire families numbering a dozen or more individuals. For example, one home destroyed in al-*Ein refugee camp, in the West Bank, on August 15, 1985, displaced 14 family members; a Hebron home demolished on September 29 reportedly left 21 homeless; and on October 26, a home in Yatta housing 25 family members were destroyed. This practice, though recognized by Israeli officials as draconian, is seen as an effective means of imposing a sense of collective responsibility on Arab residents of the Territories.
53
The State Department gives a generally accurate portrayal of other extra-judicial measures employed by the IDF in the Territories, most notably administrative detention and deportation. A somewhat low estimate appears, however, regarding the number of suspected activists placed under restriction orders confining them to their local communities by day and their homes by night. While the Report says that "at least 25 Arabs were placed under new or renewed [restriction] orders" in 1985, data provided to the Lawyers Committee indicate that approximately 39 individuals in the West Bank alone were subjected to this measure in 1985.
54
