CAMBODIA
The 1985 Report on Cambodia is far more comprehensive than the previous year's Report, and reflects much improved research by the staff of the U.S. Embassy in Thailand who help prepare the Reports. While last year's Report was strikingly thin on detail, the 1985 Report contains substantially more information about human rights conditions in Cambodia.
Despite the difficulties of gathering information about conditions in Cambodia, which is closed to outside investigators, the Report accurately reflects the major human rights problems there. The Report properly emphasizes, for example, the widespread allegations of torture by officials of the People's Republic of Kampuchea (PRK) and their Vietnamese supervisors; the extensive arbitrary arrests of persons suspected of opposing the PRK; the increased use of forced labor in the past year; and the increased physical hazards to which persons recruited for such labor have been subjected.
Despite the generally high quality of the Report, at several points it adopts a lax attitude toward repeating allegations of abuses said to be committed by the PRK. In contrast to the Report's conservative approach in crediting allegations by domestic monitors in several countries allied to the United States, it is willing at several points in the Cambodia Report to repeat untested and implausible allegations of PRK abuses.
For example, the Cambodia Report repeats an allegation of a defector from the PRK Ministry of Interior that the main prison in Phnom Penh holds "about 600 low-ranking former Heng Samrin [PRK] officials in one section." The Lawyers Committee's investigations provide no support for this estimate, which is highly implausible.
10
At several points, the Report suggests that certain practices are more widespread than the available evidence warrants. It states, for example, that "death in captivity due to torture or other mistreatment is common, according to testimony of former political prisoners." The observation may be somewhat overstated, and therefore misleading. Although the number of such reports is substantial enough to warrant concern, the great majority of prisoners who are tortured appear to survive.
The Report may also be somewhat misleading in its assertion that "[r]eports of political killing in the Vietnamese-controlled areas declined after an intensive...internal security campaign against suspected opponents in mid-1983." While there was such a purge, the principal abuses directed against suspected opponents were arbitrary arrest and torture, and reports of political killings during the purge remain unconfirmed. On the same subject, the Report appears too willing to repeat allegations by guerrilla forces opposing the PRK regarding "instances of Vietnamese and [PRK] officials killing suspects during interrogation." Our own investigation of human rights in Cambodia fails to support such allegations.
The Report's treatment of arbitrary arrest also reflects a willingness to overstate the extent of practices attributed to the PRK. Without offering any support for the assertion, the Report states: "The Lawyers Committee estimates that political prisoners number in the thousands, and this seems to be a conservative estimate, especially if those held in provincial jails and military interrogation facilities are included." The Lawyers Committee estimates cited were explicitly based on information that included provincial and military facilities.
With these exceptions, the State Department largely avoids injecting political biases into the Report, despite the United States' strong support for the two non-communist guerrilla groups opposing the PRK, and its opposition to the Khmer Rouge guerrillas also opposing the PRK. The Report notes, as it should, that one of the non-communist groups, the Khmer People's National Liberation Front (KPNLF) has conducted summary executions, and that some of
11
its troops have attacked refugees on the Thai-Cambodian border. Nevertheless, the Report could be improved by still greater balance in its treatment of the various competing factions. For example, while noting the use of arbitrary arrest and the denial of a fair trial by PRK authorities, the Report does not address similar problems in areas administered by the KPNLF -- or, for that matter by the Khmer Rouge — despite the fact that both groups jail people.
Also, the Report occasionally lapses into polemics about the Vietnamese occupation, making assertions that have little bearing on human rights conditions. It asserts, for example, "After seven years of Vietnamese control, Cambodian industry...remains of marginal importance to the economy."
Beyond the general patterns noted above, the Report makes or repeats several assertions that seem incorrect to us. It repeats, for example, the assertion of a "Heng Samrin security service official who defected to the border" that the interrogation bureau of the Ministry of Interior tortures criminal, but not political, detainees. The Lawyers Committee's 1985 Report on human rights conditions in Cambodia documents numerous instances of torture of political prisoners by officials of the Interior Ministry. The Report also states that the Khmer Rouge "seems to have moderated its use of terrorist tactics in 1985." The Khmer Rouge in fact switched to a more "moderate" tack several years ago.
The Report omits mention of several points that are worth making. In one place, the omission implies that an abuse — that of "disappearance" -- is more common than it is. The Report repeats an allegation of a defector from the PRK administration "that individuals arrested for economic violations have disappeared." To our knowledge, such reports have been limited to ethnic Chinese. The Report also fails to note that, in addition to detention facilities operated by PRK officials and those jointly operated by Vietnamese and PRK officials, there are some facilities operated solely by Vietnamese personnel.
Finally, the Report would have been more useful if its discussion of abuses by guerrilla groups explicitly distinguished between
12
conditions in camps inside Thailand of people who support the guerrillas, and those located in Cambodia. As the Report notes, the Vietnamese army's 1984-85 dry season offensive drove civilian resistance encampments located inside Cambodia into Thailand. For most of 1985, those settlements remained in Thailand. Portions of the 1985 Report appear, nonetheless, to pertain to conditions in guerrilla settlements before they were overrun by Vietnamese troops, while others clearly pertain to the behavior of guerrilla troops since the civilian camps were relocated. Given the significant effect the change in circumstances has had on the behavior of guerrilla forces, it would have been useful if the Report specifically addressed the point.
13
