REPUBLIC OF KOREA
This year's Report on the Republic of Korea is a distinct improvement over the 1984 Report and previous reports on Korea. Many of our criticisms of the 1984 Report have been addressed in the 1985 report. We commend the U.S. Embassy in Seoul and the State Department for responding to our suggestions and for demonstrating an increased willingness to speak frankly about Korean Government violations. This year's Report could be further improved, however, by detailed reporting on specific cases of abuse, as is done in reports on other countries.
The more frank tone of the 1985 Report is immediately evident in the introduction which notes that "Human rights issues as well as 'democratization' issues were the focus of greater public discussion and debate than in recent years," and highlights the increase in government repression in the last half of 1985.
The section on Arbitrary Arrest noted that "dissidents who openly criticize the Government are sometimes picked up and detained for short periods and then released." The Report goes on to state that according to government statistics, over 1,000 students were remanded to summary court where they received summary punishment of up to 29 days in jail. The 1984 Report on Korea did not mention summary detention without trial. Reporting on this important issue could have been improved by noting that this practice has been employed against hundreds of opponents of the government in addition to students, including clergy, community organizers, and labor unionists. Human rights monitors and democratic leaders told the Asia Watch during our June 1985 mission that the practice of repeatedly jailing hundreds of local activists for short periods represented the government's strategy for destroying opposition activity at the grass roots. Democratic leaders said that
57
such a strategy is actually more repressive — and more effective — than the government's past practice of jailing well-known political figures for long periods.
The section on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment is particularly detailed, describing "credible," "reliable," and "plausible" reports of torture of journalists, students, and other prisoners. The Report also states that "the use of excessive force by the police has proven to be a pervasive and ingrained problem...." This tone is markedly different from past reports, such as the Report from 1981 (a year when brutal torture was a particular problem) which stated that "reports of torture are difficult to confirm or deny." Our analysis of the 1984 Report criticized its casual depiction of prison conditions as "Spartan" which appeared to minimize the problem of gross overcrowding, lack of heat, and lack of access to prisons by international humanitarian groups. This year's Report is improved in this regard, noting that conditions are "austere," that cells are unheated in winter, and that prisoners protesting overcrowding in Taegu Prison were reportedly beaten severely. The 1985 report, while neglecting to mention that the Internationa! Committee of the Red Cross has not been permitted to visit South Korean prisons (an omission we noted in our critique of the 1984 Report) does mention that "the Republic of Korea... usually does not welcome outside involvement in the human rights area" and noted that the Government "rejected calls for a special Assembly committee to investigate human rights abuses, especially torture...."
This year's Report acknowledged that "in a few strikes, groups of nonstriking workers wielded pipes and stormed their workplaces to end worker sit-ins forcibly. They were not prevented by police from doing so, and many Koreans charged that the attacks were government-sponsored." This is a considerable improvement over last year's Report, which failed to mention this problem entirely. This section of the Report could be strengthened by describing actual incidents in which the police failed to prevent or even participated in violent attacks by plainclothes "thugs" to break up labor union strikes or intimidate trade union leaders during
58
negotiations. A number of these incidents took place in 1985, such as the attack on a group of human rights advocates by some 35 thugs at the Hanil Stainless factory in June. This practice appears to be common in Korea, and was extensively documented in the January, 1986 Asia Watch report on "Human Rights in Korea."
Reporting on labor rights violations, generally, is the only disappointment in an otherwise solid human rights Report. This year, new provisions in the 1984 Trade Act tasked the State Department to report specifically on internationally recognized labor rights, including the right to association, the right to organize and bargain collectively, freedom from forced labor, minimum age for employment of children, and acceptable conditions of work. The Report on Korea includes a description of limits on collective bargaining and collective action by employees of government, public utilities, defense-related industries or firms "that exercise great influence on the national economy"; and notes as well that independent labor union federations do not exist, and that restrictions in the labor code prevent industry-wide organizing. Unfortunately, the Report does not document pervasive abuses against trade union activists themselves, including firings, jailings, beatings, lockouts, and blacklisting. In its January, 1986 report on "Human Rights in Korea," the Asia Watch included 13 detailed case studies of factories where abuses against labor unionists were particularly acute in the past year. An advance copy of these case studies was provided to the State Department Human Rights Bureau several months prior to publication of the Country Reports in the hopes that the material might be included in its report. Unfortunately, the Report did not include a single example of the firings, beatings, and harassment of trade union leaders — many of whom are young women -- which characterize Korea's labor situation today.
The issue of direct popular election of the president in upcoming elections is the most important political issue in Korea today. Given the significance of this issue in Korean political life, its coverage in the Country Reports is disappointing. The Report correctly notes
59
that "the President is chosen by a popularly elected electoral college of at least 5,000 members....In the 1981 presidential election these restrictions, together with the authorities' screening of electoral college candidates, resulted in the absence of effective opposition to incumbent President Chun Doo Hwan, who won nearly unanimously." It would have been appropriate for the Report to explain that the system which guaranteed Chun's near unanimous election in 1981 is still in place; that the 5,000 electoral college members are not bound by the voters choice, that the presidential candidates' names do not even appear on the ballot, and that ruling party domination of the political process at local levels makes it almost impossible for the political opposition to field its own candidates for election to the electoral college. The Report also fails to mention that President Chun and the ruling Democratic Justice Party are strenuously opposed to a constitutional revision to democratize the process before the next elections. As the Report correctly noted, "the main opposition party and most dissident groups are calling for a revision of the Constitution to allow for direct popular election of the president, contending that it would be less susceptible to government manipulation than the current system." The State Department missed an opportunity to support them by reporting this only as a contention of the opposition and by not making it clear that this view warrants U.S. endorsement.
In 1984, the Country Report included the assertion that, "Since the division of the peninsula in 1945, reunification has been a major goal of Koreans on both sides of the dividing line." The 1985 Report inexplicably dropped this statement which accurately reflects Korean aspirations. In view of the fact that political repression on both sides of the DMZ is justified by the division of the country, some mention of Korean concerns on this point, which past Country Reports on the Republic Korea have included, would seem appropriate.
60
