LIBERIA
From the standpoint of human rights, 1985 was an exceedingly rough year for Liberia, and the State Department's Country Report makes this clear. In many instances, it is admirably specific in describing abuses that occurred. At the same time, however, when it comes to the government's most serious acts — its blatant stealing of an election and its brutal suppression of an attempted coup -- the Report is strangely muted. Overall, the department's account is flawed by an odd paradox: the more serious the abuse, the more fuzzy the description. This is not a complete surprise, given that Liberia is currently America's most dependable ally in Africa.
The State Department meticulously recounts the heavyhanded actions taken by the Doe government as the October election approached. The many obstacles placed in the path of opposition parties are described in detail. Among them: high registration fees, excessive delays in certification, restrictions placed on political gatherings, and the outright bannings of two major parties. The Department recounts how further problems were created by Decree 88A, a blanket edict making it a crime to criticize government officials. The Report also takes note of the imprisonment of numerous political figures (including Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf) and notes that "there was an increase in reported instances of torture of political detainees and prisoners."
The section on freedom of speech and press is especially thorough. Noting that Liberia has "a relatively vigorous press," the Report relates the various ways in which the government attempted to intimidate the press into silence. Newspaper closings, verbal threats, and the detention of journalists all receive their due.
By contrast, in describing the October election, the Report resorts to a legalistic tone that obscures the real significance of the
61
government's role. The account does note the "persistent and widespread allegations" that the government "engaged in illegal activities to secure victory" for Doe's National Democratic Party of Liberia (NDPL). The Report also mentions some of the salient events of the post-election period: the setting up of a special vote-counting committee "without official representation by the opposition parties;" the charges that "many ballots were secretly removed from ballot boxes and burned;" the government's claim that the NDPL won 50.9 percent of the vote; the opposition's announcement that it would challenge the results in court.
Unfortunately, this account does not adequately describe the magnitude of the fraud that occurred. The Report neglects to point out that, according to preliminary vote counts, the opposition Liberia Action Party won more than 60 percent of the vote, as opposed to only 25 percent for the NDPL. Only when this became apparent did the government disrupt the legally mandated vote-counting procedure and appointed a new commission made up largely of loyal government supporters. This body met for two weeks behind closed doors before emerging to announce Doe's victory. The government's manipulation was so brazen that virtually no one accepted the results as legitimate. None of this is apparent from the State Department's account.
The Report is even more disingenuous in describing the events surrounding the November 12 uprising. Here is the State Department's capsule summary:
Although the coup attempt lasted only a few hours, there was considerable loss of life associated withthe abortive coup and its aftermath. No accurate casualty figures are available, but there are unconfirmed estimates that some 450-500 people, including Quiwonkpa [the action's leader], lost their lives in this period. In its wake, there were widespread arrests by government forces of military persons and civilians. There were reports of summary executions, killings,
62
and reprisals against certain ethnic groups by government forces or government supporters. Both the Quiwonkpa and government forces and supporters engaged in beating presumed opponents during and following the coup, and homes were looted by both sides.
The unmistakable message here is that both sides in the conflict bore joint responsibility for the violence that occurred. In reality, the evidence implicates Liberia's armed forces as overwhelmingly responsible for the bloodshed. While the insurrectionary forces undoubtedly committed some violence, such as beating government ministers, there have been few confirmed accounts of killings by them; certainly the Liberian government has not been able to advance any such evidence. By contrast, many eyewitnesses have attested to violence committed by the military. For instance, many of those imprisoned after November 12 report that detainees were taken from their cells by drunken soldiers, never to return. Of the 400 to 500 killings mentioned in the report -- itself a low estimate --the government and its supporters are widely viewed as having been responsible for most of them.
A good example of the Report's misleading character is its description of the murder of Charles Gbenyon, editor-in-chief of the Liberian Broadcasting System. In describing his death, the State Department blandly states that "the Government announced that it happened while Gbenyon attempted to resist arrest, although other sources disputed this account." Indeed they did; based on the evidence that has emerged, it seems clear that Gbenyon -- who evidently displeased the government with his November 12 reporting -- was bayoneted to death by government troops on orders from the highest levels. Although Gbenyon's family has repeatedly requested the return of his body, the government has adamantly refused, leading to suspicions that the condition of the corpse would disprove the official account.
63
Interestingly, the Report's description of the election and abortive coup fit closely with statements made by Assistant Secretary of State Chester Crocker before the Senate and House subcommittees on Africa. Those statements, in turn, reflected the State Department's reluctance to engage in public criticism of the Liberian government. The Country Report's unevenness, combining meticulous detail on individual cases with serious understatement on really important matters, raises questions about whether objective reporting has succumbed to the exigencies of policy.
64
