YUGOSLAVIA
The Report on Yugoslavia attempts to balance a recognition of a gradual trend towards greater media freedom and free public discussion in Yugoslavia with an acknowledgment that the human rights situation was still "marred by several negative developments." A number of problems neglected in last year's Report have been dealt with in this year's Report.
A positive development during 1985 was the outcome of a "conspiracy" trial of six "free university" scholars. Charges were eventually dropped against four of the intellectuals, and two, who are still at liberty, were handed reduced sentences which they are appealing. Other positive developments covered by the Report include official tolerance for some independent public gatherings, and permission for the building of a Serbian Orthodox Cathedral and a Moslem mosque. Negative developments noted in the Report include book bannings, allegations of the misuse of psychiatry, poor prison conditions for political convicts, police brutality, and ethnic and religious discrimination.
The Report tends to minimize some disturbing abuses of civil liberties in the last year and also tries to justify government restrictions as a response to ethnic unrest. The authors of the Report often seem to see the situation from the perspective of the Yugoslav regime, rather than measuring human rights practices against recognized international standards.
Aso, the Report cites Yugoslavia's economic difficulties ("the worst winter in 25 years," etc.) as a way of eliciting sympathy for the government, a technique that is not used by the Department in dealing with countries such as Poland that are also in financial crisis.
The 1985 Report has expanded its coverage of free expression issues and has included the official figures on book bannings. At the same time, it tries to explain censorship in Yugoslavia by stressing security concerns. It does not mention that the Yugoslav
106
regime often raises the specter of "anti-Yugoslav" groups and conjures up "hostile threats to national security" when it seeks to suppress free expression.
The Report does not mention the fact that some political offenses are dealt with under non-political articles in the criminal code. It does respond, however, to the concern we expressed in last year's Critique that "the way in which the political and criminal articles are used varies from republic to republic (each of which has its own code)" by adding in the current Report:
enforcement of laws varies widely from republic to republic, with the result that people have been jailed in some parts of Yugoslavia for acts which in other parts of the country rarely, if ever, result in criminal sanctions.
The Report fails to mention the expulsion in 1985 of British journalist Nora Beloff, who has written critically of the regime, although it mentions British journalist Peter Hadzi-Ristic, who was arrested for comments he made in a Mostar restaurant.
In the section on denial of fair public trial, the Report changes its own previous assessment of Yugoslav judicial proceedings, without any substantiation. The Report for 1984 stated:
Yugoslav political authorities usually do not remain impartial in judicial proceedings concerning political cases. Substantial evidence exists .that Federal, republic, and provincial political authorities have sought in some cases to orchestrate trials of those charged with political crimes.
The Report for 1985 partially reverses this:
Yugoslav political authorities usually do not actively interfere in judicial proceedings concerning
107
political cases. However, substantial evidence exists that in some cases Federal, Republic, and provincial political authorities have sought to orchestrate the trials of those charged with political crimes.
In making this change, the authors of the Report may have been influenced by the positive outcome of the cases of the "Belgrade Six" and of Prof. Vojislav Seselj (whose sentence was reduced), results which most likely stemmed from intense international and domestic pressure.
The Report revises its assessment of the number of political prisoners, from an estimate of 600-750 political prisoners in its Report for 1984, to between 600 and 1,000, the figures we gave in our Critique of the 1984 Report. The Report also accurately notes that "nearly two-thirds of the political cases were so-called 'verbal crimes', that is, charges arising from something the accused said or wrote" — an important observation not made in previous Reports.
In last year's Critique, we commented that no mention had been made of "Belgrade Six" defense attorney Vladimir Seks, who was remanded to prison in 1984 and served a seven-month sentence in 1985 for a critical remark he allegedly made in a bar in 1981. The Report for 1985 mentions Seks's jailing which, it says, "probably stemmed from his active participation in the defense at the Belgrade trial." Curiously, it goes on to discredit Seks for his views, rather than pointing out the impropriety of imprisoning him for what he allegedly said in a private conversation:
"Belgrade Six" defense lawyer Vladimir Seks served a 7-month sentence in 1985 for alleged pro-Nazi statements made in an Osijek cafe in 1981. He allegedly complained that everything was rotten in Yugoslavia, insulted Tito, and suggested that Yugoslavia needed someone like Hitler to restore order.
The Report is incorrect when it states that the judicial system
108
provides "elaborate safeguards for conducting searches." There are criminal code clauses that permit searches without warrant in emergency situations, leaving politically active citizens vulnerable. It is wrong to state that detainees are always brought before a judge within 24 hours of arrest, since the law allows detention for up to three days. Detainees are frequently beaten at this stage. Last year, we commented on the Report's failure to mention that five detainees in the April 1984 raid were beaten; this year's Report acknowledges the beatings, and also cites Seks's report of widespread beatings and degrading treatment in prison.
The Report's credibility would be enhanced by providing the names and dates of publications that report "instances of police misconduct for which police officials have been reprimanded, suspended, and subjected to criminal prosection."
The Report is to be credited for dropping its claim that the use of "moral-social" (i.e. political) criteria for employment is diminished; last year we had cautioned that virtually all management positions require such "political fitness."
The section on trade union rights remains unsatisfactory. The assertion that "unions play a significant role in representing workers' interests" is not substantiated, given that union leaders are members of the Communist Party and do not act as representatives of an independent interest group. The Report mentions an ILO study accepted by the Yugoslav government "with few reservations," but omits a description of the ILO's findings. The Report notes the dramatic increase in strikes in Yugoslavia, but tends to identify with the Yugoslav government's interests:
The authorities were especially concerned that strikes at several large enterprises would result in greater economic hardship, a continuing fall in the standard of living, and more extensive labor unrest.
This kind of comment would be unthinkable in a Report on one of their communist nations, such as Poland.
109
