SOUTH AFRICA
The South Africa Report is, in most respects, an accurate and comprehensive analysis of the pervasive and systematic denial of basic human rights in that country resulting from the government's policy of apartheid and, in particular, the brutal methods employed during 1985 to crush the on-going civil unrest and to silence most expressions of opposition to the white-dominated government. Nevertheless, the Report omits several significant points.
Although it is not stated explicitly, it is clear from the Report that the conduct of the security forces during the unrest, and particularly during the State of Emergency, was a major factor in the alarming deterioration of the human rights situation during 1985. Reference is made in Section 1 of the Report to the government-appointed commission of inquiry into the Uitenhage massacre on March 21, prompted by the international outrage at the incident. The Report omits to point out, however, that the government has subsequently consistently refused to investigate or otherwise respond to the growing concern about the excessively violent behavior of the police and army in the townships. After the November killings in Mamelodi, for example, to which the Report also refers, the government ignored pleas to hold an official investigation and has made no other serious attempts to discipline the security forces. On the contrary, the blanket indemnity granted to them under the emergency regulations and the severe restrictions on media reporting of their conduct during the unrest removed practically the only remaining restraints on their brutal and repressive tactics. Their activities even prompted the State Department, in October, to call for an independent body to be set up to deal with complaints about the security forces but there is no indication that the government has responded to this either. Indeed, the government has pledged to use even greater force in the townships if necessary. The unrestrained violence of the security forces is proving to be one of the most
91
serious obstacles to the restoration of peace in the townships and to the government's own limited reform program.
An even more striking omission in the Report concerns the largescale arrests of thousands of people, many of them children, on criminal charges of public violence and other related offenses during the unrest. The Detainees' Parents Support Committee estimates that some 25,000 people were arrested and charged with such offenses during 1985. Such arrests are frequently made on highly insufficient evidence of the person's involvement in the alleged offense, serious physical abuse is commonly employed by police as a means to extract information and statements from those charged and large numbers of people, including children, are appearing daily in the courts without legal representation on serious criminal charges carrying potentially severe custodial sentences. The pattern of such arrests and the significant number of acquittals when the accused has legal representation suggests that, in many cases, the security forces are using these criminal charges as a convenient means to arrest and detain people involved in opposition to the government. Section l.d. of the Report on "Arbitrary Arrest" makes no mention of this at all.
A particularly disturbing feature of the treatment of persons arrested and detained by the South African police has been the deaths of a number of them while in detention or shortly after their release from custody. The Report seriously understates the number of deaths in detention during 1985, noting that only four such deaths occurred. The Detainees' Parents Support Committee has recorded at least 12 deaths of detainees related to their treatment in detention during 1985. Three of the victims were under 18 years old, one of them only 13 years old. In fact, the 12 deaths in detention last year represent the highest figure of such deaths ever recorded in South Africa since detention without trial was incorporated into the security legislation in the 1960's. This is a particularly serious development at a time when such largescale arrests and detentions have taken place.
In the discussion of banning orders, the Report notes that nine persons were officially banned under the Internal Security Act at the
92
end of 1985. In fact, a five-year banning order imposed on November 15 on Trevor Manuel when he was released from detention under Section 29 of the Internal Security Act brought the total number of persons banned under this Act to 10.
The Report also fails to mention a new form of banning order introduced during the emergency and generally used as a means to restrict emergency detainees on their release from detention. At least 59 persons were banned in this way during 1985. The banning orders typically severely restricted these individuals in their activities, movement, occupation, utterances, attendance at educational institutions, access to designated buildings and presence at certain gatherings. The specificity of the restrictions were, in many cases, clearly designed to prevent these persons from engaging in any form of political activity. Contravention of the order carried the same severe penalty applicable to all contraventions of regulations or orders issued during the emergency — a fine of up to R20,000 or up to 10 years' imprisonment without option of a fine.
As in other recent Reports, this Report lays considerable stress at the outset on the South African government's continuing "incremental reform process." It fails to point out, however, that the "reforms" implemented so far still do not begin to address the fundamental demand of the black majority for genuine political power-sharing and equal representation in a single central government. The reforms currently under review do not even respond to the major grievances of most black South Africans after more than a year of unrest and violence. Furthermore, the basic prerequisite to any further reform, that is, for the government to hold serious and open negotiations with the recognized and accepted leaders of the black communities, still has not been fulfilled, although this has been the major thrust of the Administration's policy of constructive engagement for many months.
As in previous years, our principal criticism is that the serious and continuing abuses of human rights, most of which have been carefully documented in this Report, did not result in a more forceful and critical response from the Administration during 1985.
93
