amnesty international ANNUAL REPORT 1974/75

AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL is a worldwide human rights movement which is independent of any government, political faction, ideology or religious creed. It works for the release of men and women imprisoned anywhere for their beliefs, colour, ethnic origin or religion, provided they have neither used nor advocated violence. These are termed "prisoners of conscience".
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL opposes torture and capital punishment in all cases and without reservation. It advocates fair and speedy trials for all political prisoners.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL seeks observance throughout the world of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights and of the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL has consultative status with the United Nations (ECOSOC), UNESCO and the Council of Europe, has cooperative relations with the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States and has observer status with the Organization of African Unity (Bureau for the Placement and Education of African Refugees).
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL is financed by its members throughout the world, by individual subscription and by donations.
©Copyright Amnesty International, 1975
Published September 1975 by Amnesty International Publications
Printed by the Russell Press, Gamble Street, Nottingham, England
Cover illustration by Judith Anderson
ISBN 0-900058-12-9
amnesty international ANNUAL REPORT 1974/75
Amnesty International Publications London 1975

«t! 'M



m


M

m
tt-v. trV'
r: n
•ai


■ ■ ■
tv'-
SV


• ( . . i-'

Contents
Preface by Dirk Börner..................................5
Introduction by Martin Ennals............................8
The Membership................... 11
Relief.............................................16
Campaign for the Abolition of Torture........... 18
Capital Punishment.................. 26
Relations with other Organizations..........................29
Information and Publications............... 33
Prisoners and Human Rights Country by Country................35
Introduction by Stephanie Grant..........................36
Africa...................... 39
ITie Americas........................................60
Asia....................... 82
Europe......................107
Middle East....................125
Amnesty International Missions 1974/75 ........... 137
News Releases 1974/75 ................ 140
Some Amnesty International Statistics...........143
International Executive Committee 1974/75 ......... 144
International Secretariat................144
National Sections, Committees, Countries with AI Members .... 145 International Secietariat Budget 1975/76........... 147
insert:
Accounts, Treasurer's and Auditors' Reports.........149
1974 Nobel Peace Prize Sean MacBride
Sean MacBride, who retired in September 1974 as Chairman of Amnesty Interna-tional's International Executive Committee, was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize on 8 October 1974 in recognition of his lifelong work for human rights.
Mr MacBride, a founder member of AI, who had been Chairman of the lEC since its inception, shared the award with the late Eisako Sato, former Prime Minister of Japan, who himself was a member of AI.
Mr MacBride stood down from his lEC post because he could not combine it with his post as United Nations Commissioner for Namibia; but he remains chairman of the Irish Section. In his honour, the lEC has established an annual Sean MacBride Lecture on Human Rights to be delivered at future meetings of AI's International Council.
In announcing the award of the Peace Prize to Mr MacBride, the Nobel Committee of the Norwegian Parliament said he had been chosen for his "many years of effort to build up and protect human rights all over the world". It also cited the fact that as Foreign Minister of Ireland from 1948-1951, he had helped shape Ireland's role in UN peace-keeping operations.
All of Amnesty International would echo the words of The Irish Times which, in an editorial commenting on the award of the Nobel Peace ftize to Sean MacBride, said:
As chainnan of Amnesty International he has shown —what is not always the case with idealists—that he is aware of individuals, not only of people in the abstract. With lus legal talents, he could easily have made a fortune at the Bar and relapsed into selfish, moneyed complacency: others are doing it all the time. Instead, he looked outward at the tormented world and immersed himself in it.
Preface
by Dirk Börner, Chairman, International Executive Committee
A year of growth. Amnesty International has grown further in 1974-75, both in membership and in the scope of its operations. But, sadly, it has also been a year of another kind of growth: of politically motivated persecution, long-term detention without trial, brutal torture and executions. A year, then, of growing need for the work of Amnesty International.
Impartially and free from any political consideration, Amnesty International worked in 1974-75 on violations of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human R^hts in more than 100 countries. Yet, almost all these countries, as members of the UN, have agreed to be bound by that declaration. Amnesty International has persistently reminded the governments of their obligations and striven to bring world public opinion to bear upon those responsible for such violations. AI missions have gone during the year to 31 countries in all parts of the world to investigate allegations of persecution and torture, observe trials and make representations to governments.
Major campaigns, involving the whole organization, have sought amnesties in countries with long-term prisoner problems. In 1974-75, there were month-long campaigns on each of five West African nations, at least three of which subsequently declared amnesties that freed political prisoners, among them Al-adopted prisoners of conscience. A current campaign for amnesty is concentrated on Indonesia, where more than 55,000 persons have been detained without trial since as far back as 1965.
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, the Soviet Union, Spain, South Korea, Guatemala, South Africa, Uganda, Argentina, Uruguay, Morocco and Brazil are, as they have been for some time, countries where violations of human rights continue on a disturbing scale, Yet there have been dramatic changes in 1974-75 in other "problem" countries. AI has welcomed the mass release of political prisoners in South Vietnam, Greece, Portugal and Mozambique. In each of these cases, the new government has announced its intention of maintaining those freedoms that were violated with such gross persistence by the former regimes. AI has formally called on all four governments to uphold those human rights to which, as UN member states, they have pledged their support. In these countries, as in all countries, words must be matched by deeds. Far too many nations of the world pay only
lip service to human rights, limiting them to those elements that are imquestion-ing in their obedience to the central authority and to the existing political system. By doing so, they corruptly downgrade human rights into privileges.
General campaigns notwithstanding, adoption of individual prisoners of conscience is still the heart of AI's work. AI groups everywhere continued their efforts to obtain the ultimate release of individuals or, as a new technique, seeking freedom for groups of prisoners. They also provided moral support and material rehef both for the prisoner and his family. More than £100,000 (US $240,000), donated by a generous public for this purpose, has been distributed as a relief money throughout the world. Many AI groups had the satisfaction of seeing their prisoners released. But such success has not always meant the end of their efforts: it is often difficult for released prisoners to be re-integrated into their society, and they continue to depend upon their adoption group for support.
There has also been a determined effort by Amnesty International to find increased support and attract new members in Asia and Latin America through the appointment of a field secretary in each of these regions. Development is one of the key words in AI's vocabulary. This means development not only of AI groups, sections and members in areas of the third world where, in the past, AI membership has been small or non-existant, but, equally important, development of an awareness everywhere that human rights are as important to the life of a nation as economic well-being-that they are not "luxuries" only the rich can afford, but the basic entitlement of all people. It is all the more regrettable, therefore that some governments have, during the year, harassed and detained persons workii^ on behalf of Amnesty International.
One basic human right of all people, wherever they may live in the world, is protection against brutal treatment by those in power. AI's Campaign for the Abolition of Torture, now in its third year, has undoubtedly created greater public awareness of a problem that was insufficiently recognized before. The unanimous passage by the United Nations General Assembly on 6 November 1974 of a resolution that called for specific action against torture by the UN and its agencies represents one of the major successes of the campaign to date. But it is only one of a long series of measures that will be needed before torture is effectively outlawed throughout the world.
In today's world of atrocities people too easily become accustomed to continuing reports of cruel and inhuman treatment to human beings of whom they know little. Having created awareness we must now make sure that every responsible citizen and organization assumes personal responsibility to fight and abolish torture once and for ever. Our campaign must be unrelenting, pushing, convincing. It must be a true campaign, from which nobody can exclude himself.
The growth of Amnesty International's work and the need for more such work has confronted the International Executive Committee with ever-increasing tasks of its own. New lEC methods were necessary to cope with these problems. In accordance with decisions taken in Askov, Denmark, in September 1974 by the International Council, members of the lEC assumed special functions and responsibilities for certain areas of AI's work: for example the Campaign for the Abolition of Torture, reUef, development, external affairs, administration,
general research and finance. This has served to streamline the lEC's process of decision-making.
No review of the year on behalf of the lEC can be complete without paying tribute to the man who was Chairman of the lEC from its inception until September 1974: Sean MacBride. Having been appointed United Nations Commissioner for Namibia, Sean MacBride was unable to continue as lEC Chairman. Without his unrelenting efforts on behalf of the organization and its aims, Amnesty International could never have achieved its present position and reputation. His lifelong work for human r^ts was justly recognized when he received the 1974 Nobel Peace Prize. We look forward to welcoming Sean MacBride to the 1975 International Council in St Gallen, Switzerland, where he is to deliver the first of the major addresses on human rights that Amnesty International has named in his honour.
Introduction
by Martin Ennab, Secretary General
Amnesty International is run by its members and motivated by concern for human rights everywhere. Its aims are constantly re-examined and its actions perpetually scrutinized and criticized. Everyone agrees v^dth something which AI has done; few agree with everything. AI is therefore constantly evolving, reacting to changes in governments and responding to new demands from prisoners, from the public and from the membership. Governmental changes often bring to power those who have known of AI previously from prison, exile or opposition, This in itself creates different relationships and more intimate comprehension of AI's motivation and purpose.
But just as political change calls for readjustment so, too, long-standii^ problems may require new methods and clearer or re-defined objectives. Thus in 1974 the International Council brought into the main objectives of the organization the concept of "fair trial" and opposition to long detention without trial. Someone detained for 10 years without trial may not always be non-violent and a prisoner of conscience, but he is certainly held without regard to his human rights. He is entitled to be considered innocent until proved guilty.
The nature of "fair trial" itself is one which is widely understood but rarely defined. Different cultures provide different measures. Trial by jury, trial by one's peers, legal defence of one's own choice, access to documentation and witnesses, right of appeal, civiUan courts and judges: any of these would be advanced by some as the prerequisite of fair trial, depending on practice, national custom and legal system. Such additions to AI's objectives necessarily add to the responsibility and area of judgement and interpretation left to the International Executive Committee and the International Secretariat.
Not all cases can be treated alike. Not all situations fall neatly into categories or classification systems. Stable Indonesia still maintains tens of thousands of prisoners without trial 10 years after their arrest. The Shah of Iran retains his benevolent image despite the highest rate of death penalties in the world, no valid system of civilian courts and a history of torture which is beyond belief. The governors of the Soviet Union still believe that dissent and minorities must be repressed or contained by imprisonment and physical restriction. The list of such situations is infinite, and they represent but a sample of the type of problem
9
which AI has to study and evaluate before deciding which action is necessary to fulfd our objectives of working for the human rights of those restricted or faced with execution or torture.
Another new area approached by AI during the 1974-75 period was the commission of inquiry into allegations of torture of prisoners taken by Syria and Israel during the October 1973 Middle East war. The commission (which received the cooperation of both governments) specifically set out to make proposals which were positive and related to existing international legal commitments undertaken by both governments under the Geneva Conventions. The commission decided not only to assess allegations on the basis of evidence but also to pinpoint weaknesses of prison camp administration which were in violation of the conventions. If the conventions were implemented they would make torture allegations more difficult to fabricate. This approach by AI did not receive universal support. Many thought that AI should apportion blame and make comparisons. The proof of our judgement wiU Ue with the governments not only of Syria and Israel, but of all countries engaged in conflicts which result in taking prisoners of war.
Amnesty International started as a case work organization dealing with people in prison. Today it is developing, in addition to its individual case work, a program designed to prevent violations of human rights and torture and to shape governmental conduct in the future. Belief in the need for codes of conduct in the medical, legal and police professions to forbid ill-treatment of prisoners is no longer held by AI alone. They have now received endorsement from the United Nations General Assembly, and draft codes of ethics have been prepared within each of the professions. The UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners will be reviewed in 1975 not only as standards but also with a view to their enforcement.
The continued growth of AI reflects the international concern for human rights and the values contained in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, United Nations covenants and other international instruments. Such public concern, when expressed in countries where dissent is not encouraged, creates risks for AI members-not necessarily because of their membership of AI but just because AI attracts those who feel commitment to the principles of human rights. For AI members in such countries there is a risk of becoming "hostages" for governments who resent AI's criticisms.
During the year, AI members at national or group level have been arrested in Nepal, South Korea, the Soviet Union and Peru. This cannot be ignored by the movement as a whole. It is a risk which inevitably limits the expansion of AI through its orthodox channels of national sections and groups.
Another element in the growth of the organization is the varying economic and social difficulties experienced in developing countries. A special conference was held in New Delhi 20-23 March 1975 at the invitation of the Indian Section to find out whether there were common factors affecting the development of AI in countries such as Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan, India and Sri Lanka, whose problems were different from those in Western Europe, North America and Australia—areas in which AI has strong national sections. New ideas were discussed and a special meeting of the International Executive Committee has
10
considered AI development in all areas where the organization is not strong at present.
The importance of these development debates and programs is not the development of Amnesty International as an organization but the development of work for prisoners of conscience by human rights supporters in these areas. Our task is to harness the opposition to torture and the sympathy for prisoners of conscience wherever they are found. Such feelings surely exist as strongly in socialist and third world countries as anywhere else.
This is a challenge to the movement as a whole: to find the ways and means of harnessing our support despite the political, social, financial and other problems which exist. There will be problems arising not only from economic and political differences but also from mistrust, from political attitudes and from cultural misunderstandings on all sides. It is these difficulties which provide the challenge.
A way must be found for all those who wish to do so to play their fuU part in the work of Amnesty International for prisoners throughout the world regardless of racial, religious or political baci^round or belief. If we can solve that problem internally, then Amnesty International will be a greater organization, and governments will be under greater pressure to put into practice the ideals which all of them profess.
The Membership
In response to the growing need for a department within the International Secretariat to meet the individual needs of the sections and to handle the servicing of groups and membership, the International Executive Committee decided in January 1974 to set up the Coordination Unit. The main functions of the Coordination Unit are to implement the International Council decisions on development; to strengthen and supervise the work of the groups, coordination groups and sections; to allocate case sheets; to prepare campaigA and other material in cooperation with the Research Department and the Campa^n for the AboUtion of Torture (CAT) so that each section can use it to the maximum effect; to deal with general inquiries from sections, groups, and individuals; and to organize the International Council meeting.
The closer contact with the sections has enabled the secretariat to cater more effectively for the particular needs of each section. The increase in the number of urgent and other actions has highlighted the need for closer and more regular contact. All sections are now asked to report regularly on actions they have taken in response to material supplied by the secretariat.
Records are kept of organizations and individuals with specialized knowledge or interest so that their support can be enlisted for campaigns where their intervention might be of value.
Major campaigns have been launched for International Women's Year and Holy Year. A list of 252 women prisoners in 25 countries has been supplied to sections and interested organizations. There have also been campaigns on behalf of imprisoned trade unionists and imprisoned journalists and writers.
The opportunity has been taken to increase the exchange of ideas and initiatives within the groups and sections by circulating material such as a "human rights kit" for use in schools and a Handbook for Action Groups both of which were compiled by a national-section. A paper was circulated summarizing the structure of each of the sections.
The past year has seen a noticeable improvement in the supervision of groups. Many groups that were not working adequately on behalf of their prisoners have been closed down and their prisoners reassigned to other groups. A standard group report form has now been introduced by the majority of sections to ensure that
12
the Research Department is kept fully informed of actions taken by the groups and to enable sections to check that their groups are working as effectively as possible.
Sections have been encouraged to establish coordination groups (groups of members within the section who specialize in a particular country or area) to aid and advise on the work of their adoption groups on behalf of prisoners in one country or area of the world. There are 78 coordination groups at the present time.
A major part of the work of the Coordination Unit concerns development. If Amnesty International is to work for human rights universally and to represent the force of worldwide public opinion, it must become more culturally diverse, and it must correct the imbalance in its present membership by growth outside Europe and North America.
This is also true if AI wishes to act with greater effectiveness in the countries of the third world. Long-range efforts in human rights education and the development of indigenous AI activities are imperative.
Over the past two years AI's International Council has recognized the need to foster development in the third world, and a major step in this direction was proposed in 1972 by the Indian Section. After considerable exploration, their initiative resulted in the appointment of a member of the International Secretariat to work in South Asia as a regional field secretary.
The project has already proved valuable in strengthening the work of AI national sections in the region, in building contacts with other non-governmental organizations, in publicizing the work of Amnesty International and in exploring techniques for work and growth.
Following the decisions of the Vienna and Askov International Councils, and with the helpful financial support of the X-Y Foundation in the Netherlands, a South Asia Regional Conference was held on 20-23 March 1975 at the Gandhi Peace Foundation, New Delhi. This was the first meeting of its kind in AI's history. It was designed to bring AI membeii in India, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Nepal, and Sri Lanka together so that they could discuss common problems and develop a common strategy for their work.
In response to a proposal by the Japanese Section at the Askov council meeting, plans are underway to hold an AI Pan-Pacific Conference on Human Rights in Tokyo in December 1975.
In 1974, a second field secretary was sent out from the Intemational Secretariat, with generous financial assistance from the Canadian University Service Overseas, to explore the possibilities for AI growth in a number of Latin American countries. The field secretary, himself a Latin American, left London in December after working for several months within the secretariat in preparation for his mission. The countries chosen were Colombia, Venezuela, Ecuador, Peru, Mexico, Costa Rica and Panama.
He was commissioned to "establish contact on as wide a basis as possible with individuals, organizations, and other bodies that are likely to be interested in AI's activities, to explore the various means whereby support can be obtained from existing organizational structures and assess the contacts established and advise the Intemational Secretariat on their present value and future potential.
13
to assess the best line of development for Amnesty International and its work for prisoners and to explore the possibility of establishing appropriate forms of membership".
The Latin American field secretary has made contact with a large number of potential members, has held discussions with sympathetic organizations, and has approached a number of publishing houses with a view to their handling Spanish-language editions of AI publications. He has also sought the support of lawyers, members of the medical profession, and military veterans who might take part in future AI missions. The problems and achievements of the AI national sections in Mexico and Peru have been discussed with them and suggestions put forward for reorganization of their future work.
In an interim report the field secretary has stressed the importance of building up the number of international members in the third world, this form of membership being particularly well suited to isolated supporters. At the same time he warns that as AI becomes better known in Latin America, the flow of information to the International Secretariat will incre^e, and this will inevitably lead to new and intensified demands on the Research Department.
The European national sections have continued to expand both in groups and membership, though greater emphasis has been given this past year to the consolidation and improvement of existing groups. Several national sections have concentrated on establishing coordination, action and CAT groups.
The majority of sections have actively responded to requests from the secretariat for urgent actions and in many instances have initiated exhibitions, demonstrations, and other activities on behalf of prisoners or to promote the work of AI as a whole. It is not possible to list these in detail in the Umited space available.
The Belgian Section has doubled the number of its groups and members and the first Flemish-speaking groAips have been established. In France, there has been a rapid increase in groups and several more are in the process of formation. A number of coordination groups have been formed. The section translates the Amnesty International Newsletter for the other French-speaking sections and has helped the secretariat with other translation work and in the coordination of joint activities.
The main efforts of the Austrian Section have been directed towards special actions and to ensuring that all groups are working as effectively as possible. The section in the Federal Republic of Germany, while still the largest section in terms of groups, did not expand as rapidly as in recent years. The section has concentrated on improving the quality of its groups and membership. It has received greater publicity than in the past.
The Italian Section has opened an office in Rome, a branch has been formed in Milan and membership has grown rapidly. The Luxembourg Section held probably the year's most successful AI fundraising campaign when in December it raised 2 million Luxembourg francs, at the same time gaining extensive publicity and attracting 200 new members. Switzerland has seen a steady growth in membership and groups. High priority has been given to the CAT campaign. Many new members have joined the Netherlands Section and there has been a steady increase in the number of groups. The section has given much time and thought to the question
14
of AI development in the third world.
The Soviet AI group was formally recognized in the autumn of 1974 and was assigned three prisoners for adoption.
Membership in the Irish Section has increased. Two major fundraising events were held and considerabJe publicity surrounded the award of the Nobel Peace Prize to Sean MacBride, chairman of the section. The British Section, with a new director and fundraiser, has undertaken numerous new initiatives to promote the work of AI throughout the country.
In the Nordic countries, the most encouraging development has been the establishment of a section in Iceland. The section has already received extensive pubUcity and the membership is growing rapidly. The sections in Denmark, the Faroe Islands, Finland and Norway have all shown a gradual increase in membership. They have participated in special campaigns and have made continued efforts in publicity and fundraising. The Swedish Section has established a large number of new groups and has devoted much time to AI pubhcations.
The Canadian Section has been successful in establishii^ groups in all but two provinces. A number of campaigns have been held and support has been given by the Canadian parliamentary AI group. In the United States individual membership has risen rapidly whilst a number of inactive groups have been closed down.
As already mentioned the two sections in Latin America, Mexico and Peru, have been visited by the Latin American field secretary. The Mexican Section particularly has had increasing contacts throughout the year with other sections and with the International Secretariat. Dirk Borner, Chairman of the International Executive Committee, met with members of the section while in Mexico on a private visit. The section was represented at the Askov council meeting.
In Israel the group in Tel Aviv has been revived, and the section was able to send a representative to the council meeting.
In Asia the main development in the past year has been the field secretary program and the holding of the South Asia Regional Conference in New Delhi. The Indian Section, while acting as host for the field secretary and for the conference, has also concentrated on promoting the Campaign for the Prisoners of the Month and has compiled a handbook to explain the different ways in which members can support the work of AI. The field secretary has visited the sections in Nepal, Banglad^h, and Sri Lanka. The sections played an active role in the regional conference and have outlined plans for renewed activity. Representatives of the section which is in formation in Pakistan attended the regional conference, and this was followed up in April by a visit from the field secretary.
The Japanese Section has had good press coverage and many new members have joined. Preliminary arrangements are going ahead for the AI Pan-Pacific Conference on Human Rights. The section in the Republic of Korea has continued to translate and distribute the Newsletter, including the Campaign for the Prisoners of the Month, and has been successful in obtaining publicity for its activities.
The six AI branches in Australia have continued to expand. A meeting was held in Sydney in January 1975 at which representatives from each of the blanches discussed the possibility of establishing a single Australian Section. Ratification of the proposed constitution is now under consideration by each of
15
the branches. The New Zealand Section has shown some growth in membership and groups.
Africa has not had the advantage of the Asian and Latin American sections of increased contact with other branches and representatives of the organization. There has been no contact over the past year with the sections in Gambia and Ghana. The Nigerian Section was faced with organizational difficulties but is attempting to revive its activities and plans to contact professional bodies to work on behalf of members of their profession imprisoned in other countries.


S.
.s
a
Relief
During the past 12 months the administration of relief funds to the families of needy prisoners of conscience has occupied an increasing amount of Amnesty International's attention. Upwards of £50,000 (US $120,000) worth of reUef money has, during 1974-75, passed through the International Secretariat to a wide variety of countries. An approximately equal total was sent by individual AI adoption groups and national sections.
To match the growing scale of AFs relief work, new procedures for speeding the flow of relief funds to those who are in need of them have been evolved at the International Secretariat and implemented with the cooperation of national sections and coordination groups. In November 1974, the International Executive Committee sanctioned the establishment of a Relief Committee at the International Secretariat with the task of supervising the expenditure of relief and deciding on the allocation of such relief funds that are not specifically earmarked for a particular country or project.
Between November 1974 and April 1975, the Relief Committee met nine times to earmark some £15,000 (US $36,000) worth of monies for prisoners of conscience and their families in Africa, Asia, Europe and Latin America. Combined with new procedures for the recording and transmission of relief payments through the International Secretariat, and a closer supervision of relief work by individual adoption groups, the committee's work has marked a significant step toward the re-organization of an important aspect of AI's assistance to prisoners of conscience.
While pressure on governments and the psychological support provided to prisoner and family by the traditional adoption process remain the principle weapons which AI uses in its fight against political persecution, the concrete benefit provided by financial relief is also of the utmost importance. To a family whose breadwinner who has been unjustly imprisoned, and perhaps detained for a number of years without trial, the previously simple problems of dealing with such financial necessities as school fees, rents, and travel money become insuperable difficulties. It is here that relief assistance, provided either directly by the adoption group, or from general funds held at the International Secretariat, can be of crucial importance.
17
AI relief money works every day to alleviate the suffering of some stricken family. In one country, the money may provide the transportation fare necessary for a wife to visit her imprisoned husband in a different city. Elsewhere the funds might provide subsistence for the family of the prisoner. In addition to helping the family, the relief funds may assist the prisoner directly, allowing him or her in some instances to purchase the few small luxuries which prisoners are allowed, and in some cases providing basic necessities such as blankets and winter clothing in harsh climates.
Once the often long ordeal of imprisonment or torture is over, AI is ready once once again with its relief funds to help the prisoner rehabilitate himself and, in the more tragic cases, to pay for the medical assistance which may be necessary in order to help a victim recuperate from torture.
In carrying out this humanitarian work, which is governed by the same principles of impartiality and political balance that guide the overall work of AI, the organization relies heavily on the generosity of its national sections, and on individual donors who feel that they would like to do something useful and direct to assist persons who are imprisoned in violation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The scores of letters received at the International Secretariat from grateful prisoners and their families attest to the importance of AI's continuing worldwide relief operation.
Campaign for the Abolition of Torture
After a year of marked success in generating international publicity and diplomatic activity against torture, the Campaign for the Abolition of Torture became fully integrated during 1974-75 with Amnesty International's work and organizational structure. The new CAT Department, in close cooperation with AI national sections and the other departments of the International Secretariat, shaped a program that comprises three major fields of activity to combat torture: publicity to emphasize this particularly heinous feature of poUtical detention, measures to improve international law and guidelines for opposing torture, and a series of projects specially designed to develop and refine the techniques used to militate against torture.
The Role of Publicity
Publicity of various kinds is Amnesty International's principal method of exerting pressure against the poUcy or practice of torture. The first task during 1974-75 for the new CAT Department was to shape the campaign for immediate intervention to help at least some of the countless victims of torture. A system of "urgent action campaigns" was developed, whereby in a very short time hundreds of telegrams and express letters could be sent on behalf of victims or potential victims of torture. AI national sections, which are instrumental in this system, continue to respond with great enthusiasm, and the larger sections now have special CAT groups or coordinators that execute urgent action campaigns whenever a situation requires an immediate response.
As the frequency of urgent campaigns increased (averaging more than one a week through May 1975), it became necessary to streamline the procedures, enlarge the participation of AI's membership and inform outside groups of the campa^s. Appeals thus brought a more broadly-based response: not only from AI's membership but also from such groups and individuals as the doctors from many countries who acted for a collej^ue in Iran, international writers' organizations for the South Korean poet Kim Chi-ha, parliamentarians for a former senator in Chile, and so on.
Although there have also been urgent campaigns for prisoners in Spain, Iran,
19
South Korea, Argentina and the USSR, the concentration has been on certain Latin American countries: Chile, relentless since the September 1973 coup in its systematic use of torture; Uruguay, continuing its suppression of the organized labour movement and other political opposition; and Brazil, where the hard-line military establishment opposed cautious attempts towards liberalization and carried out many new arrests throughout 1974 and 1975.These countries receive much attention for two reasons: first, any new political detainee is in danger of torture, and second, AT often receives reliable information about arrests there quickly enough to intervene.
By providing a mechanism for rapid international action, the Campaign for the Abolition of Torture narrows a gap that had previously been open, even though action taken directly for individuals is necessarily limited to a small percentage of the many possible victims. Furthermore, there are many countries where torture is equally systematic but from which vital information about individual cases reaches AI far too late—after the worst has already happened.
Nevertheless, wherever rapid action is possible, it is taken, and there have been some positive results: improved conditions for a prisoner, news of a release, encouraging letters from a prisoner's friends or relatives, or speedy acknowledgement by the authorities that a prisoner is detained or charged (the end of incommunicado detention often means relative safety from torture).
In addition to initiating various news releases, the CAT Department has issued special documents to be used for action by AI national sections and others, such as a booklet in July 1974 on the public floggings of dissidents in Namibia (a practice stopped by South African court order in February 1975), a letter from a Spanish woman m November 1974 in which she described her torture in a Madrid prison, and an extensive feature article in February 1975 on arbitrary arrests and torture in Paraguay, Uruguay and Argentina. In May 1975 two further items were in preparation: a selection from affidavits sworn by Mozambiquan victims of torture who suffered under Portuguese colonial rule and a paper concerning the torture of women for submission to the World Conference of International Women's Year being held in Mexico City from 19 June to 2 July 1975 under the auspices of the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations.
A second, revised edition of the Amnesty International Report on Torture was published in January 1975. The 246-page report includes updated material on Oiile, North Vietnam, Portugal, Greece, Turkey, South Korea, Cyprus and Saudi Arabia - the latter two in the report for the first time. (See chapter on Information and Publications.)
Current information regarding incidents and trends of torture as well as news about AI's activities against torture are provided in the CAT Bulletin, started in June 1974 and pubUshed monthly with the AINemletter. Every issue of the two-page Bulletin also includes one or more appeals asking individuals to write on behalf of victims of torture.
Publicity and urgent action campaigns have not been the only forms of direct response to the continuing flow of allegations of torture from all parts of the world. Approaches have been made by letters and telegrams to several dozen governments, often accompanied by publicity in the CAT Bulletin, and sometimes followed up by special action through the AI national sections. There have
20
also been several AI missions to countries where torture is practised, including Ecuador, Namibia, Spain and South Korea. These missions gathered details concerning torture (as well as other violations of human rights), and such information was given publicity by the CAT Department. Detailed information about these missions can be found in the appropriate country sections of this annual report.
Some of the most publicized allegations of ill-treatment and torture during 1974 arose out of the October 1973 war in the Middle East. Reciprocal claims were made about torture of prisoners of war, especially after the repatriation of Israeli and Syrian prisoners of war in June 1974. Under its mandate to combat all kinds of torture, including that committed against prisoners of war, the CAT Department organized a mission of investigation. Permission to conduct the investigation was granted by the governments of both Israel and Syria, and the three-man commission, composed of a Norwegian, Asbjfi)m Eide, director of the Oslo Peace Research Institute, Swedish lawyer Peter Nobel and Dutch physician Kees van Vuuren, met with full cooperation from the authorities during their two-week visit to Israel and Syria in October 1974.
The commission interviewed 25 Israeli and 21 Syrian former prisoners of war, as well as three Syrian civilians who had allegedly been kidnapped by withdrawing Israeh forces in the summer of 1974. The 34-page report of the mission, published in April 1975, summarized statements made by six Israeli and six Syrian former prisoners of war, with a medical conclusion on each. It said that although it was impossible to establish absolute proof a year after the alleged abuses, the consistency of many of the testimonies and the fact that in certain cases they appear to be corroborated by the findings of the medical examination leave little doubt that abuses were committed by both parties concerned, albeit that those perpetrated against the former IsraeU prisoners of war held in Syria appear generally to have been of a more severe nature.
The report stressed that its principal purpose was to seek remedies for the apparent shortcomings of international humanitarian law as embodied in the 1949 Geneva Conventions.lt concluded accordingly with a series of recommendations to the two governments that they take steps to secure the full implementation of the Third Geneva Convention concerning the treatment of prisoners of war. The report further urged the Diplomatic Conference in Geneva on the Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts to strengthen methods of international control and supervision in such situations.
The report also pointed out that, although permission and cooperation were requested prior to the October visit, AI was not given an opportunity properly to investigate allegations of ill-treatment and torture of civilian prisoners detained in both countries. In sending the report to both governments, AI Secretary General Martin Ennals expressed the hope that they would enable AI to investigate questions relating to civilian prisoners in their respective countries in the near future.
No response had been received by the end of June 1975 from either government to this renewed request.
21
International Law and Its Implementation
Of equal importance to publicity is the necessity to improve international law on human rights and its implementation, in order to strengthen the safeguards against torture at all levels. In connection with this function of the campaign, the highlight of 1974-75 was the unopposed adoption by the United Nations General Assembly on 6 November 1974 of Resolution 3218 (XXIX) on "torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in relation to detention and imprisonment".
By a vote of 125-0 (Zaire abstaining) the General Assembly not only reaffirmed the rejection of any form of torture, which it had expressed in its earlier Resolution 3059 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973, but also took a significant step forward in moving the question of torture from the realm of non-committal denunciation—accomplished by the 1973 resolution-into the st^e of specific action by the UN and its agencies. For, in addition to placing the question of torture as a separate item on the agenda of the 1975 (30th) session of the General Assembly, the 1974 resolution also specifically referred a number of major issues regardii^ torture to the Fifth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, which will be held from 1 -12 September 1975 in Toronto, Canada.
By virtue of Resolution 3218, this congress, which meets every five years, is requested to give urgent attention a) to the question of the development of an international code of ethics for the police and related law enforcement agencies and b) to the strengthening of the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners with a view to protection against torture. Furthermore, the World Health Organization and UNESCO are asked to prepare, in consultation with such professional bodies as the World Medical Association, draft principles of medical ethics for the treatment of persons subjected to any form of detention or imprisonment, and to submit these to the Toronto congress. On these and other matters, the congress will have to report back to the 30th session of the General Assembly.
Although the congress is not an international legislative body, it does have the status to recommend important measures to the UN and its agencies, and more important, to have its recommendations adopted. Thus, the first congress (Geneva, 1955) recommended the adoption of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners by the UN as a guideline for all member states and for incorporation into national law.
A contributing factor to this positive development on the inter-govem-mental level was a resolution on the subject of torture passed by the UN Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities at its 27th session in August 1974. In its Resolution 7 (XXVII) this sub-commission of the UN Human Rights Commission laid down a number of judicial principles that are of vital importance with a view to preventing or diminishing the occurrence of torture, and "noting....that all available information suggests that in several countries there may be a consistent pattern of such violations" (i.e. torture), it decided "to review annually developments in the field and for this purpose to retain the item on its agenda".
22
There can be Uttle doubt that, after AI's initiative in 1973, its continuing efforts have played a role in these developments. After having prepared a new draft for a UN General Assembly Resolution in May 1974, which already contained some of the main features of the eventual Resolution 3218, approaches were made to a large number of governments to propose or sponsor this proposal. An AI submission to the sub-commission's August 1974 session stressed the need for more effective action and machinery to combat torture on the inter-govem-mental level. The submission made various suggestions towards that end.
AI's preparation during 1974-75 for the Toronto congress and for the subsequent General Assembly session was extensive, and it will send its own representatives to Toronto. In addition, AI will hold two seminars during the first week of the congress. These wiU focus on various aspects of the problem of torture and on the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners and their implementation.
Hopes for a fresh, positive impact are based in the first place on AI's official submission to the congress. This 16-page document, presented also in French and Spanish, contains a series of eight proposals categorized under two main headings: matters arising out of Resolution 3218, and strengthening of the Standard Minimum Rules. Those of the first category deal particularly with the problem of torture. They include a proposal that the congress recommend to the General Assembly that it declare torture to be a crime under international law, and that it authorize an appropriate body to create a draft convention on the supression of torture and the protection of all prisoners. Other proposals present minimum requirements for international codes of ethics for poHce and for medical personnel.
The congress is also asked to stipulate that the Standard Minimum Rules apply to all detainees, whether or not they have yet been charged with an offence, thus bringing prisoners from their first moment of detention and throughout all interrogation under the protection of the rules. AI national sections and CAT coordinators were asked to seek support for these proposals from their countries' governmental delegates to the congress and from individual expert participants. From the International Secretariat the AI proposals were sent directly to a large number of governments and their UN representatives, requesting further support.
In an additional effort to strengthen the A1 proposals to the congress, AI convened a seminar of senior police officers and representatives of police unions from most Western European countries to discuss the development of an international code of police ethics. This seminar, which took place in June 1975 in The Hague, was organized in conjunction with the AI Dutch section and with the financial support of the Dutch government and police unions. The AI poUce seminar provided fresh input into the ongoing discussions on a European code of police ethics within the framework of the Council of Europe, in which A1 has taken an active role. The discussions were initiated by the Council's Consultative Assembly in 1974.
In another Council of Europe development, a motion by a number of European parliamentarians in September 1974 expressed their deep concern about the worldwide practice of torture, making specific mention of AI's work against torture and recommending certain safeguards in connection with extra-
23
dition or expulsion to countries that practise or tolerate torture. AI is closely involved in the resulting deliberations in the council's Legal Affairs Committee.
Besides inter-governmental organizations, mention should also be made of non-governmental organizations (NGO's) that have followed AI's lead or taken new initiatives against torture. The Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) at its 61st conference (Tokyo, October 1974) adopted a strong resolution against torture which included amendments recommended by AI. The resolution called on governments and parliamentarians all over the world to take appropriate action against torture and pointed out preventive and protective measures. Following the IPU conference, at which members of the Japanese Section represented AI, the CAT Department issued guidelines to national sections to consult and cooperate with parliamentarians in their countries towards effective implementation of the resolution. This was in the Ught of the resolution's specific reference to human rights organizations like AI in its urging of governments "to encourage and support by positive action those bodies which endeavour to draw the attention of the world public opinion to the dangers of torture and the means of combatting it".
The World Medical Association, at its assembly in Tokyo in October 1975, will consider a formal declaration containing ethical guidelines, based in part on AI recommendations, that forbid participation by medical personnel in interrogation of prisoners or in torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. This particular development may also contribute to the discussions at the Toronto congress on the subject of medical ethics in relation to torture.
These and other instances attest to the belief held by AI that inter-govemmen-tal and non-governmental organizations can help formulate and implement improved international laws and guidelines to prevent torture.
Other CAT Action
The CAT Department initiated or coordinated various special projects during 1974-75 in an effort to improve the methods used by AI to act on behalf of victims of torture. Two deserve special mention: a seminar with victims of torture from Greece and Portugal and a group of related medical research projects in Denmark.
With the coup in Portugal in April and the resignation of the military junta in Greece in July, the year 1974 saw the end of two dictatorial regimes that had adopted the deliberate and systematic use of torture as a method of government. These changes of regime gave AI a unique opportunity to bring together former prisoners and victims of torture from the two countries to discuss the effectiveness of AI's past work there, as well as to draw general lessons from these two distinct situations that could improve AI's techniques elsewhere.
A three-day "workshop on human rights" was held in London late in 1974 and one fact became clear from the beginning of the discussions: while recognizing the Hmitations of international pressure against governments that condone or encourage torture, the participants were convinced of its very positive value. They urged AI and other international organizations to continue and increase such pressure, and to do so as persistently as possible during the entire period of
24
detention. Some of them cited their personal experiences of having had torture prevented or shortened by the intervention of colleagues abroad, thus underlining the importance of professional organizations in attempts to stop torture.
The results of the workshop were published in a 15-page report that reviews the patterns of torture over the years in the two countries, the involvement of doctors in torture, some evidence of the international training of torturers, and the role of individuals and groups abroad in helping to stop or to decrease the severity of torture.
The many conclusions and recommendations of the workshop, as given in the report, deal mainly with the following topics: publicity and ways to increase its effectiveness; the need to take urgent action on likely cases of torture as soon as news of an arrest has reached the outside world; the need to press consistently for detainees to be permitted access to a lawyer immediately after arrest, this being the period when torture usually takes place; missions by legal experts to observe trials and to report to the outside world; action by professional organizations, trade unions, religious bodies, etc., on behalf of colleagues who are, or are in danger of, being tortured; communications between AI and groups within a country that may be able to provide information about torture; and support for treatment and rehabilitation of torture victims.
Another effort to improve AI's techniques was initiated by a group of Danish AI doctors and scientists who wish to develop effective methods for on-the-spot-medical investigation of allegations of torture. Medical evidence of this kind could be invaluable in mobilizing international public opinion.
Because no scientific work has been done on the subject, the doctors and scientists began research in 1974 along three lines: the formulation of a checklist for the medical examination of victims of torture, tests to detect forced medication and tests to detect electrical torture. The checklist for medical examinations will assist in the standardization of investigations, thus allowing results from different investigations made by medical personnel from different countries to be comparable. A standard questionnaire, as well as a standard protocol for physicd examination, have already been prepared. The tests to detect forced medication will allow for the length of time in which drugs can be detected in the blood and urine after administration.
Because electrical torture has become more and more frequently used, tests to verify its use should prove very valuable. The research is being carried forward in the fields of pathology, dermatology, and neurophysiology, focusing on the duration of application, voltage, localization and the rate and extent of tissue regeneration.
* *
It is appropriate to conclude this account by paying tribute to the AI national sections and CAT groups. They have played and continue to play an indispensable role, not only by safeguarding the campaign's existence in financial terms and by providing the framework for efficient urgent campaigns on behalf of individual victims, but also by initiating a variety of imaginative actions at the national level. It is clear from the example cited of the medical research started in Denmark that some of these have a considerable potential impact on the international campaign.
25
A further initiative was taken to strengthen the campaign at the national level when AI's British Section raised with the British Government, members of parliament and the national media the question of the training currently being given to selected British servicemen in resistance to interrogation and torture. The techniques involved in this training include hooding, wall-standing, restricted diet, sleep deprivation and the use of noise-making machines — the very techniques that the British govemment in 1972 forbade the military using in Northern Ireland.
AI national sections and CAT groups have become increasingly active in carrying forward all facets of the campaign, including widespread publicity, special programs of research, representations to embassies and foreign ministries on behalf of victims and the education of their own parHamentarians about the need for national and international laws against torture.
£ VM
I
■m
a u Oi,
a
E c
&
o U
"Amnesty International has proof that there is a world trade in sophisticated instruments of torture.	|
'It's th* best product on the market, Mr President. We've heard nothing but moans about it." ^
Capital Punishment
Amnesty International and 25 other non-governmental organizations signed a resolution during the past year calling on all governments to cease employing capital punishment and on the United Nations General Assembly to promulgate a declaration that would urge its total worldwide abolition. The resolution has been submitted to the Fifth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, taking place in Toronto, Canada, in September 1975. The text of the resolution reads:
THE UNDERSIGNED INTERNATIONAL NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS CONCERNED WITH HUMAN RIGHTS
Affirming their unswerving commitment to the protection of the right to life of every human being,
Re-iterating their total opposition to any form of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Considering that the death penalty is in violation of both the above principles,
1.	Call on all governments that retain capital punishment to cease employing it;
2.	Call on the General Assembly of the United Nations to promulgate a declaration that woiUd urge its total woridwide abolition;
3.	Call on all non-governmental organizations concerned with hiunan rights to make every effort at the national and international level to secure the abolition of capital punishment.
Amnesty International Arab Lawyers Union
Commission of the Churches on International Affairs of the
World Council of Churches Friends World Committee for Consultation (Quakers)
27
International Association of Democratic Lawyers
International Confederation of Free Trade Unions
International Council of Jewish Women
International Council of Social Democratic Women
International Council of Women
International Federation of Free Journalists
International Federation of Human Rights
International Federation of Women Lawyers
International League for the Rights of Man
International Movement for Fraternal Union among Races and
Peoples International Peace Bureau International Social Service
International Youth and Student Movement for the United
Nations Pax Romana
Womens International Le^ue for Peace and Freedom
Womens International Zionist Organization
World Assembly of Youth
World Confederation of Labour
World Federation of United Nations Associations
World Jewish Congress
World Muslim Congress
World Student Christian Federation
Meanwhile, at its 58th session, held April-May 1975 in New York, the UN Economic and Social Council reaffirmed its earlier position on the "desirability" of abolishing the death penalty.
On 23 April 1975 the 27th session of the Consultative Assembly of the Council of Europe overwhelmingly rejected a request by its Legal Affairs Committee that the question of capital punishment be dropped from the committee's agenda. The committee's request had been made on 23 January 1975 and was challenged the same day in an Amnesty International news release expressing AI's "dismay" and describing Secretary General Martin Ennals as "surprised and disappointed that a motion which ultimately affects the lives and human rights of people in all member countries of the Council of Europe should have been dropped so casually".
The motion in question, drafted in consultation with AI, had been submitted to the assembly by 11 European parliamentarians in May 1973. It calls upon "those members of the Council of Europe that retain capital punishment for certain crimes to aboUsh it as a legal sanction". National sections took action to persuade parliamentarians from their countries to vote in the assembly to retain the item on its agenda.
A recent report prepared by the UN shows that, over the past few years, states have ignored the official position of the General Assembly: namely, that it is desirable to abolish the death penalty in all countries, that it should not be introduced for crimes to which it does not already apply, that the crimes to which
28
it applies should be progressively reduced and that it should only be employed for the gravest of crimes.
Of the countries reporting to the UN on changes since 1969, only one has abolished the penalty for ordinary crimes. One renewed its suspension of the penalty for most crimes until 1977, while another confirmed its abolition after a trial period of suspension. One country abolished the penalty for <7// crimes, including mihtary crimes, making it only the 10th country to do so. Meanwhile two countries have expanded the list of crimes for which death is prescribed.
Even more disturbing departures from international standards have included the denial of the right to appeal against conviction or sentence for a capitally punishable offence, the denial of the right to petition for clemency after sentence of death and pronouncement of death sentence on persons under 18 years of age at the time the crime was committed. There has also been a resurgence of the use of the penalty for economic crimes.
In addition, there has been a sharp increase in what might be termed unofficial executions, whereby certain extra-governmental forces, unhampered by the properly constituted authorities, are permitted to murder persons considered to be criminals or political undesirables. Similarly, there have been reports of persons killed while allegedly trying to escape from custody, before or after trial, in circumstances giving strong reason to doubt the official explanation.
Although the present international climate may appear generally unfavourable, AI is determined to continue its grim task of seeking to prevent executions and to protest their imposition.
Relations with other Organizations
Much of Amnesty International's work on the international governmental and non-governmental organizational level has concentrated on maintaining the momentum of the Campaign for the Abolition of Torture (CAT). Accordingly, the major initiatives undertaken at the United Nations General Assembly and with regard to the forthcoming Fifth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders are described in the chapter of this report dealing with the campaign, as are parallel initiatives within the framework of the Council of Europe. Details of other work follow.
United Nations
At the 31st session of the UN Commission on Human Rights, held in Geneva, 3 February—7 March 1975, AI was represented by its permanent representatives, Henry Jacoby and Freydoun Kadjar, and by Professor Frank C. Newman of AI's United States Section. Portions of the session were also attended by AI Secretary General Martin Ennals and Legal Adviser Nigel S. Rodley.
AI had previously communicated information alleging consistent patterns of gross and reliably attested violations of human rights in Brazil, Chile, Indonesia and Namibia. With regard to Namibia, the Ad Hoc Working Group already in existence was authorized to continue its work. A similar group was set up to investigate the situation in Chile with particular reference to torture and cmel, inhuman or degrading treatment and punishment.
No announcement was made concerning the outcome of private deliberations on a number of cases, including Brazil and Indonesia. However, press reports indicated that the Brazilian authorities may have been requested to supply further information. The same reports, corroborated by a letter from the Indonesian Ambassador in London to Amnesty International, suggested that no action would be taken on Indonesia. Such an omission would be most regrettable.
Also in private session, the commission requested the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC), its parent body with which AI has consultative status, to take measures that would impose severe restrictions on non-governmental organizations (NGOs) communicating human rights violations to the UN.
30
Fortunately, the ECOSOC meeting of May 1975 confined itself to reminding NGO's of the rules already in existence and that non-compliance could lead to the suspension or termination of consultative status.
In addition to the communications on human rights violations it submitted to the commission, AI joined other NGOs in written statements calling for an investigation into the Chilean situation and for recognition of the right to conscientious objection. The latter topic, which the previous 30th session of the commission had deferred to the 31st session for high priority consideration, has once again been deferred to the 32nd session for high priority treatment.
Meanwhile, AI's communication concerning the floggings in Namibia was, brought to the attention of the General Assembly's Committee on Decolonization and of the members of the Council for Namibia, and it is to be brought before the Commission's Ad Hoc Working Group of Experts on human rights violations in southern Africa. The floggings have now ceased. In addition, on 18 July 1974, Malcolm Smart of the International Secretariat's Africa Department testified before the Ad Hoc Working Group on human rights violations throughout southern Africa.
UNESCO
In May 1975, the Executive Board of UNESCO approved the application of AI to be granted Category B consultative status with the organization. AI previously had Category C status, called "mutual information relationship". The new relationship will permit much greater involvement by AI in UNESCO's program.
During the year AI had been in correspondence with UNESCO regarding violations of educational rights in Uruguay and in the context of general cooperation on the question of torture, with special reference to the development of codes of professional ethics.
Council of Europe
AI was represented at various meeting of the Council of Europe, with which it has consultative status, by lEC member Eric Baker, Secretary General Martin Ennals, Legal Adviser Nigel S.Rodley, CAT coordinator Dick Oosting, and Roland Fischer, its official representative. The principal area of concern remained the question of torture and the elaboration of a European Code of Police Ethics. The work on police ethics, in which concerned NGOs are playing an important role, is continuing. Other work on a Council of Europe approach to torture is described in the chapter on CAT.
AI has manifested its concern that plans to merge the Legal Directorate and the Human Rights Directorate of the Council of Europe's secretariat should not be implemented, as this might be interpreted as a downgrading of the council's work on human rights. The section of the report dealing with capital punishment covers developments in the field at the council. It was confirmed that the council's Committee of Ministers had agreed to put the question of conscientious objection on its short- and medium-term work program on human rights for the council. What this will mean in practice remains to be seen.
31
Organization of American States
AI sent further material to the In ter-American Commission on Human Rights of the OAS, with which AI has "cooperative relations", concerning its case regarding deaths and disappearances in Guatemala.
It has also submitted information to the commission on prisoners of conscience in Haiti, pointing to the rarity of prisoners being brought to trial and the absence of fair trial procedures when trials take place. The submission requests the commission to use its good offices to secure the fair trial or release of the Usted prisoners.
Organization of African Unity
Deputy Secretary General Hans Ehrenstrale and Deputy Head of Research John Humphreys attended the Sixth Ordinary Session of the Coordination Committee of the Bureau for the Placement and Education of African Refugees (BPEAR) on which AI has observer status. The session took place in Addis Ababa from 3—7 February 1975 and provided the occasion for several useful meetings with senior officials of the OAU and other African organizations which could pave the way for increased cooperation on human rights issues in Africa in the future. At its AprU 1975 meeting, the International Executive Committee agreed that AI should increase its grant to BPEAR for use for legal aid to detained African refugees.
Non-Governmental Organizations
Amnesty International has attended numerous meetings of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in New York, Geneva and Strasbourg. Representation is carried out by its permanent representatives in those cities, but AI's Secretary General and Legal Adviser have also participated on occasion. In addition, there has been important liaison with Paris-based NGOs under the supervision of International Executive Committee member Marie-José Protais.
More than 20 broadly representative NGOs have signed the Amnesty International resolution against torture which will be circulated to those attending AI's seminars at the Fifth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders being held in Toronto, Canada, in September 1975. A similar number have signed the AI resolution on capital punishment which will be circulated to the congress.
At the September 1974 International Council in Denmark, a special meeting was held of NGO representatives who were attending the council as observers. All participants felt that the meeting, which discussed methods of increased collaboration, specifically on prisoner-oriented work, was useful and should be repeated. The participating NGOs also played an important role in the meeting on the Campaign for the Abolition of Torture.
Since then, several organizations have passed resolutions pledging their commitment to work for the abolition of torture, sometimes exphcitly referring to collaboration with the Amnesty International campaign, as did the Third European Justice and Peace Conference. It is relevant here to mention that the United Nations Liaison Officer with Non-Governmental Organizations, Curtis
32
Roosevelt, asked the AI secretariat to arrange for a meeting in December 1974 at the secretariat of all London-based voluntary organizations.
Amnesty International has itself attended various meetings of other NGOs. These included the Second World Conference on Religion and Peace (1974) held in Louvain, Belgium; the 10th Congress of the International Association of Democratic Lawyers (1975) in Algiers, as well as the International Seminar of Lawyers on Vietnam (1975) held in Paris by the same organization; the Enlarged Meeting of the Steering Committee of the Continuing Liaison Council of the World Congress of Peace Forces (1974) in Moscow; the 24th General Assembly of the International Press Institute (1975) in Zurich, Switzerland; the 1975 Conference of the Intemational Confederation for Disarmament and Peace in Canterbury, England; and the 12th Congress of the Union of Arab Lawyers (1974) in Baghdad.
In addition, Secretary General Martin Ennals was a principal participant in the World Council of Churches Consultation on Human Rights and Christian Responsibility held 21 -26 October 1974 in St Pölten, Austria. Especially close cooperation continues to exist with the Intemational Commission of Jurists, particularly with respect to the planning and execution of certain missions.
As a member of Sub-Committee on Racism and Decolonization of the Special NGO Committee on Human Rights (Geneva), AI was involved in convening the major Intemational NGO Conference against Apartheid and Colonialism in Africa, held 2-5 September 1974 at the Palais des Nations in Geneva. AI was represented at the conference by Clara Olsen, former researcher on southern Aftica and now member of the staff of the UN Commissioner for Namibia (Sean MacBride), and by Freydoun Kadjar of the Swiss Section.
Special mention should be made of the second session of the Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts which was convened in Geneva, February-April 1975, by the Swiss Government in collaboration with the International Committee of the Red Cross. In addition to continuing its work at the conference through the Non-Governmental Organization Working Group on Humanitarian Law, AI representative Henry Jacoby, who was an observer at the conference, delivered on 2 April 1975 a formal statement by Amnesty International, drawing the attention of the assembled governments in the conference's first committee to the recommendations made to the conference in the AI report of its mission to investigate conflicting allegations of torture in the Middle East, Of particular importance was the recommendation that the conference make provision for an automatic system of independent international investigation into allegations of infringements of the Geneva Convention from any source. This matter will be taken up again by the conference when it reconvenes next year.
Information and Publications
Three new titles were added to Amnesty International's publications list in 1974-75. In September 1974, to coincide with the first anniversary of the coup that overthrew the government of Salvador AUende in Chile, AI published Chile: an Amnesty International Report in both English and Spanish. This is an 80-page study of the political imprisonment, executions, disappearances, systematic use of torture and abuse of legal procedures by the new military regime.
In April 1975 AI published the	Report of an Amnesty International
Mission to Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic to Investigate Allegations of III-Treatment and Torture (see chapter on the Campaign for the Abolition of Torture).
In May 1975, AI published a 168-page book comprising the English translations of numbers 28-31 of A Chronicle of Current Events, the sam/ziia/journal of the Soviet movement for the defence of human rights in the USSR. The decision to resume publication of the Chronicle—M. published numbers 16 through 27 in English before the journal was temporarily suppressed by the KGB—was taken by the International Council at its meeting in Denmark in September 1974 after the new numbers had appeared in Moscow. The book, which covers the period October 1972 to May 1974, records the arrests, searches, detentions, trials, deaths and confinement in labour camps and sometimes psychiatric hospitals of intellectual, religious and national dissenters in the USSR.
In addition to the new titles, a revised edition of the Amnesty International Report on Torture was published in January 1975. This second edition—the first was published in December 1973 and sold out completely within a year—was updated to include new material on torture. During the year of this annual report, translations of the book appeared in the Netherlands, France, Japan, Portugal and Italy, and Greek and German translations are in preparation. An American edition was also published.
Sales of all Amnesty International reports increased markedly in 1974-75. Indonesia Special, Report on Allegations of Torture in Brazil and the Report of an Inquiry into Allegations of Ill-Treatment in Northern Ireland have all sold out completely, the latter two only shortly after a new reprint. This reflects efforts
34
made by the Information and Publications Department to develop better channels of international distribution of AI reports. The flWirtit' PiMNtiC cooperation of national sections in opening ■	Bi^Blia gyg^ channels in their own country is vital to
^^is new program.
Another mnovation durmg the year arose from the lEC-authorized purchase of an IBM numbers 28-31	composer for typesetting. The Spanish
edition of the Oiile Report, the new edition of^ Chronicle of Current Events and this Annual Report were all typeset, des^ned and layed out inside the International Secretariat by department staff.
Efforts were made to increase the general information outflow from the International Secretariat. In addition to the 50 news Anms^iotoiEtfkaüPAHnäaBs	releases and a number of feature articles
produced during the year, individual Usts of trade unionists, journalists and women in prison were published and circulated throughout the world. There was also an increasing interest shown in the special Spanish-language bulletin produced for distribution in Latin America and Spain. For economic reasons, however, publication of the bulletin was cut back from monthly to once every two months.
After a proposal by Sean MacBride that Amnesty International sponsor a multilingual international magazine devoted entirely to human rights, the International Council authorized the International Executive Committee to examine the proposal and also AI's entire pubUc information policy. The lEC established a special committee of international publishing experts for this purpose, and the committee's report will be submitted to the meeting of the council in St Gallen, Switzerland, in September 1975.
Multilingualism in AI's information and publications outflow was taken a step further with an lEC decision in principle to establish a translation and printing operation in Paris to produce more material in French.
The department also produced the printed Workshop on Human Rights: Report and Recommendation, the results of the workshop held in London 29 November-1 December 1974 by the Campa^n for the Abolition of Torture (see chapter on CAT). A new, illustrated CAT leaflet, a new general AI leaflet and a leaflet explaining AI's position on violence were also produced. In addition, the department produced booklets in English, French and Spanish containing AI's proposals to the Fifth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, being held in Toronto, Canada, 1-12 September 1975.
Prisoners and Human Rights Country by Country
Introduction
by Stephanie Grant, Head of Research
This report describes initiatives taken during the past year for the release or relief of prisoners in 107 countries. In a few instances the issues were new; in others—Ethiopia, Portugal or Mozambique—new problems arose in famihar situations. But in most countries Amnesty International has continued its traditional patterns of action, aimed at the release of prisoners of conscience, the amelioration of legal and penal treatment for all political prisoners and the prevention of torture and capital punishment.
Between June 1974 and May 1975, 2169 cases were written up for AI groups, and 1,699 of those already under adoption or investigation were released; missions were sent to 31 countries; a major report was produced on Chile, and substantive material pubhshed on imprisonment in India (West Bengal) and psychiatric treatment in the Soviet Union. Lists of imprisoned writers, journalists, trade unionists, lawyers and women have been prepared in response to appropriate international events. Al groups are now working on the cases of 3,650 prisoners, a figure which represents only a nominal increase over the year. This was caused by the unprecedentedly high rate of release among adopted prisoners.
The reasons for release have been many. In Portugal, South Vietnam and Greece, tens of thousands of prisoners were freed as the direct consequence of radical political change. In South Korea a large-scale amnesty followed intensive international pressure, particularly from the United States. In the Soviet Union, women prisoners of conscience were released in an amnesty to mark International Women's Year. In Chile prisoners could leave their prison and their country on condition that their air fare was paid. In Bahrein 26 adopted trade unionists were released by court decision. In Spain, some of the "Carabanchel 10"—also trade unionists—were released after a successful appeal attended by international observers. A change of law in the Netherlands regarding conscientious objection benefitted only one prisoner, but assured future freedom to conscientious objectors.
Each situation had been a focus of AI activities, but in the majority of cases it is neither accurate nor responsible to trace any causal connection between AI work and release. Nonetheless the pages which follow report a number of instances where adoption, a mission or publicity has been succeeded by the release of a
37
prisoner or the improvement in prison conditions. In each situation, the circumstances and imperatives are different, and assessment is both a sensitive and difficult procedure. The Research Department is now attempting to identify the criteria against which initiatives and organizational techniques can realistically be assessed.
The increasing extent and complexity of AI work is well illustrated by the Ust at the end of this annual report of missions undertaken during the year. It also demonstrates the operational nature of AI research: most missions originate with the responsible researcher, who suggests the appropriate nationality and qualifications for each assignment, writes the brief and may accompany the delegate. Last year delegates representing 18 nationalities carried AI mandates to 31 countries. Trials were attended, inter alia, in Lesotho, Spain, Morocco, Tunis Tunisia, Chile, Yugoslavia, Rhodesia, Namibia and Egypt. Substantive legal inquiries were conducted in Ecuador (into the special tribunals), Northern Ireland (into the Emergency Provisions Act), Sri Lanka (into the Criminal Justice Commissions), and in South Korea (into political trial procedures). All the mission reports made specific recommendations to the governments concerned, and all extended Al's understanding of the legal mechanisms under which political prisoners are tried.
Through the Campaign for the Abolition of Torture, AI national sections and members have acted in response to reports of torture in many countries, particularly in Latin America. Appeals against sentence of death have been made for prisoners in, inter alia, Tanzania (Zanzibar), Bulgaria, German Democratic Republic, Zambia, South Korea, Chile, Ethiopia, Iraq, Iran, Somalia, the United States of America and several Caribbean countries, and against arbitrary executions in Equatorial Guinea, Uganda and in many parts of Latin America. AI has protested in the strongest terms against the death of prisoners of conscience in the USSR (from medical neglect) and their murder in Iran.
As AI becomes increasingly recognized internationally as-the single source of objective information on political imprisonment, more and more requests for information are made to the Research Department from outside the AI organization. These can present a conflict of priorities. In a single week, a researcher may have to decide whether the preparation of 20 case sheets on prisoners in the Philippines or South JCorea is likely to have more immediate effect than the dispatch of a detailed brief to a US Congressman visiting Manila or Seoul to report on human rights violations in the context of continuing American aid. The two approaches are, at best, complementary, and the Research Department has discharged its parallel obligations to inform groups and national sections and to respond to requests for briefs and information from parliamentarians, churchmen and other groups in, for example, Holland, the United States or Japan.
The Research Department has been able to meet the needs of the growing AI organization and also respond to outside demands as a result of a farsighted International Executive Committee decision (May 1974) to expand the department's staff by 25% and thanks to the financial generosity of national sections. At the end of 1974, several highly qualified researchers and assistants were recruited, a number from outside Britain. The 14 present researchers come from
38
10 different countries. In April 1975, the International Executive Committee took a step of considerable significance when it agreed to establish a formal documentation center to provide a professional information retrieval system for the International Secretariat.
The increase in staff has also enabled the Research Department to worK on countries which hitherto had been neglected because of the practical difficulties of obtaining information in tightly controlled societies. Research on Cuba has been a priority, and the extension of systematic work on eastern Europe has resulted in two observer missions to Yugoslavia and a legal intervention to avert a death sentence in Bulgaria. Between June and December 1974, the number of adopted cases in "socialist" countries rose by 33%. But, increasingly, the concept of of political balance is seen in regional rather than global terms. Classic examples of this are the Syria/Israel report and the mission to North and South Yemen.
Within the last 18 months, the AI organization has firmly established itself outside Europe. Strong national sections exist in Japan, Australia and the United States. Field secretaries in South Asia and Latin America have publicized AI work in countries which detain prisoners of conscience. In the past, pressure on the International Secretariat to act came largely from individuals in Germany, Holland or Sweden. Now the appeals may also come from Tokyo or California-places much closer than London to Taiwan, Mexico and other areas of imprisonment.
The effect of this development on the Research Department has been to emphasize the paramount importance of maintaining comprehensive and up to date information on cases and problems which may well fall outside the normal group work program. In this situation, the quality of research assumes critical importance in enabling the International Secretariat to decide the correct response to a request for action. When urgent appeals are made for an AI initiative in response to reported torture or a threatened death sentence, accurate information is the single guarantee that the decision will rest on the facts of the situation itself rather than on the immediacy with which the appeal is expressed.
Africa
Amnesty International worked during 1974-75 for prisoners of conscience in 37 African countries. Due largely to political developments in the continent, full or partial amnesties were granted in a number of states.
In Rhodesia, following moves for a pohtical settlement between nationalist groups and the ruling government of Prime Minister Ian Smith, approximately 80 long-term detainees were released in the months following December 1974; but, at the same time, others have been detained.
In Morocco, a rapprochement between King Hassan and the leading opposition parties created the atmosphere for the release during the last months of 1974 of more than 70 adopted prisoners who had been held since September 1973.
In Mozambique and Angola, the change of government in Portugal resulted in the release of prisoners formerly held under the regime of Dr Marcelo Caetano.
A military coup in Chad freed 172 political prisoners, including AI adoptees, and in Mali, the government of President Moussa Traoré promised that 1975 would be a year of national reconciliation marked by the release of political prisoners, and began to implement this policy with the liberation of 15 detainees in June 1975.
All these developments give cause for hope. However, in many areas of the continent, there has been a deterioration in the human rights situation in 1974-75. In spite of the releases in Rhodesia, over 250 prisoners remain in detention without trial. In South Africa, notwithstanding that country's policy of détente with independent African states, political leaders of the African population have been arrested, detained for considerable periods and then brought to trial under the Terrorism Act.
Under the rule of President Idi Amin, reports continue of massacres, "disappearances" and imprisonment in Uganda. In Ethiopia, the Provisional Military Administration Council, which assumed power with the overthrow of Emperor Haile Selassie I in September 1974, has imprisoned hundreds of Ethiopians without trial and is trying civilians before special courts martial, administering a severe penal code promulgated in November of the same year. In Malawi, Tanzania, Zambia, and Sudan, detention without trial remains a serious problem.
One disturbing development in Africa during the last 12 months has been the
40
increasing use of the death penalty, either after a regular trial or simply by administrative decision. In November 1974, 59 members and alleged supporters of the former Selassie government in Ethiopia were executed summarily. Dahomey sentenced seven people to death in March 1975. September 1974 saw the beginning of a treason trial in Sierra Leone which culminated two months later in death sentences on 15 individuals. January 1975 was marked by the execution in Somalia of 10 men who had allegedly opposed a decree by the Supreme Revolutionary Council granting equal rights to Somali women. In Rhodesia, the Smith government announced during April 1975 that it would no longer publicize the fact that it was executing African nationalists after secret trials.
Amnesty International has applied a variety of techniques to meet this growing challenge. Work has gone forward in the Research Department on the production of individual case sheets and the writing of background papers. During the 12 month period of this annual report, Ai missions to Africa averaged one per month, and included the sending of delegates to observe military trials in Ethiopia, missions to investigate floggings in Namibia, observer missions to Tunisia, the Ivory Coast, and Lesotho, and several other such major initiatives.
In addition, AI launched several worldwide campaigns for general amnesties in a number of African states. The most important series of such campaigns took place between November 1974 and March 1975 and covered the five French-speaking West African states of Mali, Chad, Gabon, Cameroun and Ivory Coast. AI groups have been working for some time on adoption and investigation cases in all five of these countries. A similar campaign on Morocco took place during the early months of 1975. It was designed to coincide with the demand by Moroccan opposition parties for a general amnesty for political prisoners.
In addition to these general campaigns, AI reacted with immediate appeals for clemency when death sentences were passed anywhere in the continent. On the question of torture, the Research Department has worked closely with the Campaign for the Abolition of Torture to investigate and act upon allegations of torture emanating from Tunisia, Morocco and Zambia.
As for material assistance, the Africa department is responsible for dispensing approximately 60% of all relief monies passing through the International Secretariat, distributing them to the families of prisoners of conscience in numerous African countries.
Above all, the International Secretariat has relied for the effectiveness of its work on Africa on the enthusiasm, diligence and generosity of AI adoption groups and coordination groups throughout the world. Thanks to the enthusiasm of these groups, Amnesty International has been able to help more than 1,000 prisoners of conscience on the African continent during the past year.
The Africa department is currently handling 862 adoption and investigation cases.
Algeria
Amnesty International groups continued their efforts to procure the release of former Algerian President Ahmed Ben Bella, who has been in prison and under
41
restriction since his government was overthrown by a coup d'état in June 1965. AI was also concerned at the introduction of the death sentence in February 1975 to punish drug smuggling "of such a nature as to undermine the moral health of the Algerian people".
Angola
Following the overthrow of the Caetano regime in Portugal in April 1974, the new Portuguese government began independence talks with the leaders of the three recognized liberation movements. These talks resulted in an agreement, signed in January 1975, establishing a provisional government to lead Angola to full independence on 11 November 1975.
Soon after the Portuguese coup d'état, all Angolan political prisoners were released. Recognizing their needs, AI has provided financial assistance to a rehabilitation project.
Since it took power, divisions within the transitional government, which includes representatives from the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA), the National Front for the Liberation of Angola (FNLA) and the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA), have led to violent clashes between supporters of the three movements. Censorship of the press has been re-imposed and a number of individuals have been deported and imprisoned in Portugal.
Botswana
Amnesty International has been particularly concerned throughout the year about the situation of South African and Rhodesian refugees in Botswana. Their number increased during the last months of 1974 when, following the arrest of many officials of the South African Students' Organization and the Black Peoples' Convention in South Africa, approximately 35 young supporters of those organizations took refuge in Botswana. The International Secretariat has been in contact with the Botswana government and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees regarding the status and security against repatriation afforded to this latest group of refugees, some of whom were formerly detained or barmed in South Africa. AI is presently considering a scheme for the provision of relief assistance.
The vulnerability of refugees in Botswana was vividly demonstrated during 1974. In October, Ethan Dube, an official of the Zimbabwe African Peoples' Union (ZAPU) and a Rhodesian national, was forcibly abducted from Francistown. Reports suggest that Mr Dube was kidnapped by members of the Rhodesian security forces although the Rhodesian government has denied any involvement in the affair.
Burundi
During 1974, Amnesty International adoption groups continued to work actively on the cases of six prisoners convicted of political offences at a major trial in July 1971. One of these adoptees, Ernest Basita, was placed on the AI greetings card campaign in December 1974. The following month a number of AI groups and members who sent cards to Mr Basita received replies from him
42
in which he reported that he and his companions had been set at hberty towards the end of December. The Research Department is still seeking definite proof that all the adopted Burundi prisoners have now been released.
Meanwhile, in a disturbing new development, Burundi introduced the death sentence for cannibalism in January 1975, replacing a law under which cannibalistic practices were punishable by a maximum term of 3 years' imprisonment.
Cameroun
While Amnesty International groups continued to work on seven investigation cases and two adoptions in Cameroun during the year 1974-75, a major attempt was made during December 1974 to encourage the granting of a general amnesty for convicted political prisoners and untried detainees in the country. AI hoped that such an amnesty would, if granted, cover a number of categories of prisoners, including the 74 alleged members and supporters of the banned Union des Populations du Cameroun (UPC), who received prison sentences ranging from 5 years to life at an important political trial which cuhninated in January 1971.
In a letter to President Ahmadou Ahidjo, supported by postcard appeals from AI members throughout the world. Secretary General Martin Ennals called for an amnesty for the convicted UPC prisoners and for untried poUtical prisoners held at "administrative internment camps" at Tcholliré, Yoko, Yaoundé, Douala, Maroua and elsewhere. The appeal for an amnesty received some support in the Camerounian press, and in May 1975, news reached the Research Department that up to 50 prisoners had been freed in an amnesty, including Monsignor Ndongmo, the Roman Catholic Bishop of Nkongsamba, who had been sentenced to life imprisonment in 1971.
Central African Republic
Following the arrest in January 1974 of the Secretary General of the Union Générale des Travailleurs Centrafricains Jean-Richard Sandos and his deputy J.B. Malikanga, Amnesty International groups adopted both men. Mr Sandos was released in August 1974 but subsequently re-arrested in January 1975. Group work continues on both the cases.
Chad
Amnesty International group work on 38 adoption cases, mostly persons arrested between July 1972 and March 1973 and held without charge or trial, continued during 1974-75. In August 1974,106 prisoners were released in an amnesty announced by President N'garta Tombalbaye. Among those freed were three AI adoption cases, one of whom had been the subject of a postcard campaign in November 1973.
In spite of this amnesty, the human rights situation in Chad continued to deteriorate throughout the last months of 1974. In September reports began reaching the outside world that Chadians of all walks of hfe were being forced by the government to undergo the Yondo initiation rites of President Tombalbaye's ethnic group, the Sara. Although Chad embassy officials in France denied it, reports stated that as many as 50 Chadian Christians may have died during the rites.
43
In January 1975 Chad was the subject of a world-wide postcard campaign organized by AI, which appealed to President Tombalbaye to release the hundreds of untried detainees reportedly held in poor conditions in prisons in the capital, N'Djamena, and the urban centers of Moundou and Doba.
February 1975 saw the trial in N'Djamena of 32 persons accused of having plotted the overthrow of President Tombalbaye. Although the principal accused, Madame Kaltouma Guembang, received a 7-year prison sentence at the conclusion of the trial, there were indications that the government was displeased by what it considered to be the leniency of the sentence, and a new trial was in preparation when Tombalbaye's government was overthrown in a coMp d'état on 13 April 1975.
The new regime, which took power after President Tombalbaye's death during the fighting, turned to the question of the political prisoners as a matter of priority. By the end of April 1975, according to government sources, 172 prisoners had been released, and there were no further political prisoners in Chad. Among those freed were a number of AI adoptees, but the releases coincided with the tragic news that over 70 political detainees had died in prison or been executed summarily between January 1974 and April 1975. AI is attempting to obtain a complete list of those prisoners freed and those who did not survive. Meanwhile, groups continue to handle 27 adoption cases: prisoners whose exact fate remains uncertain.
Dahomey
On 17 March 1975 the National Revolutionary Tribunal in Cotonou, the capital of Dahomey, passed death sentences on seven persons allegedly involved in a plot against the state during January 1975. Among those sentenced were former President Emile Zinsou and his brother Dr René Zinsou. Dahomeyan law provides no appeal from the decisions of the tribunal, only the Head of State having the power to exercise clemency.
Immediately on hearing of the death sentences Amnesty International Secretary General Martin Ennals. appealed to President Mathieu Kerekou by cable and letter, asking for commutation of the sentences.
Equatorial Guinea
During 1974-75, Amnesty International received disturbing reports concerning the death of political prisoners and other opponents of the government of President Macias Nguema. In June 1974, between 80 and 100 prisoners in Bata, the capital of the mainland portion of the country, were reported killed after the President alleged that they were plotting against him in prison.
In December 1974 Equatorian exiles in Europe issued a list of 319 persons whom they alleged had been executed since the country gained independence from Spanish colonial rule in 1968. Following the "suicide" of former Vice-President Edmundo Bosio in February 1975, AI Secretary General Martin Ennals appealed to President Macias Nguema to halt atrocities being inflicted on political prisoners in the country.
44
Ethiopia
During the course of the gradual military assumption of power in Ethiopia, which began in February 1974 and culminated in September 1974 in the deposing of Emperor Haile Selassie I, more than 180 persons connected with the former government or the royal family were arrested or detained. Most of the prisoners were held in the headquarters of the Ethiopian Army's Fourth Division at Addis Ababa, or in the Menelik Palace in the same city.
In September 1974 Amnesty International Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to General Aman Andom, then chairman of the ruling Dergue (Provisional Military Administration Council), asking for guarantees that those imprisoned would have the opportunity to defend themselves at a fair trial. However, in November 1974, following a power-struggle within the Dergue in which General Andom was killed, 59 former high officials and army personnel were summarily executed.
AI immediately appealed to the Dergue to halt the executions and urged that humanitarian agencies be allowed to visit the remaining prisoners in their cells. Representations were also made to the President of the United Nations General Assembly, and AI national sections whose countries had diplomatic representation in Addis Ababa were asked to take appropriate steps to save the lives of the remaining detainees by bringing world opinion to bear on their plight.
AI later sought permission through the Ethiopian Embassy in London to send a delegation to Addis Ababa to discuss human rights questions with the Ethiopian authorities, and to observe trials taking place before the special courts martial which were established by decree in November 1974. In January 1975 permission for the mission was received, and the following month AI Deputy Secretary General Hans Ehrenstrale and Deputy Head of Research John Humphreys visited Ethiopia. During the course of their mission they spoke to a number of government officials, including the Minister of Justice and the registrar of the courts martial, and attended sessions of the courts martial at the Menelik Palace.
Following the return of the delegates, a confidential report on the functioning of the courts martial, the provisions of the special penal code promulgated in November 1974, and the situation of the untried detainees was made to AI's International Executive Committee. In May 1975 an aide memoire based on this report was forwarded through the Ethiopian Embassy in London to the chairman of the Dergue.
Although releases of prisoners have taken place in Ethiopia in January 1975 and later, AI is still gravely concerned at the detention without trial of persons connected with the former government of Emperor Haile Selassie. It is also concerned at the arrest and imprisonment of students, civil servants and others who are alleged to have violated provisions of the November 1974 special penal code.
The situation in Ethiopia has been complicated since February 1975 by the upsurge of secessionist guerrilla warfare in the northern province of Eritrea, and developments in that country will require close scrutiny during the remainder of 1975 to guard against further human rights violations.
45
Gabon
Nine investigation cases continued to be handled by Amnesty International groups during 1974-75. The prisoners, who include teachers, students, and civil servants, were arrested between July and October 1972 and have been held since that time without being brought to trial. In February 1975 AI Secretary General Martin Ennals appealed to President Omar Bongo of Gabon to release the prisoners as part of a general amnesty. This initiative was supported by a postcard campaign by AI groups which have adopted prisoners in a number of French-speaking African states. During June 1975 the Research Department received reports of an amnesty, declared in the previous month, which freed over 300 prisoners. Further details of this measure are now being sought.
Guinea
Amnesty International groups continued to work on two investigation cases in Guinea; individuals held since 1971 and 1972 without being chained or brought to trial. AI is still concerned at the reportedly large numbers of prisoners held in Guinea, but lack of firm information and the sensitivity of the situation in Guinea precluded large scale work on this country during the past 12 months.
Ivory Coast
Amnesty International groups continued throughout the year to work on the cases of prisoners arrested during October and November 1970 following an uprisii^ in the Gagnoa district in the southwestern region of the Ivory Coast. Following pressure from AI for a trial for these detainees (whose existence had been denied when AI first asked the government about them) they were eventually brought to court in Gagnoa during August 1974.
Tiie trial, which was open to the public, was attended by an AI observer, Marie-Claire Picard, a French lawyer. She reported that several defendants complained that they had been beaten or otherwise maltreated while in the custody of the police, and that the legislation under which they were tried was highly repressive in nature, having been promulgated in 1964 to punish an earlier plot to overthrow the government.
Although 55 persons were acquitted at the trial, severe prison terms ranging from 5 years to life were passed on 85 others. During March 1975 AI appealed to President Felix Houphouet-Boigny of the Ivory Coast calling on him to grant a general amnesty which would cover the prisoners sentenced at the Gagnoa trial.
Kenya
Amnesty International adoption groups continued throughout the year to work on the cases of two former members of the banned opposition party the Kenya People's Union (KPU), who had been detained without trial since 1969. These two prisoners are believed to be the only remaining KPU detainees, following the release in March 1974 of a third long-term detainee who had been the subject of an AI postcard campaign in February of that year. A third AI group continued to handle, as an investigation case, a prisoner who has been held without trial since June 1971, until news was received of his release in May 1975.
46
Lesotho
In July 1974 an Amnesty International delegate visited Lesotho to investigate the situation of more than 170 supporters of the opposition Basutoland Congress Party (BCP), all of whom had been detained at the time of January 1974 disturbances. During the mission, the delegate was allowed to visit the detainees at Maseru Central Prison and to arrange for them to receive study materials purchased with funds provided by AI. AI then began to take up the detainees as investigation cases.
A total of 66 detainees were released unconditionally in October, but 32 others were charged with treason—a capital offence in Lesotho—and told that they would be put on summary trial the following month. At AI's request, Barend van Niekerk, Professor of Law at Natal University, went to Lesotho in November to observe the trial.
His report contained substantial information concerning atrocities alleged to have been committed by the police and other officials against BCP supporters in January 1974 and about the brutal treatment of those BCP detainees who were taken into custody at that time. The International Secretariat brought these allegations to the attention of the Lesotho High Commissioner in Ix)ndon, and AI wrote to the Prime Minister, Chief Leabua Jonathan, on several occasions requesting the establishment of an independent commission of inquiry.
The first "treason trial", involving 32 BCP members, was concluded in February 1975. Fifteen of the defendants were convicted of treason and received prison sentences ranging from 4 to 9 years. Five others were found guilty of sedition and sentenced to terms of 3 or 4 years' imprisonment. The remaining defendants were either acquitted of all charges or convicted of minor offences and given suspended prison sentences. Chief Justice Justice J.T. Mapetla, whose conduct of the proceedings has been described as exemplary, found that the long history of official harassment to which BCP supporters had been subjected was a factor which had to be weighed in mitigation.
The second "treason trial" of BCP supporters was in progress at this writing. After the release of a further 28 detainees in January 1975, the remaining 49 detainees were also charged with treason. However, several days before this second trial was due to begin in April 1975, charges against 18 of the accused were withdrawn and nine other defendants were released during the early stages of the trial. Professor van Niekerk again attended part of the trial as an AI observer..
Malagasy Republic
The only two cases in the Malagasy Republic (formerly known as Madagascar) being handled by Amnesty International groups—both investigation cases-were released early in 1975. However, the International Secretariat has been paying close attention during 1974-75 to the issue of political trials on the island.
Reports late in 1974 said that 60 persons were to be charged with subversion in Tananarive, the Malagasy capital. They included Paul Ramahavita, a former government minister. They were chaiged with forming an organization, the Komity Fivendranan'ny Tanindrana (KFT), allegedly aimed at the overthrow of the military government of General Gabriel Ramanantsoa.
Preparations were going ahead for the dispatch of a mission when, in December
47
1974,	an abortive coup against the Ramanantsoa government took place, plunging the Malagasy Republic into a political crisis. On 25 January 1975 the government of General Ramanantsoa was dissolved, and political power was passed to the Minister of National Defence and Planning, Colonel Wchard Ratsimandrava. On
11 February 1975, Colonel Ratsimandrava was assassinated.
Subsequently rebels who had been beseiged in an army camp on the outskirts of Tananarive since the December coup attempt were crushed by the armed forces, and a new military regime was established under the leadership of General Gilles Andriamahazo. In March 1975 more than 300 persons, including former President Philibert Tsiranana, were brought to trial in Tananarive on charges of complicity in the assassination of Colonel Ratsimandrava. The AI mission, originally scheduled for late 1974, is being reconsidered in the light of these latest developments.
Malawi
An Amnesty International appeal for a general amnesty on 14 May 1974 (Kamuzu Day—a national holiday) was specifically rejected by President Hastings Banda of Malawi. Nonetheless, about 40 political detainees were released on that date. Further AI initiatives were taken to encourage a general amnesty on 6 July 1974—the 10th anniversary of Malawi's independence-but no such act of clemency was granted.
During the remaining months of 1974 AI heard of the release of a number of prisoners, but the general human rights situation in Malawi continued to deteriorate. In a speech made during September 1974, Dr Banda confirmed that a number of individuals had been executed for political crimes of violence. More people were detained, adding to the more than one thousand persons who are now held without trial at various prisons and detention centers in Malawi: specifically Mikuyu Detention Center near Zomba, Zomba and Lilongwe Prisons, and Chichiri Remand Prison, Blantyre.
Prison conditions in the main detention center at Mikuyu are reportedly very bad, with inadequate diet, medical attention and facilities for exercise. During the year AI received unconfirmed reports of the deaths in detention of 10 prisoners. It also received eye-witness accounts of the poor prison conditions from released European detainees who have reached Europe.
Mali
Amnesty International groups continued their adoption work for 38 prisoners detained without trial since the overthrow of Mali's last civilian government by a military coup in November 1968. In August 1974, AI adopted 14 other persons who had been arrested two months earlier for circulating a pamphlet in Bamako, the Malien capital, criticizing a constitutional referendum which had been organized by the ruling Conseil Militaire de Libération National (CMLN). In April
1975,	these prisoners were brought to trial in Bamako and received prison terms.
In November 1974, AI launched a concerted campaign for a general amnesty
for all political prisoners in Mali, focused on the sixth aimiversary of the accession to power of the CMLN. One month after the campaign. President Moussa Traoré annoiinreH that 1975 would be a year of national reconciliation, which would see
48
the release of the political detainees.
AI groups then urged the CMLN to include Al-adopted prisoners in this overall amnesty. On 2 June 1975,15 political prisoners were riîleased, presumably as part of the amnesty. They included associates of former President Modibo Keita whose government was overthrown in the 1968 coup. All those released were AI adoptees.
Mauritania
Although the 20 Mauritanian prisoners taken up as investigation cases by Amnesty International groups during 1973 were released on provisional liberty in March 1974, a new wave of arrests later took place in the country, apparently in response to the distribution of an anti-government leaflet. The detainees, who were reportedly being held at the Prison Civile de Beyla in the capital, Nouakchott, were mostly young people and students, and included some of the
1973	detainees.
By early 1975 none of the prisoners had been charged or brought to trial, and in consequence, between January and March 1975 AI adopted 30 of the detainees. In June AI learned of the release of these prisoners on "provisional liberty".
Morocco
During 1974-75 Amnesty International was principally concerned with three groups of prisoners in Morocco. The first consisted of members or supporters of the opposition party Union Nationale des Forces Populaires (UNFP) who had been tried on charges of subversion at two major political trials: at Marrakesh in 1971 and at Kenitra in 1973.
The second included leftwing students and teachers who had been sentenced to long prison terms following a trial in Casablanca in 1973. The third consisted of leftwing activists who had been arrested early in 1973 and never charged or brought before a court.
By mid-1974 AI groups were handling more than 180 adoption or investigation cases in these three categories, and a new wave of arrests beginning in November
1974	saw the imprisonment of more than 100 individuals. Some of the latter had been sentenced to hfe imprisonment in absentia at the 1973 Casablanca trial and had been in hiding since that time. Reports of the torture of political detainees continued to reach the Research Department, and in December 1974 AI received confirmed reports that Professor Bekhali, a professor of philosophy at Casablanca, had died during the previous month after torture.
Against thtô background, AI has intensified its work on Morocco, taking up further adoption and investigation cases. In August 1974 the Research Department produced a new background paper on Morocco. Coordination group work proved most valuable, and made it possible to plan a concerted campaign during 1975 aimed at encouraging a general amnesty on the birthday of King Hassan II on 9 July 1975.
There are some hopeful signs, however, that the human rights situation in Morocco may be improving. In spite of continuing arrests and reports of torture, the Moroccan government has moved during the past year towards a rapprochement with the leading opposition parties, mainly in an attempt to build
49
national unity over the issue of Morocco's claim to the territory in the Sahara presently administerad by Spain.
During the summer and autumn of 1974 many members and supporters of the UNFP, including a number of AI adoptees, were released from prison. May 1975 saw further releases and light or suspended sentences passed on detainees held at Casablanca. Most of the leading opposition parties, some of which were allowed to hold public annual conventions for the first time in years, have called on the Moroccan government to show its good faith by granting a general amnesty to political prisoners.
AI has been encouraged by these moves, and by the appreciation which Moroccan parties and individual prisoners have expressed of AI's work in their country. In January 1975, for example, the Union Socialiste des Forces Populaires (USFF-formerly the Rabat branch of the UNFP) sent a cable to the Intemational Secretariat expressing the party's "sincerest thanks" for the "courageous action" which AI had taken in the past on behalf of imprisoned Moroccans.
Mozambique
In September 1974, Portuguese authorities handed over political control in Mozambique to the unified liberation movement Front for the Liberation of Mozambique (FRELIMO).
Although a general amnesty for political prisoners in Mozambique was granted soon after the Portuguese coup d'état in April 1974, a considerable number of people have been detained by FRELIMO since then. Many of those arrested are presently being held at a FRELIMO-run camp in southern Tanzania, where they have been seen twice by journalists. Samora Machel, President of FRELIMO, gave a public undertaking that the prisoners would not be maltreated and stated that it was FRELIMO's intention to rehabilitate them into Mozambique society.
In June 1975 Amnesty International sent a representative to Mozambique to discuss the continuing detention of these prisoners and to request that a general amnesty be granted to mark the achievement of independence on 25 June 1975.
Namibia
A series of much publicized human rights violations focused international attention on the Namibian situation during the latter half of 1974 and increased pressure for the withdrawal of the South African administration in accordance with the 1966 United Nations' decision to terminate South Africa's mandate over the country.
In June 1974, Ezriel Taapopi and Josef Kashea, two young officials of the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO), who had been detained some months before, were charged with offences under the Terrorism Act and put on summary trial in Windhoek. In a joint mission with the Washington-based Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, Amnesty Intemational sent British lawyer Cedric Thomberry to observe the trial and report on the situation of other political detainees in Namibia.
Both the accused were ultimately convicted but received minimum sentences, and other SWAPO leaders who had been detained were then charged with less
50
serious, even trivial, offences. Thomas Komati, who had been held in solitary confinement for almost six months, was eventually prosecuted for having scratched political slogans on the walls of his cell. Like all the SWAPO leaders who had been detained, Mr Komati alleged that he had been tortured at the hands of the South African police.
The situation in Namibia, and particularly in Ovamboland, remained tense throughout the year. The public flogging of SWAPO supporters by the South African appointed Ovambo chiefs, which had aroused a storm of international protest, was gradually suspended and finally forbidden by a ruling of the Appellate Division of the South African Supreme Court in February 1975. AI's Campaign for the Abolition of Torture published a selection of affidavits written by some of the victims of the floggings in mid-1974, and in August 1974, AI submitted a communication to UN Secretary General Kurt Waldheim "concerning a consistent pattern of gross and reliably attested violations of human rights perpetrated by the government of South Africa upon inhabitants of Namibia". However, one factor which also influenced the decline of public flogging in Ovamboland was the mass exodus of SWAPO supporters which occurred in the last months of 1974: an estitnated 3,000 people left Namibia and sought refuge in Zambia.
Niger
In April 1974 the government of President Hamani Diori was overthrown by a military coup, just as Amnesty International was preparing to take up the cases of teachers, students and secondary school pupils who had been imprisoned for political offences in December 1973. Although the coup released political prisoners , President Diori and members and supporters oï \i\% Parti Progressiste Nigérien (PPN) were detained. In a letter to the new President of Niger, Colonel Seyni Kountché, in December 1974, AI Secretary General Martin Ennals expressed the organization's concern at the continuing restriction of ex-President Hamani Diori and others.
Nigeria
During the first half of 1974, Amnesty International groups continued to work on the investigation cases of 13 former members of the Biafran armed forces who had been detained without trial since the end of the Nigerian Civil War in January 1970. Groups were asked to appeal for a general amnesty on 1 October 1974, Nigeria's Independence Day.
In a speech that day, the Nigerian Head of State, General Yakubu Go won, announced that all military detainees would be released. Since that time the Research Department has heard of the release of a number of the investigation case prisoners, although it is believed that the promised amnesty has yet to be implemented fully.
In the speech which announced the impending release of the military detainees, General Gowon retracted a former pledge that his military regime would give way to a civilian government by 1976. This provoked unrest in some political and academic circles in Nigeria, and several critics of the policies of the Federal Military Government were detained without trial under the provisions of the 1967
51
Emergency Regulations. AI adopted these prisoners and the journalists, academics and trade unionists arrested in January and February 1975 following unrest over wage awards to government employees. The use of the emei^ency regulations by the Federal government has come under strong criticism from members of the Nigerian judiciary.
Rhodesia
The changing situation in southern Africa, stimulated particularly by the progress of Angola and Mozambique towards African rule, has brought about the growing isolation of the white regime in Rhodesia during the past year. The South African government's policy of improving relations with the African states north of the Zambesi, has placed Prime Minister Ian Smith's government under increasing pressure to reach a constitutional settlement with the African National Council (ANC), led by Bishop Abel Muzorewa.
However, while engaging in protracted negotiations with the ANC, and even going as far as to release a number of detained African nationalist leaders, the ruling Rhodesia Front government has continued to introduce increasingly repressive legislation and to deal ruthlessly with any persons suspected of involvement with the,guerrilla campaign being waged in the northeastern parts of the country. One former detainee, who was released during December 1974 and who is adopted by Amnesty International, was, at this writing (May 1975) to be tried in camera on charges of recruiting guerrillas. If convicted, he faces a mandatory death penalty under a recently introduced amendment to the Law and Order (Maintenance) Act.
In June 1974, AI received news of the closure of Gonakudzingwa (Sengwe) detention camp and the transfer of detainees to Salisbury Remand Prison. During the same month, Dr Edson Sithole, the publicity secretary of the ANC and a former Al-adopted prisoner, was re-detained by the Rhodesian authorities after a temporary breakdown in negotiations between the government and the ANC.
However, Edson Sithole and 12 other nationalist leaders were released from detention in early December 1974 in order to participate in settlement talks in Lusaka, Zambia, in which heads of state and other representatives of the governments of Botswana, Tanzania, Zambia and South Africa played an active part. At the talks, it was agreed that, as a preliminary to more detailed negotiations, the Smith government would release political detainees and that a ceasefire should be observed between govemment forces and nationalist guerrillas operating in the northeast. It was also decided that Rhodesia's two liberation movements, the Zimbabwe African Peoples' Union (ZAPU) and the Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU), would unite under the umbrella of an enlarged ANC and the leadership of Bishop Muzorewa.
Before the announcement of the agreement, the International Secretariat had cabled Mr Smith urging him to release all political detainees as a mark of his desire for a just and equitable settlement. After Mr Smith had broadcast his decision to "release the African leaders from detention and restriction, and their followers as well", a further cable was sent asking for clarification as to whether the amnesty would extend to all of the 350 political detainees known to be imprisoned in Rhodesia. Messages of support were also sent to the African heads of state and
52
nationalist leaders who had been involved in the negotiations'and, when it was known that he was one of those freed, to Daniel Madzimbamuto, an AI adoptee who had been detained without trial since 1959.
Regrettably, the Smith government's amnesty did not include all political detainees, and of the 80 believed to have been released, many had their freedom of movement restricted. Nor did the Lusaka agreement bring an effective end to the warfare in northeastern Rhodesia. Apparently for this reason, the Rhodesian authorities stated in early January 1975 that no more detainees would be freed until guerilla activities ceased. Since that time, the ANC has argued that no meaningful talks can be held until the remainii^ detainees are freed and the authorities stop executing captured guerrillas and other people sentenced to death for political offences. The only response of the Smith government has been to announce that details of future hangings will no longer be made available to the public.
In March 1975, the Reverend Ndabaningi Sithole, President of ZANU and a member of the executive of the enlarged ANC since his release from detention in December, was re-arrested and accused of plotting the assassination of a number of his political associates in the ANC. New regulations were hurriedly introduced establishing a special court—in reahty, little more than a detention review tribunal. Reverend Sithole was further accused of ultimate responsibility for atrocities alleged to have been committed by ZANU guerrillas.
When Reverend Sithole appeared before the tribunal, no evidence was introduced to support the original assassination charge. An AI observer who was present, American lawyer E. Clinton Bamberger, described the proceedings as a "sham" and a blatant attempt on the part of the Smith government to create friction between ZANU and the rest of the ANC. Mr Bamberger went on to characterize the partcipation of Rhodesia's acting Chief Justice in the proceedings as "a prostitution of the judiciary".
AI has more than 250 adopted prisoners in Rhodesia. During the year, several of these prisoners have obtained, with the assistance of their adoption groups, offers of educational places in Western Europe. It is hoped that some may soon be freed to take up these places.
AI operates a considerable relief and prisoner rehabilitation program in Rhodesia using funds made available to the International Secretariat by the Swedish Section and by means of individual group contributions.
Senegal
In April 1974 the Senegalese government announced an amnesty for political prisoners. This resulted in the release of some individuals who had been held for more than 10 years and in the subsequent claim by the Senegalese authorities that no political prisoners were held in their country.
In late December 1974, however, a new wave of arrests began in academic and professional circles, and by early January a total of 19 persons were being held. Nine were later released on bail, but the remaining 10 were kept in custody and ultimately charged in April 1975 with the publicat'on of an illegal pamphlet Xare-Bi (The Struggle). The most prominent of those appearing in court was Landing Savané, a well-known Senegalese demographer of international standing,
53
who had been arrested on 18 March 1975 when he returned to Senegal. Prison terms of up to 2 years were passed on the accused.
At the time of writing (May 1975), Amnesty International was gathering data on these prisoners. AI was particularly disturbed by strong allegations that some of the prisoners arrested in December 1974 and January 1975 were subjected to torture during interrogation.
Sierra Leone
Following a bomb attack on the residence of Minister of Finance C.A. Kamara Taylor in the Sierra Leone capital Freetown on 30 July 1974, the government issued detention orders under the Public Emergency Regulations against some 35 people. A number of these were prominent political personalities who had been previously detained in 1970 when a new opposition party, the United Democratic Party (UDP), broke away from the ruling All People's Congress (APC). Several were former Amnesty International adoptees during their detentions from 1970 until 1973.
At the end of August 1974, 15 people appeared in court in Freetown charged with treason and plotting the unlawful overthrow of the government. In view of the grave nature of the charges and the possibility of the death sentence being imposed, Al Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote in early October to President Siaka Stevens appealing to him to ensure that the accused received a fair and public trial.
The trial did in fact take place in public and was amply reported in the local press. The accused also received the assistance of defence lawyers. In mid-November, however, all 15 were found guilty and sentenced to death. AI immediately appealed to President Stevens to commute the sentences. The 15 appealed to the Sierra Leone Court of Appeals, which rejected all but one of their appeals in May 1975. The 14 persons still under sentence of death are now appealing to the Sierra Leone Supreme Court.
In addition to the 15 persons brought before the courts, more than 80 individuals were detained under the Public Emergency Regulations in the wake of the bombing. Many have since been released, but the Research Department has taken up as investigation cases those few persons about whom sufficient data has been available.
Somalia
In October 1974 Amnesty International adopted 13 teachers who were sentenced to prison terms ranging from 7 to 10 years in April 1974 for organizing and taking part in an illegal strike. Under the National Security Law of 10 September 1970, all strikes are banned.
A further trial took place in Somalia in October 1974, when former Prime Minister Mohammed Ibrahim Egal was sentenced to 30 years' imprisonment and a heavy fine on charges of corruption. Mr Egal had been an AI investigation case during his imprisonment without trial from October 1969 (when his government was overthrown by a military coup) until April 1973. In November 1974, Al Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to President Muhammad Siad Barre, head of Somalia's Supreme Revolutionary Council for clarification of the exact charges
54
which had been brought against Mr Egal and the nature of the court before which he was tried.
In January 1975 10 men were executed by firing squad in Mogadishu, the Somali capital, after having been found guilty in the National Security Court of "exploiting religion to create national disunity and subverting state authority". They were aUeged to have mounted a campaign of "false propaganda" against a decision earlier in the month by the Supreme Revolutionary Council to grant equal rights to women in Somalia, which is a predominantly Islamic country. AI immediately cabled its protest at these shbo tings to President Siad Bar re, denouncing the executions as a fl^rant violation of the right to life clause of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
South Africa
Despite the leading role of the South African government in bringing about renewed negotiations for the settlement of the Rhodesian issue and some diminution of inter-racial tension in southern Africa as a whole, 1974-75 has seen little improvement in the treatment of opponents of apartheid within the Republic of South Africa itself.
Thirteen young supporters of the "black consciousness" movement in South Africa were, as of this writing (May 1975), awaiting trial under the notorious Terrorism Act, which carries a minimum mandatory sentence of 5 years' imprisonment upon conviction and a maximum sentence of death. More than 20 other members of the South African Students' Organization (SASO) and the Black Peoples' Convention (BPC), the organizations which have fostered the concepts of black consciousness and self-reliance in South Africa, remain in detention in Pretoria with no knowledge of whether they are to be charged also or eventually released.
All of these people were arrested after the banning of a pro-FRELIMO (the liberation movement in Mozambique) rally which had been organized by SASO and BPC and which was scheduled to take place in Durban on 25 September 1974, the 10th anniversary of the start of the FRELIMO-led war for the liberation of Mozambique. A crowd which gathered at the place of the proposed rally in defiance of the government's ban was forcibly dispersed by the police and a number of persons were charged with riotous assembly.
Thereafter, a series of raids was launched throughout the Republic on the homes of known supporters of the "black consciousness" movement, during the course of which most of the leaders were detained or driven into exile in Botswana. Several of those still uncharged have now been detained for more than seven months and many allegations of torture and ill-treatment have been made. Legal action on behalf of five detainees to restrain the security police from further assaulting or unlawfully interrogating them failed when it came before the Supreme Court in November 1974. Amnesty International has taken up the cases of all those who have been detained and is planning to send an observer to the trial.
In October 1974, the International Secretariat cabled South African Prime Minister John Vorster urging him to exercise clemency in the case of Winnie Mandela, wife of African nationalist leader Nelson Mandela, who is currently serving a life sentence on Robben Island. Mrs Mandela, together with Peter Magubane,
55
had been sentenced to 6 months' imprisonment for contravening the terms of a "banning order" issued under the Suppression of Communism Act. Mrs Mandela served the sentence and was released in March 1975.
The International Secretariat, like the United Nations and many other international organizations, wrote to Mr Vorster in January 1975 to ask for the release of Bram Fischer, former leader of the South African Communist Party who was jailed for life in 1966 and who was reported at the end of 1974 to be suffering from terminal cancer. He was conditionally released for a period of one month in early March 1975 and died shortly after this period had been extended for a further two months. A further request was made to the South African government for the release of all political prisoners suffering from chronic ill health.
AI is working on more than 150 adoption and investigation cases in South Africa at the present time. These include convicted prisoners, prisoners awaiting trial, detainees, banned persons and people who have been "banished" to the so-called "resettlement areas". In addition, AI operates a considerable relief program using funds made available to the International Secretariat by the Swedish Section and by means of individual contributions.
Sudan
Following the mass arrests of September-December 1973, an amnesty in March 1974 freed most of the prisoners who had been taken up as investigation cases by Amnesty International groups. However, according to reports reaching the Research Department, more than 100 persons remained in intermittent detention under the provisions of the National Security Law promulgated in June 1973.
Since detentions under this law are nominally limited to a period of six months and ten days, it has proven difficult to obtain data on arrested persons in time for AI's traditional group adoption technique to become effective. In January and February 1975 new steps were taken by the Research Department to overcome this obstacle and to ensure that information about prisoners reaches the International Secretariat with as little delay as possible.
Detainees now held in Sudan include members or supporters of political parties covering a wide ideological spectrum, since the ruling Sudanese SociaUst Union is the only legally-recognized party in the country. The Sudanese Communist Party, the Umma Party, the Moslem Brothers (Islamic Charter Front) and the National Unionist Party have all suffered the arrest and detention of their leaders and alleged supporters.
The main prison used to house the detainees is Kober Prison in the northern part of the capital Khartoum, where conditions for political prisoners are reported to have deteriorated since the prison began to be used for detainees earlier this decade. No reading material apart from the Koran is allowed, and detainees are not permitted access to newspapers or radios. No visits to political detainees are permitted, and diet and bedding are inadequate. Prisons in Omdurman, Kassala, Port Sudan, El Obeid and E! Fasher have also been used to house political detainees. Prisoners transferred to El Obeid from Khartoum late in 1974 were reported to have been beaten and to have had their heads shaved.
56
Swaziland
Amnesty International's activities in Swaziland have focused on the situation of refugees from South Africa. In mid-1974, AI learned of the arrest and detention of V.A. Shange, who had been associated with the opposition Ngwane National Liberatory Congress (NNLC) since his arrival in Swaziland some years before.
After representations had been made to the Swaziland government and to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), Mr Shange and two other detained refugees were released and allowed to take up offers of settlement in other countries. More recently, AI has taken up the cases of two more refugees from South Africa who are known to have been detained in Swaziland.
Tanzania
Amnesty International groups continued to handle more than 60 adoption and investigation cases in Tanzania, both on the mainland and on the offshore islands of Zanzibar and Pemba. These prisoners include individuals sentenced to death or to long prison terms at a trial which culminated on Zanzibar in May 1974, and which stemmed from arrests made after the assassination of Zanzibar! President Sheikh Abeid Karume in April 1972.
In May 1974 AI appealed to President Julius Nyerere of Tanzania to ensure that the death sentences which had been passed at the Zanzibar trial would not be carried out. Meanwhile, the convicted men are carrying their appeals against conviction and sentence to the High Court in Zanzibar, and ultimately to President Aboud Jumbe (President Karume's successor) who has the final decision on the matter.
A number of the accused who were tried in the Zanzibar treason trial between May 1973 and May 1974 are in fact in detention on mainland Tanzania, the government having refused to return them to Zanzibar for trial in view of the lack of guarantees that the proceedings would be fair. In December 1974, 10 long-term detainees were released by the Tanzanian authorities, including five persons who had been held since the killing of Sheikh Abeid Karume but who had been acquitted in absentia by the Zanzibar court. Fourteen others allegedly involved in the Karume assassination plot remain in detention on the mainland. They include Abdul Rahman Babu, the former Tanzanian Minister for Economic Affairs and Development Planning, who was sentenced to death by the Zanzibar court in May 1974.
Prisons in Dar es Salaam, the Tanzanian capital, and in the mainland towns of Tabora, Mwanza, and Tanga, hold an unknown number of untried prisoners detained under the provisions of the Preventive Detention Act (1962). These prisoners include relatives of former Tanzanian cabinet minister Oscar Kambona, now in self-imposed exile; refugees from other African states who have become suspect in the eyes of the Tanzanian authorities; and Tanzanians suspected of subversion or other crimes. Individuals among them are adopted as soon as the Research Department has sufficient data on them.
Al-adopted prisoners on mainland Tanzania were released in presidential amnesties in December 1974 and April 1975.
During the year the authorities on Zanzibar showed a curiously ambivalent
57
attitude towards the imposition of the death sentence for the crime of smuggUng cloves, the island's main cash crop. In August 1974 President Jumbe pardoned 15 clove smugglers who had been caught in 1972 and subsequently sentenced to death. But in March 1975 four people were sentenced to death for clove smuggling after pleading guilty in the Zanzibar High Court. The sentences have yet to be carried out at the time of writing (May 1975).
An AI adoption group in Denmark continued to handle the case of Nasreen Mohammed Hussein, a Zanzibari woman of Persian descent who was abducted and forcibly married in September 1970 on the orders of the ruling Revolutionary Council. In November 1974 a group of women members of the Danish Parliament appealed to Presidents Jumbe and Nyerere to speed her release.
Togo
During early 1974 Amnesty International groups worked on the cases of two persons who had been held without trial in Lomé, the Togolese capital, since August 1973. In June 1974 one of these prisoners was freed.
Sixteen political prisoners were released in October 1974, but a number still remain in prison. The Research Department is trying to obtain further information about them so that their adoption may be considered.
Tunisia
In May 1975 Amnesty International groups were working actively on more than 40 adoption and investigation cases in Tunisia. A number of these cases date from a wave of arrests which began in November 1973, while others concern individuals who were detained in September and October 1974.
Political prisoners are held in the Prison Centrale in Tunis, at the prison of Boij el Roumi near Bizerte,and, in the case of women, at La Manouba prison. Conditions in all three prisons are reported to be poor, with insufficient diet and medical care.
During February 1975 political detainees in the three prisons staged a hunger strike in order to obtain the status of "politicals", the abolition of soUtary confinement and other concessions. Simultaneously AI launched a postcard campaign on behalf of a long-term prisoner, Ahmed Ben Othman, who has been severely tortured. Reports in March 1975 said that the prisoners had succeeded in gaining some concessions and that Mr Ben Othman's sohtary confinement had been lifted.
A major political trial took place in Tunis during August 1974, involving 202 persons charged with plotting against the internal security of the state, reconstituting a banned organization and diffusing false information likely to disturb the public order. Monique Desforges, a French lawyer, attended the trial as AI's observer, but was expelled as were all other judicial observers. A further trial, involving some individuals who were given suspended sentences or sentenced in absentia at the August trial, occurred in late March 1975. The AI Research Department is at present assembling data on the prisoners sentenced in these two trials with a view towards adopting them.
58
Uganda
Consistent reports of violations of human rights and flouting of the rule of law continue to reach Amnesty International regarding Uganda, where the major problem continues to be the "disappearance" of opponents of the government of President Idi Amin, rather than political imprisonment as such.
Following a report by AI in May 1974 on political murders in Uganda and a well-documented study of the breakdown of the rule of law in that country by the International Commission of Jurists the following month, the Ugandan government set up a commission of inquiry to look into the "disappearances" of Ugandans since General Amin seized power in January 1971.
Meanwhile reports of politically-motivated killings continued. In November 1974,15 members of the Ugandan armed forces were reportedly killed in a revolt against the Amin government. Two months later the international press reported that up to 600 Ugandans had been massacred near the eastern Ugandan town of Moroto.
In March 1975 General Amin introduced a decree stipulating the death sentence by firing squad for economic crimes such as embezzlement, smuggling and corruption, thus raising the possibility that public executions, such as those which took place in Uganda early in 1973, might be revived. On 1 April 1975, the Ugandan authorities arrested a British university lecturer, Denis Hills. He was charged with treason and sentenced to public execution by a military tribunal in June 1975. AI cabled the Organization of African Unity and several African heads of state, asking them to appeal to President Amin for clemency for Mr Hills.
After postponing the execution briefly during an unsuccessful conciliation attempt by two British government emissaries, General Amin announced during a visit to Zaire at the end of June that he had decided to spare the life of Mr Hills following mediation by his host, President Mobuto Sese Seko.
Zaire
On 25 November 1974 President Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire announced a general amnesty for all political prisoners and political exiles. He told a public gathering that he wished Zaire to be a "country with no prisons". Amnesty International Secretary General Martin Ennals sent a cable of congratulations to the President.
Several exiles have since returned to Zaire although there are unconfirmed reports that at least one prominent exiled politician who returned to Zaire under the amnesty has since been placed under house arrest.
Zambia
Late in 1974, Zambia took the initiative in seeking to reduce the dangers of racial confrontation and to bring greater peace to southern Africa. As a result, Lusaka became the meeting place, and President Kenneth Kaunda the host, for negotiators in search of effective political settlements in Angola, in Mozambique and in Rhodesia.
However, if Zambian diplomacy has been instrumental in promoting peaceful change in southern Africa and, incidentally, in obtaining the release of approximately 80 long-term detainees in Rhodesia, there is considerable concern
59
about the situation within Zambia itself. Information reaching the Internationa! Secretariat suggests that up to 100 Zambians may currently be detained under the Preservation of Public Security Regulations. Groups of Namibians and Rhodesians and several individuals of other nationalities are also known to be held as detainees or prohibited immigrants.
Twenty-one such refugees, who had been taken up as investigation cases by Amnesty International after three years in detention without trial, were included among a group of 40 detained Rhodesians who left Zambia in October 1974 in order to accept educational places offered by the British government. Some weeks later, two Europeans whose cases had been taken up by AI were released after having been detained without trial for the greater part of a year. However, two South Africans arrested in early 1974 but subsequently acquitted of espionage charges in the Zambian courts have still not been released.
Other reports reaching AI indicate that the Zambian authorities have continued to allow the use of torture. Various Zambians and prisoners of other nationalities are believed to have been severely tortured during 1974. More recently, the detention and interrogation of suspects in connection with the assassination of the exiled Rhodesian nationalist leader Herbert Chitepo has given rise to serious allegations of abuse and maltreatment.
Accordingly, while welcoming President Kaunda's establishment of an intemational commission of inquiry into the circumstances of Mr Chitepo's death, AI urged the Zambian President to intervene personally to ensure that suspects receive fair and humane treatment.
The Americas
The Americas include three distinct regions: Latin America, the United States of America and the English-speaking Caribbean. Diverse in their human elements, cultural heritages and legal systems, yet politically interrelated, all except Cuba are members of the Organization of American States (OAS). A major political issue in the hemisphere during the p^t year has been the move to restore to Cuba its membership of the OAS, tom which it was excluded in 1961. This has not yet been achieved, but several countries have unilaterally re-established diplomatic relations with Cuba.
Amnesty International has maintained its close and fruitful working relationship with the OAS Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, in particular on the subject of disappearances and political assassinations in Guatemala.
Disappearances and other forms of extra-legal detentions, resulting in torture and often assassinations, are a dramatic feature of the human rights scene in Latin America, and they appear to be on the increase. One form they take is that of officially unacknowledged arrest and detention incommunicado in an unknown place for an initial period. It is during this time that torture is likely to occur (for example, Chile, Mexico, Uruguay and Nicaragua). In their most serious form, they entail the abduction of people by organized death squads which operate systematically and seemingly unchecked by the authorities. The apparent impunity with which the death squads operate has given rise to serious allegations that representatives of police and other authorities condone, or even are unofficially involved in, the activities of such groups (Guatemala, Brazil and Argentina are examples).
It is ironic and deserves to be pointed out that this high incidence of unofficial executions takes place in Spanish-speaking America, which has virtually abolished capital punishment in legislation. Anglo-America, on the oiher hand, has preserved, and even re-introduced, the judicial death penalty and also carried out several executions during the past year (the Bahamas, Trinidad, Jamaica).
With the exception of Paraguay-and to a certain extent Brazil, Chile and Haiti - the number of identifiable long-term prisoners of conscience does not appear to be very high in Latin America. Most prisoners of conscience (i.e. those representing peaceful political dissent) tend to suffer detentions of comparatively
61
short duration, but on a very large scale (for example, Uruguay). In some countries they are given the option of exile, which in practice, however, often equals expulsion from their own country (Bolivia, Peru, Chile, Uruguay and Argentina are examples).
Some sectors of political opposition in Latin American countries pursue their goals by violent means, and governments can with cause point to the attacks on military establishments, kidnappings and executions committed by their violent opponents. AI opposes all executions, whether officiai or non-official, but takes no overall moral position vis-à-vis persons throughout the world who use violence as (what they may consider) a last resort. AI recognizes the problems faced by governments in such situations, yet also maintains that all prisoners should be treated in a humane fashion by all parties to the confiict. One of AI's major concerns in Latin America is, however, that government ^encies themselves resort to illegal methods of detention and interrogation in their attempt to maintain law and order. One cannot uphold the law by breaking it.
The most serious and general concern of AI throughout Latin America is the lack of legal safeguards at the time of arrest, whether in the cases of prisoners of conscience or of other political prisoners. This failure to apply the most fundamental norms of legal and humanitarian conduct towards detainees can only encourue maltreatment and torture. To meet the urgent need for international pressure in such cases, the Latin America department has, in conjunction with the Campaign for the Abolition of Torture, developed new action techniques and encouraged the establishment of new structures among the membership. This is additional to the continuing work of adoption groups.
A Colombian jurist went to Ecuador in September 1974 on behalf of AI and the International Commission of Jurists to investigate the case of one AI adoptee and the workings of the special tribunals responsible for his and other cases of a poUtical nature. Researchers have also briefed a number of delegations and observers to trials, particularly in the case of Chile. A submission on Chile has also been made to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights. Further material to supplement an earlier submission on Brazil has also been presented to the commission.
More attention has also been paid to the importance of keeping individuals and organizations within Latin America informed about APs concern and activities. AI's first field secretary for Latin America was sent there in late 1974, and the secretariat's Information and Publications department continues to produce a bulletin in Spanish every two months, containing news of AI's worldwide activities. This is distributed to radio stations, newspapers and organizations and individuals throughout Latin America.
The purpose of these efforts is to give moral support to those who within their own country — and often at great personal risk — work for the defence of human rights and to convey to them that human rights transcend geographical and political frontiers and are the concern of the international community.
The Americas department is currently handUng 732 adoption and investigation cases.
62
Argentina
Political tensions that began during the administrationof President Juan Domingo Perón and deepened after his death in July 1974 have created a serious and unusually complex human rights situation in Argentina.
In August 1974, Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to President Maria Estela Perón urging stricter control of detention procedures to avoid occurrences of maltreatment and torture. Mr Ennals called for an inquiry into the allegations that had been made and referred, in particular, to the situation of the large numbers of Latin American refugees who had come to Argentina after the coup d'état in Chile, in September 1973.
In September 1974, a tragic event confirmed the lack of effective safeguards for refugees in Argentina: five Uruguayans, of whom one was under the protection of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, were kidnapped by a group of men in civilian clothes claiming to be police. Three of the Uruguayans were later found dead. In a press statement, AI again called for increased protection for such vulnerable sectors of the community and for an inquiry into those murders committed by para-poUce or vigilante groups.
In an effort to curb violent opposition, severe security legislation was introduced in September 1974, followed by the declaration of a state of siege in November 1974. The official figures of persons placed "at the disposal of the Executive Power" was in the region of 500 towards the end of 1974, and 1,117 in March 1975. No legal data are available on such preventive detention, but it appears that the large majority of these persons represent peaceful dissent and themselves condemn violent methods.
Although preventive detention is fully constitutional under the provisions of the state of siege, AI is watching closely the extent and duration of detention and has already allocated 19 such cases to AI groups for further investigation.
Prominent among the detainees are those lawyers who act as counsel for political prisoners. Their detention represents an infringement of the very principle of the right to defence. AI has provided information on some 50 lawyers in this situation to lawyers' and legal bodies and has allocated some of these cases to AI groups for further investigation.
During the past year, AI received numerous allegations of torture of detainees in police or military custody. In several cases, there exist medical certificates and statements made before judicial authorities conceming maltreatment. AI has repeatedly written to the federal and provincial authorities, calling for inquiries into specific cases of torture and deaths of detainees. Such calls have also been made by political and legal sectors within Argentina. In January 1975, Martin Ennals again wrote to the Argentinian authorities to appeal for adequate legal safeguards. The letter was released to the press, accompanied by an article on the situation.
In his letter, the Secretary General also referred to political assassinations and other acts of violence committed by leftwing guerrillas and rightwing death squads. The number of victims of such violence since July 1974 has now surpassed 400. The government has concentrated its efforts on curbing the leftwing violence, but its failure to intervene against the rightwing death squads has created an impression that the authorities condone their activities. There is
63
growing circumstantial evidence that those responsible are to be found in high positions of authority.
In an urgent effort to deal with the current gross violations of human rights in Argentina and to try to protect the well-being of present and potential victims of these violations, AI has created a special structure for rapid action by AI members and interested private persons and institutions. Although it is not easy to establish the effectiveness of such action, it is nevertheless clear that some lives have been saved thanks to immediate international attention.
As certain political and professional sectors in Argentina are concerned with the defence of human and legal rights, it is particularly important to keep them informed about AI's concern and actions, both with a view to conveying to them that such problems transcend geographical and political borders and are the concern of the international community, and to give moral support to their own efforts within Argentina.
Bahamas
In June 1974, Amnesty International Secretary General Martin Ennals sent a telegram to Prime Minister Lynden Pindling, appealing against reported moves to deport Haitian refugees and immigrants who have been working in the Bahamas for many years and who would run a high risk of arbitrary detention if returned to Haiti.
An appeal was also sent to the Prime Minister for commutation of two death sentences in August 1974, but both men were hanged in October 1974.
Bolivia
Amnesty International has continued its adoption program during the current year. Most of the prisoners under adoption or investigation have been released, although some only on condition that they left the country immediately. In a certain number of cases AI met their travel costs.
Despite administrative changes in Bolivia and the ostensible improvement represented by these releases, serious violations of human rights have continued. Rehable sources supplied evidence of severe torture and physical brutality, prolonged detention without trial, denial of the right of habeas corpus and a lack of legal safeguards for those people arrested for allegedly illegal political activities. In consequence, Secretary General Martin Ennals addressed a memorandum in September 1974 to President Hugo Banzer Suarez. The memorandum was based on information supplied to Judge Lennart Aspegren of the Stockholm Superior Court, Sweden, who had previously carried out a mission to Bolivia. Mr Ennals called for an immediate cessation of such violations, "including illegal arrest, forced exile without due hearing, undue delay in bringing the accused before a competent judge, long periods of incommunicado, torture and other forms of physical and moral violations against detained persons".
AI has worked persistently throughout the year to persuade the Bolivian government either to release prisoners or to put them on trial, since, in some cases, they had been moved from military to civilian jurisdiction and held for periods of up to 3 years. Some of these prisoners have now been released albeit without trial.
64
In November 1974, an alleged attempted coup against the government was defeated. A state of siege was declared and severely repressive measures were decreed: political parties were placed in recession and all political activities within the trade union movement were banned. As a result, numerous trade unionists were detained, and their cases were taken up by AI.
The main target for these measures appeared to be the trade union movement and, following the introduction of a system of compulsory civil service, a number of trade unionists were nominated as labour coordinators throughout the country. Their task was to ensure that management and labour worked together on a non-poHtical basis. Certain trade union leaders refused these posts including Victor Lopez Arias, Secretary General of the Bolivian Miners' Federation, who is still under arrest at the time of writing.
When confirmation of these arrests was received by AI, Martin Ennals wrote to President Banzer expressing grave concern over the nature of the new legislation and the number of arrests that had taken place during the preceding month. At the same time, AI circulated a memorandum to a number of intemational labour federations, documenting the arrests of trade unionists and the persistent violations of human rights, particularly that of labour freedom.
The Bolivian Committee for Justice and Peace (CJP) intervened shortly afterwards and the acting president. Father Eric de Wasseige, a Belgian citizen, was arrested and given 24 hours to leave the country.
However, after the period had expired and as a result of the most vigorous protests from AI and other international organizations, the order was suspended. But in March 1975, Father de Wasseige and another priest were summarily arrested and expelled from Bolivia for allegedly handUng subversive literature. This is believed to be a reference to a publication by the CJP which documented the violent deaths of a large number of peasants in the Cochabamba valley, while they were protesting about the increase in food prices which had taken place in January and February.
To celebrate Easter, the Minister of the Interior announced a partial amnesty for 27 political prisoners. This was welcomed by the Committee for Justice and Peace, which then partially recessed its work for political prisoners.
AI has continued to press the Bolivian government either to release or bring to trial detained people. Money has also been allocated towards the expenses of defence lawyers, if and when the trials should take place, and aid and the supplying of relief monies to help the families and improve the situation of political detainees has continued.
Brazil
President Ernesto Geisel of Brazil came to power in March 1974 promising a policy of gradual distensao and apertura (relaxation and opening), but a wave of arrests immediately following his inauguration, apparently by unofficial security groups, indicated that some groups were not prepared to allow a gradual liberalization of the Brazilian political scene. In a cable, Amnesty Intemational drew the President's attention to these arrests and reports of torture. An AI news release on 21 June reported the finding of new bodies in various regions of Brazil, apparent death squad victim, and the arrest of Maria de Conceiçâo
65
Sarmiento Coelho da Paz, who was evidently detained by police seeking her son. She was released shortly afterwards.
AI groups protested against the continuing arrests, which experts interpreted as symptoms of the confrontation between President Geisel and army sectors. Some arrests were carried out by govemment bodies opposed to his liberalization pohcy. Other arrests were made by unofficial groups opposed to political relaxation, probably to illustrate the extent of "subversion". This absence of a single detaining authority has made it particularly difficuh for friends and families to locate missing persons.
In reaction to the continuing arrests and disappearances, the Roman Catholic Church, particularly Archbishop Ams of Sao Paulo and the Sao Paulo Justice and Peace Commission, members of the only legal opposition party, the Movimento Democratico Brasilerio (MDB), the Brazilian Order of Lawyers (OAB) and friends and relatives of prisoners, became more vocal in their efforts to draw public attention to these transgressions of human rights.
In November, the MDB won a surprising victory in elections to the Senate and the House of Representatives, after a campaign which focused to a large extent on human rights issues. Although the opposition still has not a majority in either house, it succeeded in instituting a pariiamentary inquiry. Hopes were high that the MDB would open an investigation into the cases of some 22 persons (including several Al cases) whose "disappearance" and feared deaths in custody over an 18-month period has become a cause célèbre in Brazil.
Press censorship was lifted slightly by President Geisel following the elections, and advertisements seeking the missing persons and reports of new arrests and alleged torture appeared in the BraziHan press for the first time since the imposition of Institutional Act Number 5 in 1968.
To avert an inquiry, Minister of Justice Armando Fal9ào gave information to the press concerning a number of persons, some of them amongst the list of the "disappeared". However, in many cases his information related to their previous arrests. In other instances Mr Falgao claimed that the persons named were not in custody, or that no records concerning them were available. Al has addressed a memorandum to the Brazilian Government which points out the discrepancies between the information released by the Ministry of Justice and our own information.
However, reports that hardliners had'forced President Geisel to back down from his intention to allow some latitude to the MDB and rumours that MDB deputies would be declared cassado (lose their political and civil rights) if they pressed for an inquiry led the MDB to seek a compromise course. Instead of iniating a parliamentary inquiry, the MDB moved to ask Mr Pal^ao to appear before Congress to answer questions about the disappeared. The govemment party Arena defeated this motion, and has tried strongly to link the MDB to the Brazilian Communist Party in an effort to silence the debate on those who have disappeared. Al, however, has continued to press for an investigation and has been particularly active on behalf of Ana Rosa Kucinski Silva and her husband, Wilson Silva, both amongst the disappeared. Ana Rosa Silva's case has been widely pubUcized in connection with International Women's Year 1975.
AI has also taken up the cases of Communist Party (Mosco w-Hne) members
66
arrested after their printing presses were discovered and raided early in 1975. These new c^es bring the total of Brazil adopted cases to 142 and investigations to 40.
Groups are also attempting to estabUsh the exact whereabouts of political prisoners and are supporting moves within Brazil to improve prison conditions. Hunger strikes in November 1974 at various prisons were publicized in an effort to integrate the prisoners at Linhares prison in Juiz de Fora with other political prisoners. In May 1975, political prisoners at Ilha Grande were successful in their bid to be moved from their remote island prison to the city of Rio de Janeiro.
Action has been taken on behalf of Cesar Quiroz de Benjamin and Ivan Axelrud Seixas. Both boys were minors at the time of their arrest, and in both cases psychiatric and medical examination procedures were manipulated in order that they could be held in irregular situations. Cesar has now been transferred to a civilian rehabilitation center where his treatment improved.
In December 1974, a new submission was made to the United Nations and the Organization of American States presenting allegations of torture and unexplained disappearances. This up-dated an earlier submission in April 1974 giving the names of 210 "disappeared" people. AI's Report on Allegations of Torture in Brazil, originally published in September 1972, was re-issued in July 1974 with a new preface and some minor changes necessary to bring the documents up to date.
National sections have continued activities on behalf of Brazilian refugees driven from Chile following the September 1973 coup.
In March 1975, the case of Luis Basilio Rossi, on which AI has become active, finally came to trial. Although Professor Rossi now lives outside Brazil, a new writ calling for his preventive detention was issued. Several other adopted persons were sentenced on charges of attempting to re-organize the banned Communist Party. However, in most cases defendants had already served the terms imposed on them and were thus released.
Francisco Pinto, the MDB deputy indicted after criticizing President Augusto Pinochet Ugarte of Chile, served six months in prison, having refused the civil pardon which was offered him. Although Marcio Moreira Alves, a deputy who was indicted after addressing Parliament on human r^hts issues and who fled Brazil in' 1968, has now been cleared, President Geisel's useof Institutional Act Number 5 to intervene in a political dispute in the State of Acrem suggests that the brief experiment in distensao and apertura is now closed.
Chile
On 10 September 1974, the eve of the first anniversary of the overthrow of the government of President Salvador Allende Gossens, Amnesty International published an 80-page detailed report on violations of human rights in Chile. A news conference lauhching the report was held at the United Nations in New York. The report was based on the material gathered by an AI mission in November 1973 and was subsequently updated with the help of the enormous volume of material, including individual cases, received by the Research
67
> 'miormr ^rnftmu
Department in the intervening period.
The report was rejected in its entirety by the Chilean government, but the situation it describes has been only too fully corroborated from other sources. Among the many missions which were sent to Chile by international bodies of impeccable repute, one need only mention the International Labour Organization (ILO), the International Commission of Jurists (ICJ), and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States.
All these bodies observed and reported continuing violations of human rights in every area of civil liberties. On 6 November 1974, the United Nations General Assembly made an urgent appeal to Chile "to restore basic human rights and fundamental freedoms". In February 1975, the UN Economic and Social Council Commission on Human Rights, meeting in Geneva, set up an ad hoc working group of five members "to inquire into the present situation of human rights in Chile". This is the first case of the commission undertaking an investigation into the internal situation of a UN member country outside southern Africa.
The cumulative effect of so many adverse reports from respected international bodies has been considerable. The Chilean government pubUcly declared that missions would not be welcome unless they had first visited the Soviet Union and the Republic of Cuba.
In addition to submitting evidence to bodies as varied as the UN Human Rights Commission and the International Commission of Inquiry in Mexico City, AI has briefed the many distinguished jurists, academics and others who have undertaken individual missions of inquiry. Their aims have varied from observing the judicial process to investigating the treatment of different sectors of Chilean society; but almost without exception, their findings have corroborated the conclusions of the research staff in the International Secretariat.
AI has continued its program of adoption and investigation of prisoners detained under the state of siege, and groups are now working on over 300 cases. In an attempt to assist the enormous numbers of detainees whose cases could not be included in an adoption program-many of whom had no charges preferred against them even after 18 months' detention-AI decided to launch a special campaign. Lists of detained doctors, journalists, lawyers, actors, trade unionists, etc., were sent to professional or trade associations which were asked to try to secure elementary legal and civil rights for them.
Even when prisoners are brought to trial, the procedures are anything but adequate. In June 1974, a German federal judge, Dr Horst Woesner, attended the trial of 57 air force officers and 10 civilians. In a letter to President Augusto Pinochet Ugarte, based on Dr Woesner's report, Secretary General Martin Ennals
68
wrote that "the demands of the military prosecution were based on confessions extracted under torture and on prior interrogations by military personnel and intelligence officers, without the participation of defence lawyers " and that "the decision of the military prosecution that a state of internal war existed in Chile before 11 September 1973 is a violation of the principle of the non-retroactive nature of penal legislation". The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights described the judicial process in Chile as "a massive violation of the guarantees of due process of law". In the particular trial referred to, the death penalty was passed on four defendants, and it was only one of many where intemational concern, including action by AI, preceded the commutation of the sentence.
In September 1974, General Pinochet declared that the state of war was over, but instead of a return to normal legal standards, a state of siege "for internal defence" was declared, with the retention of the military tribunals which have been responsible for the worst legal excesses of the present regime. The state of siege was renewed in March 1975 for a further six-month period.
A new security code was decreed on 8 May 1975. While not protecting the legal rights of detainees, it increased from 48 hours to five days the period during which detainees could be held for interrogation, without official legal obligation to inform their relatives. Although there is overwhelming evidence that the 48-hour rule was rarely obeyed, this represents a distinct and official deterioration in the position of political prisoners. The judicial safeguard oí habeas corpus has been rendered almost totally ineffective by the willingness of the magistrates to accept replies from the minister concerned that the person was detained by virtue of the powers conferred by the state of siege, and the consequent failure of the magistrates to insist on the person being produced in court.
It is during this period between detention and recognition of the prisoner as a detainee that the worst instances of torture take place. This is corroborated both by the report of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and by innumerable written affidavits, eyewitness reports and personal testimonials. The problem of torture and disappearances which at the middle of 1974 seemed to be receding slightly, has been sharply re-defined with the establishment in June of a new agency, the Dirección de Investigación Nacional (DINA), to coordinate the intelligence activities of all four services. It is responsible solely to the ruling military junta. Consequently, AI sections and groups have been asked to act swiftly and frequently in attempts to locate individual detainees, inform the authorities of international concern and achieve formal recognition of the prisoner's status in a recognized detention camp.
A paltry number of prisoners have been released during the year under different amnesties. In many cases, despite being detained for considerable periods, the people released have never been charged, tried or sentenced, and the "opportunity of exile" offered to some appears unjust. In cases where the released detainees remain in Chile, no form of legal redress seems available.
Colombia
Although no prisoners were adopted by Amnesty International in Colombia in 1974-75, information received from peasant associations indicates that serious human rights problems exist in isolated rural areas. AI Deputy Secretary General
69
Hans Ehrenstraie wrote to President Alfonso Lopez Michelsen in March 1975, asking for an investigation into the alleged torture and murder of peasant leaders in Cauca province, reportedly by military forces in conjunction with vigilante groups. Local sources in Cauca later informed AI that more than 30 detained peasants were freed in direct response to the AI initiative.
Cuba
Amnesty International groups have continued to work throughout the current year on behalf of nine long-term adopted prisoners in Cuba. The occupation and circumstances of these prisoners vary widely. They include journalists, former revolutionaries, trade unionists, priests and physicians. The sentences passed on them range from 15 to 30 years. A common feature of their situation is their refusal to take part in government rehabilitation programs, which require the participant to adhere to the political beliefs current in Cuba.
This rehabilitation program, known as the Progressive Plan, was introduced at the end of the 1960s, not only to enable prisoners to make a satisfactory transition back into civilian life, but also as a means of educating alleged opponents of the government in the guiding principles of the new Cuban society.
Although it is indisputable that most political prisoners have joined this plan, it appears that those long-term prisoners who have refused are in a serious situation. They are held in different prisons without access to the graduated privileges available to the Progressive Plan prisoners. In some cases they have already served more than 15 years of their sentences.
It is extremely difficult to estimate the number of political prisoners held in Cuba and, indeed, an estimate of numbers seems to depend on the interpretation of a political prisoner within the context of the new and evolving Cuban penal system. However, in 1967, Prime Minister Fidel Castro estimated that there were 20,000 political prisoners, and recently, in reply to a question at a news conference during the visit of United States Senator George McGovern, he said that the number of political prisoners had decreased over the years by 75-80%. He added that this was a domestic problem which would not be solved under external pressure.
As a consequence of a decision by AI's International Executive Committee, an intensive research program has been undertaken. This has yielded valuable contacts and considerable research material.
In May-June 1974, an AI delegate, Inger Fahlander, Head of Latin America Research, visited Cuba for 10 days. The object of the mission was to explain the aims, methods and work of AI in a worldwide context. Miss Fahlander did so in personal interviews with, among others, the Minister of Justice, the Federation of Cuban Women, the Foreign Office and organs of press and radio.
Following the mission and as a result of further conversations between Secretary General Martin Ennals and a Cuban legal delegation to the Conference of the International Association of Democratic Lawyers, in Algiers, in April 1975, a letter was addressed to the Minister of Justice asking for information as to the present status of 18 listed prisoners. According to the information in AI's possession, this group is predominantly composed of students, peasants and manual workers who were sentenced by tribunals to around 10 years
70
imprisonment, which should have expired by now.
Dominica ( West Indies)
In December 1974, Amnesty Intemational Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to Prime Minister Patrick John of Dominica, appealing for the commutation of a death sentence which had been passed on Desmond Trotter, a member of the Movement for a New Dominica (MND), who was accused of shooting an American tourist. Although, as Mr Ennals pointed out in his letter, AI works for the abolition of capital punishment in all cases, he particularly urged that it should not be used in this instance because of doubts which existed regarding the guilt of the condemned man and the quality of the evidence against him.
Following information received in April 1975, the Secretary General wrote to the superintendent of the prison in which Desmond Trotter was held, asking to receive his assurance that the prisoner was not being subjected to ill-treatment.
AI has no adopted prisoners in Dominica.
Dominican Republic
In November 1974, Amnesty International Secretary General Martin Ennals addressed an appeal to President Joaquin Balaguer of the Dominican Republic wliich, while congratulating him on the release of five adopted prisoners, also drew his attention to the deterioratii^ conditions in certain mral areas, especially in the vicinity of San Francisco de Macoris, the Dominican Republic's third largest city.
Major problems relating to violations of human rights at present exist inter alia in the functioning of the judicial system, the conditions within prisons and the treatment of arrested or suspected people, especially in rural areas. Research is now in progress to establish a legal framework in which to examine these violations.
President Balaguer's government, in power since 1966, was re-elected in May 1974, amid widespread allegations of irregularities in voting procedures. The opposition parties, as a consequence, refused to recognize the validity of this result. In the violent political climate which prevailed after the election hxmdreds of arrests were made. Some of those detained were only peripherally connected with political parties. These arrests appear to have been carried out in a brutal and illegal manner with the detainees frequently being denied the most elementary safeguards.
During the year Amnesty Intemational took up the cases of six people, a number which in no way reflects the tme extent of the problem in the Dominican Republic.
Ecuador
A case before the Special Military Tribunals {Tribunales Especiales de Justicia), established by decree in July 1972, has been Amnesty Intemational's main concem in Ecuador. The first and most prominent trial before a special tribunal involved a number of leftwing personalities and activists charged with eight armed robberies carried out over a period of more than two years.
Co-defendants in the case included an ex-member of Congress and provincial
71
mayor, the secretary general of the Ecuadorian Revolutionary Socialist Party (a legal political party) and student leaders affiHated to that party. The most prominent defendant in the case was the writer Jaime Galarza, well known throughout Latin America for a critical study of corruption in the Ecuadorian petroleum industry. Despite the nature of the charges, Señor Galarza was felt to be a prisoner of conscience, and was adopted by AI.
In May 1973 the First Special Tribunal of Quito had passed long-term prison sentences on eight prisoners, all politically active. An appeal was then lodged before the Superior Military Court which accepted the appeal petition that the convictions should be quashed on the grounds that the ruling court had no jurisdiction in the case.
In August 1974, following international and domestic protests over their legality, the special tribunals were formally abolished. But the government said sentences passed by the tribunals during their two years of existence would be upheld and appeals would continue to be heard by the Superior Military Court.
In September 1974, a Colombian lawyer, Dr Lisandro Martinez, visited Ecuador and inquired into the case of Señor Galarza and others at the request of AI and the International Commission of Jurists. With the full cooperation of the Ecuadorian authorities, Dr Martinez examined the official documents and interviewed the defence counsel, the prosecutors, the original examining judge and members of the Superior Military Court.
Dr Martinez found serious irregularities both generic to the suspended special tribunals and specific in the Galarza case. He criticized the tribunals' lack of independence from executive control and questioned their legal competence on the grounds that two of three judges in each court were military officers with no legal training who were appointed by presidential order. Investigations were in the hands of military security units responsible to the Ministry of Defence.
Examining the Galarza case, Dr Martinez found that confessions made after torture and during interrogation by military personnel had formed the principal basis for prosecution. He noted that the special tribunal had no legal jurisdiction according to Ecuadorian law, as all charges in the case referred to common law rather than political offences, and no jurisdiction on territorial grounds, as some of the alleged offences occurred within the jurisdiction of the special tribunals of Guayaquil, rather than Quito.
He further found that "insulting language" used in court documents, referring to defendants as "common, vulgar terrorists", "criminals" and "evil" individuals, betrayed a clear lack of impartiality on the part of the judges, and that, despite the 30-day time limit within which an appeals court must pass judgement, 16 months had passed between appeal and judgement. Dr Martinez concluded that the case should be considered juridically null and void.
On 7 December 1974, the co-defendants in the Galarza case, held in Garcia Moreno Prison in Quito, announced a hunger strike. AI issued a news release supporting their demand for unconditional liberty, and protests were made on their behalf in Ecuador itself. The Superior Military Court quashed-the sentences and ordered the release of the prisoners, but with one serious qualification: those who had an indictment or detention order against them pending in an ordinary court would remain in prison.
72
Three well known prisoners were finally released on 22 November 1974, including Jaime Galarza. Three of their co-defendants remain imprisoned in Quito and two in the Penal Litoral of Guayaquil. All are adopted by AI which understands that these prisoners are held on the basis of cases originally heard by ordinary courts that were suspended when the special tribunals were estab-hshed. These suspended proceedings in ordinary courts have now been reopened. Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to President Rodriquez Lara in March 1975 expressing AI's concern over the five remaining prisoners.
During the past year AI investigated four other cases of Ecuadorians tried under the now suspended special tribunals. Four students involved in leftwing university and secondary school student federations in Guayaquil were charged with having hijacked an airplane from Quito airport to Havana, Cuba, in September 1969. None of the four have been tried, although all have been held for well over a year in Garcia Moreno Prison in Quito. Each alleged that interrogation was carried out under severe torture. One of the four, Victor Quintero, presented newspaper clippings to court investigators reporting his public role in student associations in Ecuador throughout 1969 and 1970, thus demonstrating that he had neither visited Cuba nor left Ecuador.
AI adoption groups are currently working for nine prisoners in Ecuador.
Guatemala
Disappearances and political murder continue to be Amnesty International's principal concern in Guatemala. In January 1975 alone, the daily newspapers of Guatemala City reported the apparently politically motivated killing of 41 persons and the disappearance of seven.
AI adoption groups took up eight new investigation cases in the past year, most of them persons reported in the press as having "disappeared"—a description that, in Guatemala, generally refers to kidnapping as a prelude to murder. Disappearances have been written up as investigation cases when there has been evidence that government officials played some part in the affair. Eleven AI groups are investgiating the cases of Guatemalans who disappeared prior to 1974. AI groups have also been supplied with material on the overall incidence of pohtical violence in Guatemala for publicity purposes.
In February 1975, AI sent a list of 121 persons who have disappeared in the past three years to all the radio stations in Guatemala. Relevant data on each disappearance was included, as were copies of documents of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States concerning political murder and disappearances in Guatemala.
In May 1975, AI Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to President Kjell Laugerud concerning reports that an official investigation had been instituted into police participation in political murder in Guatemala. Mr Ennals welcomed this initiative and enclosed an annotated list of 135 persons reported killed or found dead through apparent acts of political violence, many of them bearing signs of torture and mutilation. Each individual case was taken from Guatemala City newspaper reports and cited the source and date of the news item. All cases were reported between 1 July 1974, the date on which President Laugerud took office, and 31 January 1975.
73
In addition to drawing President Laugerud's attention to the 135 murder cases, the Secretary General also referred to a report published in November in the Guatemala City newspaper Prensa Libre on an unsuccessful kidnap attempt in the Department of Escuintla. The style of this attempt was identical to the manner in which many Guatemalans have "disappeared" and been found dead shortly afterwards with gunshot wounds. But in this case the victim escaped when the car used by the kidnappers—apparently members of a death squad-crashed, killing an agent of the national police who was identified as one of the kidnappers.
Noting that seven leaders of the Christian Democratic Party in the Department of Escuintla have been murdered by death squads in the past year, the Secretary General asked whether the kidnap attempt had been fully investigated and what the results of the inquiry were.
A number of submissions were made by AI to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights after the March presidential elections. In August 1974, AI submitted newspaper cuttings from the Guatemalan press on death squad actions and disappearances during the March election period.
In March 1975, AI made a further submission of information on an appeal by parliamentarians of the Guatemalan Christian Democratic Party to the Ministry of thé Interior concerning the violence endemic in the country. The submission concerned both the parliamentary appeal and death threats and an assassination attempt that followed. The same information was also sent via national sections to Christian Democratic and related political parties throughout the world.
Haiti
The adoption program initiated in 1973 has continued, and 70 prisoners are currently allocated to Amnesty International groups. Apart from a constant flow of letters to the Haitian authorities, group work has included approaches to the embassies and also publicity.
Prisoners are not allowed lawyers, nor contact with their families after arrest, nor-with few exceptions-are they ever charged or brought to trial. Such conditions of isolation and the general fear of arbitrary arrest make it difficult to obtain personal data on the prisoners and to establish their status as prisoners of conscience.
Hence, the main reason for taking up the cases is prolonged detention without due legal process, and the purpose of group work is to press for trial or release. The prisoners, who are peasant farmers, workers, teachers, students and other intellectuals, have been detained for between 2 and 12 years. It is possible that some of these prisoners are no longer alive, but, as the prison authorities do not inform even families of a prisoner's death, such facts cannot be estabhshed.
Shortly after adverse publicity on conditions of detention in Haiti in the Canadian news media early in 1975 based on material supplied by the International Secretariat, the Haitian government declared an amnesty for 26 prisoners. The most prominent of this group was an AI adoptee, Jean Bernardel, ex-director of the Royal Bank of Canada in Haiti, and one of the few prisoners to have been tried. Together with four other people, not included in the amnesty, he had been sentenced to life imprisonment. The list of amnestied prisoners included one other
74
adoptee and a further five whose names were known to the International Secretariat. However, with the exception of Mr Bemardel, it has not been possible to establish whether, in fact, the others were released and whether some of the names correspond to prisoners at all.
The International Secretariat has on several occasions supplied information to lawyers and institutions attempting to help Haitian refugees in Canada and the United States, who are threatened with return to Haiti where they would run a high risk of arbitrary arrest.
Jamaica
In July 1974, Amnesty International Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to Governor General Florizel Glasspole of Jamaica, appealing for commutation of the death sentence passed on Mario Hector who was convicted of murder on 25 February 1972. Mr Hector was, however, charged with the crime on 7 November 1970 when he was 17 years old and, under Jamaican law, not liable to capital punishment because of his youth. The Secretary General pointed out that this was in violation of article 11 of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the last sentence of which states: "Nor shall a heavier penalty be imposed than the one that was apphcable at the time the penal offence was committed."
On 21 May 1975, following the decision by the judicial committee of the Privy Council in London that death sentences passed in 1971 on Eaton Baker and Paul Tyrell must stand, even though they were both under 18 years of age when they committed their offence, Mr Ennals cabled an appeal for their reprieve to the government of Jamaica. In a letter of 25 May, he cited article 6, paragraph 5 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights: "Sentence of death shall not be imposed for crimes committed by persons below 18 years of age." On the same day, AI issued a news release about the case.
At the time of writing (June 1975) none of the men referred to above has been executed.
Mexico
In March 1975, the Chairman of the International Executive Committee, Dirk Börner, visited Mexico and introduced Amnesty International and its work to the Mexican government. In an interview at the Ministry of Government, Mr Börner discussed the international scope and humanitarian aims of AI's work and its concerns in Mexico, including the prevention of torture. The basis for future relations between AI and the Mexican government was established.
Allegations of torture received by AI in the past year relate closely to the de facto absence of procedural guarantees in both common and political cases. All torture allegations received by AI have referred to the periods immediately following detention but prior to formal arraignment before a judge. Allegations describe systematic beatings, near drowning and electric shocks. They have been made by prisoners held for alleged guerrilla activities, students and intellectuals held for brief periods and young North Americans imprisoned on narcotics charges. AI's Campaign for the Abolition of Torture is currently reviewing this information.
On 30 December 1974,65-year old Hilario Moreno, a militant of the legal
75
Mexican Communist Party, was reported by his friends to have disappeared. A week later the police acknowledged his detention, alleging that he had hanged himself while awaiting arraignment. Newspapers openly attributed the death to maltreatment in police custody.
In late March 1975, AI was informed of the "disappearance" of two members of a left wing political research and study group in Mexico City. Mexican authorities denied they were in police custody. Dirk Börner immediately cabled the Mexican authorities asking that all necessary efforts be made to locate the missing persons and to ensure respect for their rights under the law. A letter from Deputy Secretary General Hans Ehrenstrale to President Luis Ecneverria further expressed AI's concern over the ca^e in the light of similar disappearances, and especially that of Hilario Moreno. A week afterward, the office of the Federal Prosecutor General announced that the two disappeared persons were detained by the Federal Security Police. Shortly afterwards they were conditionally released.
"Disappearances" were the major subject of AI's appeals on Mexico in the past year. As illustrated by the Hilario Moreno case, the period immediately following detention is the most critical. National sections were asked to inquire into reported disappearances in which the victims were believed to be in the custody of government security agencies.
During the past year, AI has received considerable information on political imprisonment in Mexico. In contrast to the situation in the late 1960s, when nonviolent student dissenters received long prison sentences, the current pattern is of short-term detention designed to intimidate, rather than to precede legal proceedings. The subjects are students, members of Mexico's tiny legal leftwing political parties, peasant leaders and leftwing journalists.
These detentions appear to relate to no specific crimes, but rather to be for the purposes of intimidation and general interrogation: release has generally followed shortly after interrogation and before judicial authorities are advised. While there are few long-term prisoners that are visibly prisoners of conscience, AI is deeply concerned over evidence of a generalized disregard in all pohtical cases for basic rights pertaining to detention, interrogation and trial procedures.
In April 1975, AI Legal Adviser Nigel S. Rodley wrote to the Governor of the Mexican state of Sinaloa, requesting information on the continued detention of more than 50 students of the autonomous University of Sinaloa, held without trial since January 1974. According to Mexican law, no prisoner can be held for more than one year without trial.
Nicaragua
A state of martial law was imposed following a guerrilla action in December 1974, in which members of the Nicaraguan government and diplomatic corps, largely relatives of President Anastasio Somoza, were held hostage. Amnesty International received many reports of arbitrary arrests, torture and disappearances related to the Nicaraguan government's subsequent action against guerrilla movements and sympathizers. In February 1975, Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to President Somoza to express AI's concern over suspension of basic human rights under martial law.
76
Paraguay
During an Amnesty International mission to Paraguay in May 1974, Dr Horst Woesner, Judge of the Supreme Court of the Federal Republic of Germany, raised with President Alfredo Stroessner, the Minister of the Interior and the Paraguayan Supreme Court the problems relating to long-term political prisoners and the lack of legal process for alleged political offences. The authorities claimed that the state of siege, declared every three months as a matter of routine, gives the President the right to maintain political suspects in indefinite preventive detention without any form of judicial process. Dr Woesner stressed every detainee's right to a fair trial whereby his guilt or innocence could be established.
This situation, which is anachronistic in today's Latin America, caused the Latin American Parliament, meeting in Caracas in February 1975, to call for the release of the political prisoners in Paraguay.
Besides the continuing long-term detentions (now reaching 17 years for three detainees), there are often waves of short-term arrests of political dissenters, usually including brutal treatment. During the past year, waves of arrests have been almost unprecedented, both in numbers and brutality. TTie first, in November 1974, hit several hundred members of the Christian-oriented agrarian cooperative movement, the Ligas Agrarias.
The second attack on the Ligas Agrarias came in February 1975 when many peasant communities were raided by military personnel, and peasants, priests and village teachers were arrested in circumstances of great brutality. Several peasants were reported to have been shot during the raid, and one priest was seriously wounded. The raid took place the same day that representatives of the Catholic Relief Service were inspecting the village communities. They and other foreign priests were later released after intervention from their embassies.
Thanks to the full support given to these communities by the Paraguayan Roman Catholic Church hierarchy, it was possible to establish the facts of the event more quickly than usual. The International Secretariat approached the United States State Department and the various governments whose citizens had been arrested in the same circumstances, requesting their help also for the Paraguayan citizens involved. All prisoners whose names it has been possible to obtain have been taken up by AI, each AI group being responsible for all arrested peasants from the same village community.
The arrests of the Ligas Agrarias illustrate a mainly socio-economical cause for political imprisonment, whereas the large-scale arrests that took place towards the end of 1974 were a clampdown on a wide range of political opposition, including prominent political personalities close to the President himself. The event that initiated the repression was an alleged conspiracy against President Stroessner's life.
The complete secrecy surrounding the interrogations gave cause for the most serious concern for the physical safety of the prisoners; at least one person died as a result of torture. Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to President Stroessner in January 1975, stressing the need for legal safeguards, access to legal counsel and the right of habeas corpus. AI also issued a news release about these violations of human and legal rights and published an article which described the events.
77
It is interesting to note that, for the first time, one member of the Surpreme Court has registered a dissenting opinion in a case regarding the denial of habeas corpus. It is unlikely, however, that any of the prisoners will benefit from judicial process. Consequently, it will not be possible to estabUsh the evidence against the 800 to 1,500 persons arrested during the past year throughout the country. All those whose names are known have been taken up by AI, with a view to pressing for trial.
There are 65 individual cases and six peasant groups currently under adoption or investigation by AI groups.
Peru
In June 1974 Amnesty International groups were informed of the release of the last 64 members of the radical teacher's union SUTEP {Sindicato Unico de Trabajadores de la Educación), detained in October 1973 following strike action and taken up as adoptions by AI.
But trade unionist prisoners continued to be a focus of AI work throughout 1974. In October 1974 Laura Caller, head of AI's Peruvian Section, was briefly jailed for her work as the defence lawyer of imprisoned members of the Federation of Peasants of the Province of Andahuaylas (FEPC A). Laura Caller was released after approaches were made to Peruvian embassies and cables were sent by Secretary General Martin Ennals and AI national sections. Trade unionists from the Confederación Campesina del Peru, Peru's major non-governmental peasant federation,with which the Andahuaylas peasants were affiliated, were detained with Laura Caller, and released some time later after Mr Ennals sent President Velasco Alvarado a cable of inquiry.
In November 1974, AI adopted six members of the Lima Bar Association who were prosecuted for criticizing a government contract with Japan concerning the financing of a trans-Andean oil pipeline. They were sentenced under the 26 July 1974 Press Act for "the publication of materials considered injurious to the nation". Although journalists accused of contravening the Press Act have been exiled, this group of lawyers, which inchided Dr Vicente Ugarte del Pino, President of the Lima Bar Association, were sentenced to one year imprisonment. In January they were provisionally released.
Legislation concerning the death penalty has been a serious concern of AI in Peru. Following a series of terrorist attacks in December 1974, including an assassination attempt on then Prime Minister General Edgardo Mercado Jarrin in which two high government ministers were wounded, a Decree Law of Political Terrorism was promulgated. The law introduces the death penalty for a broad range of crimes related to political terrorism and removes the right of appeal. Trials are to take place within 48 hours of arrest and sentence is to be delivered 48 hours later. Martin Ennals wrote to President Velasco asking for the derogation or the indefinite suspension of the death penalty provision.
In September 1974, following a series of denunciations of torture in the domestic Peruvian press, President Velasco publicly condemned the practice of torture, announced an investigation into its practice and asked for the resignation of the head of the Peruvian Investigative Police (PIP), one of those implicated
78
in the press campaign gainst torture. In March 1975 Eteputy Secretary General Hans Ehrenstrale talked with the current Chief Inspector of the PIP, H. Coahila de la Peña, and expressed AI's appreciation of these measures against torture.
In April 1975,11 peasants detained for alleged guerrilla activities in the northern Department of Cajamarca were taken up as AI investigation cases. Detained between July 1972 and December 1974, and most of them members of the same extended family, they alleged severe tortures by the Guardia Civil and by the PIP. Hans Ehrenstrale wrote to Señor Coahila de la Pena and to Interior Minister Pedro Richter Prada requesting an investigation into the allegations of torture made by the imprisoned Cajamarca peasants.
AI adoption groups are presently working for 15 Peruvian prisoners.
Trinidad and Tobago
As in previous years, attempts were made to obtain a reprieve for Michael de Freitas—also known as Michael X. When Mr de Freitas' final appeal against his death sentence was dismissed in May 1975, Secretary General Martin Ennals cabled the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference in Jamaica to express Amnesty International's dissapointment at the decision, particularly because of the impUcations for others awaiting execution in the West Indies. He appealed to all the prime ministers to suport abolition of the death penalty throughout the Commonwealth.
United States of America
At the request of AI's International Council, Amnesty International Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to President Gerald Ford on 1 November 1974 appealing to him to mark American Thanksgiving Day by declaring a general, imconditional amnesty for all United States war resisters. The contents of this letter were made public in a news release issued to coincide with the annual US holiday on 28 November 1974.
Although the number of imprisoned war resisters is now fewer than in previous years, there are still thousands of young American men living in exile or underground in the United States because, for reasons of conscience, they do not feel able to accept the terms of the clemency program initiated by President Ford.
Much attention has been given throughout the year to the case of Martin Sostre, sentenced to a possible 40 years' imprisonment in 1968 for the alleged sale of narcotics. The only witness of the alleged sale has since recanted his testimony, and AI believes that Mr Sostre was falsely implicated because of his poUtical activities. He was one of the prisoners featured during Prisoner of Conscience Week in October 1974.
On 13 August 1974, an AI observer attended Mr Sostre's appeal against being returned to New York State custody after testifying on behalf of a fellow prisoner in an action against the New York State prison authorities. The federal appellate court ruled against him and he was returned to Clinton prison in New York where he was once again subjected to harrassment and abuse.
On 11 November 1974 Secretary General Martin Ennals cabled the New York State Commissioner of Corrections to express concern about reports that Mr
79
Sostre had again been assauhed by prison guards for refusing to submit to rectal searches. An AI observer was also present in February 1975 at Mr Sostre's trial-arising from his refusal to submit to rectal searches—on charges of assaulting prison guards. He was found guilty, but at the time of writing has not been sentenced.
The Chairman of AI's International Executive Committee, Dirk Börner, discussed the Sostre case with the legal counsellor of the Governor of New York State and in a letter address to Governor Hugh Carey on 14 April 1975 Mr Börner argued that "... any reasonable person placed in possession of the facts of this case is bound to feel that a serious miscarriage of justice has occurred".
On 10-11 December 1974, an AI observer attended the hearing in North Carolina of the petitions of three Al-adopted prisoners, James Earl Grant Jr, Charles Parker and T.J. Reddy (known as "The Charlotte Three") in which they sought an order setting aside their convictions on a charge of arson (see AI Annual Report 1973-74), but there has been an extraordinary delay in the handing down of a decision by the judge in this case and at the time of writing no judgment has yet been delivered.
During the past year many appeals have been made to state authorities regarding the passing of death sentences, including one passed in the State of Florida on a 15-year-old boy.
AI groups are working on behalf of seven prisoners in the United States.
Uruguay
The combined mission to Uruguay of the International Commission of Jurists and Amnesty International in May 1974 concluded that poHtical detainees lacked legal protection and were systematically tortured during the first period following their arrest. The delegation discussed these questions with the Uruguayan authorities and made specific recommendations as to how to improve legal safeguards and avoid the occurrence of maltreatment.
During the past year, AI has not been able to note any improvements in this respect. On the contrary, maltreatment has been extended to those categories of detainees who earlier enjoyed reasonably correct conditions of detention in the roofed sports stadium El Cilindro in Montevideo. Persons detained there represent the peaceful opposition, not suspected of subversion, and held for comparatively short periods of untried detention. Trade unionists, journalists, and politicians were amongst them. Gradually, there were more and more incidents of such prisoners being taken to military barracks, where torture has become routine practice.
AI appealed to the authorities on many occasions during the past year to respect humanitarian and legal norms of conduct towards detainees. One appeal concerned the case of the trade unionist Alcides Lanza, who was severely tortured before being returned to El Cilindro \ another appeal related to four dockworkers. Several other urgent steps have been taken in an attempt to protect detainees from maltreatment as early as possible after arrest. One trade unionist, detained earlier, was reported to have died some time after his release as a result of torture.
The political conflicts have further sharpened during the past year and the government's attempts to extend severe political control over all aspects of
80
society has increased the imprisonment of peaceful dissenters and, consequently, created a large number of prisoners of conscience. The curb on trade union freedom, the "oath of democratic faith" imposed on teachers and civil servants, whereby they swear never to have belonged to any of the now banned parties or organizations, the "administrative investigations" into teachers' political past, the curb on press freedom and the closure of journals are examples of government interventions in the national and political life that create prisoners of conscience - a group which, in Uruguay »represents a broad spectrum of the left. All dissent is interpreted as being part of an international Marxist conspiracy. President Juan Maria Bordaberry has even accused the United Nations of being a Marxist-dominated body.
The pattern of comparatively short detention, to which AI's traditional adoption method is unsuited, has largely remained. National sections, therefore, have been provided with information on "situations" of arrests among, for example, trade unionists, university teachers and students, and have been asked to take action on their behalf. The Research Department regularly provides national and international professional bodies with such information.
Detention procedures have remained highly unsatisfactory throughout the year, and AI has issued several news releases on waves of arrest during which maltreatment has occurred. The latest was in April 1975, when the secondary school teachers' union was closed and several teachers and active members of this union were arrested. The same statement reported on the detention incommunicado of a group of students, between 14 and 17 years of age, and on the inability of the families even to locate the place of detention of another group of prisoners.
AI groups are currently working for over 60 cases, among them a group of 25 belonging to a political group, Grupos de Acción Unificadora (GAU), which was legal until all political parties and groups left of center were banned at the end of 1973. The ostensible reason for their arrest was a bomb incident in which a student belonging to that group was killed. Although it has not even been satisfactorily established that the student himself knew of the bomb, the whole group is being tried under the concept of guilt by association.
Previously, the Communist Party, although banned, had not been a specific target, except for its top leadership. Its secretary general, Rodney Arismendi (who featured in the November 1974 Prisoners of the Month Campaign), was released in January 1975 in exchange for exile. His successor is in detention, as is the secretary general of the Communist Party youth branch. In the beginning of 1975, many members of the Communist Party were arrested, to be released later. Eduardo Viera, an elderly ex-deputy, was indicted for an alleged "attack on the morale of the armed forces" in April 1975.
The sensitivity to criticism of the military de facto rulers of the country is illustrated by the increasingly common charge of "attack on the morale of the armed forces", usually meaning criticism by the political opposition of the role of the armed forces and their policies. Several such cases are currently under adoption or investigation by AI groups.
Liber Seregni, the presidential candidate of the leftwing coalition Frente Amplio, was released, as was his colleague. Colonel Carlos Zufriategui, whereas
81
General Victor Licandro remains in detention. Also imprisoned is Winston Nelson Marra, author of the short story that last year caused the suspension and subsequent closure of the prestigious weekly Marc/ia and the detention for several months of the literary jury and the editors of the magazine.
Much international attention has been aroused by the fact that prisoners under judicial process are removed — in violation of the prison regulations — from their prison to military barracks throughout the country. There are individual instances, but the two best known groups consist of leading members of the urban guerrilla movement, the National Libeiation Movement (MLN) — Tupamaros. Secretary General Martin Ennals replied to President Bordaberry's public statement that all prisoners were detained in proper penal establishments by suggesting that faciUties be provided for jurists to visit the prisoners in question, thereby putting an end to adverse international publicity.
In 1974, there was an attempt by prominent jurists and other personalities to form an independent commission for the defence of human rights. The attempt failed on the grounds that there already existed such a commission within the Council of State, the 25-member body that has replaced Parliament. Although AI frequently uses this channel for lodging complaints about infringements of human rights, it is clear that this body, appointed by the Executive Power, cannot have the independence to protect citizens against abuse of authority, in the same way as the military official {juez íuwamwíe) appointed by his superior officers to investigate the case of a political suspect cannot have the independence of a civilian judge exercising his function within a system of separation of powers.
Venezuela
Amnesty International groups are at present investigating two cases in Venezuela. Both are peasants detained for alleged collaboration with guerrilla groups; both are held under military justice. Three peasants adopted in 1973 were released in late 1974 after AI adoption groups exchanged cables and letters with Venezuelan officials, including President Carlos Andrés Pérez who took office in March 1974. The released prisoners had been held without trial under military law, charged with military rebeUion. One of the three, Simón José Gil, was detained in January 1969, and released after almost five years' detention without trial.
AI has received considerable information on torture and maltreatment in Venezuela prior to 1974, but there have been no more recent allegations.
In November 1974 AI received information on over 100 prisoners held in Venezuela for political reasons. Most are held for alleged guerrilla activity. Almost all of these prisoners are held under military justice,charged with military rebellion, and were detained between 1968 and 1973. Many alleged severe torture by both military and civilian security agencies. Only a small percentage have been tried. A number of political prisoners sentenced to long prison terms for military rebellion were released in early 1975.
Asia
The most troubling feature in Asia is the imprisonment of very large numbers of people for long periods in many countries without trial. With the state of emergency declared in December 1974 in Bangladesh, the trend continues of more Asian countries being governed by the use of extraordinary powers which severely limit the rights of individuals. The creation of new courts and changes in trial procedure are regrettable additions to the existing state of emergency legislation in Pakistan. Both India and Sri Lanka continue to be governed under states of emergency. The Philippines is due to enter its third year of martial law. Civil rights in the Republic of Korea have been eroded by presidential decree.
The vast scale of imprisonment has made it necessary to balance the adoption of individual cases with work in the International Secretariat to bring pressure on governments to grant amnesties to large groups of prisoners. A number of missions were sent during 1974-75 to discuss with governments general problems of imprisonment, as well as specific cases. In the last year, delegates have visited Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, Nepal, Sri Lanka, Indonesia, Republic of Korea and Taiwan.
The major event of the past year was the ending of the Vietnam war in April 1975. A temporary specialist researcher was appointed at the International Secretariat to monitor the effects of the war on political prisoners. The reported release of all political prisoners in South Vietnam was welcomed as a termination of the previous pattern of laige-scale imprisonment.
During the year. Amnesty International worked on 1,000 adoption and investigation cases in Asia, most of them persons detained without charge or trial. Compared with other parts of the world, the adopted prisoners tend to be detained for extremely long periods: imprisonment for more than 10 years is common. This is particularly the case with Indonesia where tens of thousands of prisoners are spending their 10th year in detention.
In the relatively few cases where trials are held for political prisoners, the charges tend to be based on vague, broadly defined laws which restrict normal forms of political opposition, and this is made worse by questionable legal procedures which hamper the prisoner in the preparation of an adequate defence.
83
There have been political show trials in Indonesia, the Philippines and in the Republic of Korea.
Bangladesh
Following increasing civil disturbances, combined with an economic crisis aggravated by extensive flooding this summer, the government imposed a number of extreme measures during the past year. On 23 July 1974, the government introduced the death penalty for persons found guilty of specific crimes before special tribunals. On 28 December 1974, a state of emei^ency was declared and approved by Parliament, and this was followed by presidential rule one month later.
Until then, Bangladesh had been the only country in the sub-continent not under emergency rule. But the December 1974 declaration suspended the enforcement of all fundamental constitutional rights and introduced provisions for indefinite detention without trial on very wide grounds, without facilities for bail or review by an advisory board that existed under previous legislation.
The Fourth Constitutional Amendment of 25 January 1975 established the presidential form of government, but at the same time introduced serious curbs on the independence of the judiciary. Although habeas corpus petitions can still technically be made. Supreme Court powers to act upon them have in practice been seriously limited. On 24 February 1975 the formation of the only national party, the Bangladesh Krishak-Sramik Awami League (Baksal), was announced, and all other political parties were proscribed.
According to reliable reports, 2,000 persons have been arrested under the new emergency powers. They include the well-known civil rights lawyer Moudud Ahmed, who had defended Sheikh Mujibur Rahman (now President of Bangladesh) in the Agartalla Conspiracy case in 1968. He was, however, released early in March.
Amnesty International Secretary General Martin Ennals discussed the recent constitutional changes, and the state of emergency with the President Mujibur Rahman and the Ministers of Law and Foreign Affairs during his visit to Dacca from 25-28 March 1975. While expressing his concern about the wide powers of arrest and detention recently assumed, Mr Ennals urged that prisoners arrested under preventive detention legislation should be brought to trial at the earliest opportunity.
In this context, he raised the cases of four members of the Jatiya Samajtantric Dal (JSD) who were arrested on 17 March 1974 and are still held without trial in Dacca Central Jail. Their cases are presently being investigated by AI groups. Mr Ennals also discussed the serious curbs on fundamental rights, and discussed the position regarding the Biharis in Bangladesh and their prospects for leaving the country.
Mr Ennals asked the Law Minister about the existence of rules of conduct governing the conduct of the Rakkhi Bahini, a para-military force largely responsible for law and order and political arrests. The Secretary General said that a number of allegations of brutality and reports of persons disappearing after arrests by the Rakkhi Bahini had reached AI. The Supreme Court of Bangladesh, in its judgement of the Shahjehan case, had seriously criticized the conduct of
84
the Rakkhi Bahini.
Finally, the Secretary General inquired about the possibility of trial and release of some 2,000 prisoners AI estimates are awaiting trial on charges of collaboration with the Pakistan Army during the 1971 war.
It is not possible to give a precise estimate of the number of political prisoners now detained in Bangladesh. Following the Secretary General's discussions in Dacca, he received from the Bangladesh government a list of 383 prisoners now held under the Emergency Regulations and the Special Powers Act. However, AI believes the actual number of political prisoners is considerably higher.
Most political prisoners now held belong to the extreme leftwing groups or are members of the JSD, whose leaders have nearly all been arrested over the last year. Presently the number of adoption and investigation cases is very small, but AI has been in constant touch with the Bangladesh government about developments affecting fundamental rights. Apart from the Secretary General's visit, the South Asia researcher also briefly visited Dacca in January and met with the Minister of Law.
Bhutan
On 1 June 1974, the day before the coronation of King Jigme Singye Wangchuk, the Bhutan government announced the discovery of a plot to assassinate the King. On 5 March 1974, 30 persons had been arrested, including the Bhutanese Deputy Home Minister, as well as 26 Tibetan residents in Bhutan. The arrests came at a time when the position of the some 3,500 Tibetan refugees in Bhutan had become increasingly precarious.
In a letter dated 18 November 1974, Amnesty International sought assurances from the King that the government would observe legal safeguards for those to be tried and that representations could be made in advance of those who might face the death penalty. AI representatives also discussed the trial and interrogation methods of these prisoners with the Bhutanese representative at the United Nations.
On 21 March 1975, Mumtaz Soysal, Turkish member of AI's International Executive Committee, presented a list of 23 prisoners to the Bhutanese representative in New Delhi. In their discussions, Mr Soysal learned that the trial of the prisoners had already finished and, in spite of assurances made on 29 July 1974 that the trial proceedings would be made public, transcripts were not available. According to the Bhutanese representative, five or six people were released, and, whereas some prisoners were sentenced to death, the King had commuted their sentences to life imprisonment. At present, AI is continuing its investigations into their trial and prison conditions.
Brunei
In July 1974, Amnesty International completed a review of the cases of all 49 known detainees in Brunei. These cases had been under investigation by AI groups for almost a year. Since most of them had been detained without a trial of any description for over 11 years—the equivalent of a severe prison sentence—AI felt that the emphasis in these cases should properly lie on the lack of any trial procedures and on the apparent political motivation for the continued detention
85
of the men. On this basis, it was decided to change the status of each of the 49 cases from investigation to full adoption.
Since the United Kingdom retains responsibihty for the conduct of Brunei's external affairs and since Britain still has considerable influence in the sultanate, group activity was directed largely towards the British government. Following an extensive lobbying campaign, a number of British members of parhament wrote on behalf of groups to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office seeking official comment on the position of the 49 detainees. AI Secretary General Martin Ennals had written on 18 June 1974 to British Foreign Secretary James Callaghan requesting that he raise the question of the detainees with the authorities in Brunei. Appeals had also been addressed directly to Hassanal Bolkiah Muizaddin Waddaulah, Sultan of Brunei, and to members of his government.
On 1 November 1974, three of the 49 men were released from detention after taking an oath of loyalty to the Sultan and the Brunei government. This move followed an announcement by the Sultan in September to the effect that his government did not intend to hold the detainees indefinitely and that an advisory committee had been set up to review their cases. The committee, he announced, was to "study and review the situation of those who have realized their past wrong-doing and who are willing to mend and choose their way according to the teaching of Islam".
Further releases were made in January and March 1975, and to date a total of 11 detainees have been freed. They have all either taken an oath of loyalty or made statements condemning the leaders of the 1962 revolt. Groups continue to write to the Sultan welcoming the releases as they occur and urging the release of the remaining prisoners.
Burma
On 5 December 1974, students from Rangoon University seized the coffin of former United Nations Secretary General U Thant from a funeral procession and put it in a makeshift mausoleum on the university campus. The action was generally interpreted as a symbolic protest against the government of President Ne Win, who took power in a military coup d'état in 1962, since U Thant was identified with President Ne Win's long-standing political adversary, former President U Nu.
A week later widespread rioting and looting broke out. Martial law was declared following a night raid by troops and police on the university campus to recover U Thant's body. According to official statements, 2,887 students, Buddhist monks and women were arrested on the campus, while nine were killed and 70 wounded during the riots. (Unofficial estimates put the dead at between 50 and 70.)
By February 1975, more than 2,100 of those arrested had been released. A further 300 others were given prison sentences ranging from 3 to 12 years, after being tried by special courts in Rangoon. Another 52 were reportedly sentenced to between 3 and 10 years on 10 April 1975.
Early in 1975, the Minister of the Interior, U Ko Ko, told a meeting of the People's Assembly in Rangoon that "questioning of those detained during the riot was being sped up" and that "action would be taken only against the true
culprits". AI sent a letter to the Minister in May 1975 asking whether investigations had been completed and seeking information about any further prison sentences which may have been imposed by the special courts.
Cambodia
On 17 April 1975, troops of the Cambodian People's Armed Forces of National Liberation entered the capital Phnom Penh after the government and armed forces of the Khmer Republic had announced their surrender. Ten days earlier. Amnesty International Secretary General Martin Ennals had sent a cable to Samdech (Prince) Norodom Sihanouk, Head of State and President of the National United Front of Cambodia (FUNK) expressing concern for civilians detained in areas of conflict.
At the time of writing (mid-May 1975) it remains hard to assess the human rights situation in Cambodia under FUNK's Royal Government of National Union (GRUNK). In the absence of any independent observers, allegations of mass executions and reprisals were impossible to substantiate, although the Research Department noted that a number of allegations were based on flimsy evidence and second-hand accounts.
On 16 Mayl975, Martin Ennals sent a further cable to GRUNK through the office of its mission in Paris welcoming the spirit of "large national union without distinction of class, religious beUef or political tendency" proclaimed by the recently convened Second National Congress of the Cambodian People. The cable then went on to reaffirm AI's opposition to the death penalty and urged GRUNK to show clemency towards former members of the old Phnom Penh government in a spirit of national reconciliation and concord.
The cable was sent in response to a GRUNK statement maintaining that the carrying out of the death sentence on Cambodia's seven "super-traitors" corresponded to "the sovereign right of the Cambodian people and nation". At least four of the seven, including former President Lon Nol, had fled the country before the Liberation Army entered Phnom Penh. But two others, former Prime Ministers Long Boret and Sirik Matak, had stayed in the capital and were placed under detention.
People's Republic of China
A newly-appointed researcher has been examining in detail material gathered by the Research Department on political imprisonment and reform-through-labour in the People's Republic of China.
Although fragmentary, some information is now available on the law and judicial system in China. In particular, an interview between Gerd Ruge, Peking correspondent of the West German newspaper Die Welt, and members of the Kwangtung Institute of Law and Political Science, provided detailed information on the structure of the courts in the country and the application of penalties. (Mr Ruge was a founder member of Amnesty International's German Section and a former member of Amnesty International's International Executive Committee.)
As reported in the interview, which took place in May 1974, "the principles
87
on which the court's work are based are Party policy and the law of the State". Although the country has no published code, there are regulations covering special penalties, such as "regulations concerning penalties against counterrevolutionaries". High, middle and lower courts are established at different local levels of authority, but important cases, especially when the death sentence is involved, are brought up before the Supreme Court.
The normal legal procedure allows the accused to make one appeal, although if he is "not convinced after the second trial, he must observe the decision and go where he is sent, but he can still appeal to the next court up". The function of public prosecutor does not exist any longer. The role of defence lawyer has also been abolished in the last few years, but the accused "has the full right" to defend himself or to "ask a kinsman...or people from the institution to which he belongs to speak for him". There still remain special courts to deal with particular cases, such as military courts, courts in mining areas and railroad courts.
Regarding the death penalty, it was stated that "extremely few criminals are sentenced to death...Although some criminals have committed monstrous crimes, the anger of the masses can be appeased by sending them to reform farms." In spite of the maintenance of ordinary prisons, especially in large cities, it is now thought that most prisoners spend their term of imprisonment working in farms or factories. Some of these production units have only prisoners as workers-falling therefore within the category of "labour camps"—whereas some others employ free workers as well as prisoners. This has been substantiated by the first autobiographical account of life in Chinese labour camps by Bao Ruo-wang, a French national released in 1964, when France and the People's Republic of China established diplomatic relations, after seven years in detention as a "counter-revolutionary".
According to Mr Bao's account, prisoners in Peking's prisons and in the labour camps of the northeast were generally well-treated by the guards and administration. Intense political re-education was part of daily routine, and the completion of imprisonment depended in various ways on the "political attitude" of the prisoners. The prison diet varied. There were times when the food provided was extremely deficient; Bao comments that this coincided with two years of famine conditions affecting the whole country.
Republic of China (Taiwan)
Work on behalf of prisoners in the Republic of China (Taiwan) has continued to prove difficult as a result of the lack of detailed response from Taiwanese authorities. In consequence, valuable contacts have been made and built up outside Taiwan, and these are now likely to prove useful in the light of the official announcement in April 1975 of a reduction of sentences for all prisoners in Taiwan.
Amnesty International members in Japan have continued to provide information on Taiwan through their links with overseas Taiwanese groups. In view of the difficulty in obtaining information from inside Taiwan, efforts have been made, particularly by the A1 German Section coordination group, to establish supplementary channels for information. One particular feature of the German
group work has been a three-tier campaign, carried out over a period of several months, on behalf of the group of cases connected with the so-called "People's Happiness Party" which is alleged by the government to have planned to establish an "independent Taiwan".
Despite the generally unrewarding nature of official inquiries, certain groups have made important progress in their contacts with the authorities. Particular emphasis here has been laid on Taiwan's American connections. An example is the case of Su Tung-ch'i, where the adoption group has had useful contact with the Taiwanese diplomatic representatives in the United States.
The condition of Su Tung-chi has caused particular concern: he is reportedly suffering from high blood pressure, numbness and dizziness. Reports received by the International Secretariat from the prison island of Lu Tao state that more than half the prisoners on the island suffer from similar symptoms-high blood pressure, numbness, trembling and burning sensations. The reports say there is no qualified doctor to minister to the 200 prisoners on the island—and no evidence that any of them have been removed to hospital for treatment.
AI has also received allegations of torture of prisoners from a reliable source. These state that different types of torture are applied to certain classifications of prisoner, ranging from psychological torture, such as sleep deprivation, to severe beatings, water torture and electrical shocks. In almost all cases, it is reported that prisoners who attempt to lodge an appeal are liable to receive especially harsh sentences.
In November 1974, an urgent action campaign was launched through all AI groups and national sections on behalf of two well-known writers, Lee Ao and Hsieh Ts'ung-min, after reports had been received that their health had seriously deteriorated. AI later heard that Mr. Hsieh had been moved to hospital for medical treatment and that relatives are allowed to visit him.
Following the death of President Chiang Kai-shek on 5 April 1975, his son. Premier Chiang Ching-kuo, ordered a nationwide reduction of sentences for all Taiwanese prisoners. For the first time since 1949, this measure is to include political prisoners. On 22 April, AI Secretary General Martin Ennals cabled Chiang Ching-kuo welcoming the reduction in sentences, and requesting full details of individual commutations as they affect political prisoners. On 11 May, Professor James Seymour, Professor of PoHtical Science at New York University, was sent on a mission to Taiwan for discussions with the Taiwanese authorities and to make formal inquiries as to how the reduction of sentences will affect particular cases and groups of cases in which AI has taken an interest.
Sources close to the government estimate the number of political prisoners in Taiwan at 300, while exile Taiwanese sources say there are some 8,000 held. Other outside observers generally believe several thousands are being held for non-violent political dissent.
AI groups are working on 14 adopted and 71 investigation cases.
Hong Kong
In December 1974, the Hong Kong government decided to send back to the People's RepubUc of China Chinese nationals caught entering the colony without
89
permission. In January 1975 Amnesty International Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to British Foreign Secretary James Callaghan to ask what steps the Hong Kong government had taken to ascertain beforehand whether these individuals would face punishment on their return, and whether an attempt had been made, once the decision to deport had been taken, to find alternative countries of residence.
In reply, Under Secretary of State Lord Goronwy-Roberts asserted that "each case is quickly but carefully examined...and full account is taken of any special circumstance or genuine hardship". However, the principles on which the screening procedures and assessment of each case were based remained unclear. Lord Goronwy-Roberts also maintained that going to Hong Kong illegally would normally be regarded by the Chinese authorities as a civil misdemeanour, not calling for penal correctives, although no evidence was given on this point. As for third countries of residence, those possessing valid entry permits would "probably" be permitted to travel onwards, but Hong Kong would not and could not become a general clearing-house.
India
The largest number of poUtical prisoners in India remain detained in West Bengal. Following the hunger strike of 46 political prisoners demanding improvements in prison conditions. Amnesty International Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote on 14 June 1974 to Prime Minister Indira Gandhi of India and the Chief Minister of West Bengal, Siddharta Sankar Ray, presenting a report on the treatment and detention conditions of political prisoners in the State. When no response was received to this report, nor to any of the earlier letters AI had sent to the Indian government on the subject, the report was published on 16 September 1974.
In this Report on Prison Conditions in West Bengal, AI, following its normal policy of not condoning acts of violence, expressed its concern about the large numbers of political prisoners detained without trial. These are estimated at between 15,000 and 20,000, some of whom have been so detained for up to five years. Most of the prisoners are alleged to be members of the Communist Party of India (Marixst-Leninist), commonly known as "Naxalites", others are members of the Communist Party of India (Marxist). Some are detained under preventive detention laws in force since the state of emergency declared in 1971 (such as the Maintenance of Internal Security Act and the Defence of India Rules), but most are "under trial" prisoners, charged with specific criminal offences.
Prfsoners live in extremely overcrowded conditions, which may well have contributed to the deaths of 88 prisoners (reportedly while trying to escape) during the period December 1970- January 1972. The report further listed the use of bar fetters on prisoners, sometimes for periods of up to two years, and insufficient hygienic and medical facilities, as well as the use of torture during police interrogation.
AI submitted a number of recommendations with the report, suggesting that the government confine itself to prosecuting only those against whom there is evidence that they committed criminal offences, and that all such prisoners be brought to trid without further delay or, alternatively, be released if no
90
trial is possible within three months. In accordance with the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, AI also made a number of specific recommendations regarding the improvement of prison conditions. AI asked the Indian government to investigate any allegations of torture which may come to its attention, and that an independent inquiry be made into the many prison incidents which result in the deaths of prisoners.
In its reaction to the report, the Indian government only seriously contested the numbers of political prisoners estimated by AI, maintaining that 1,609 prisoners were held in West Bengal in connection with "extremist activities". However, an investigation made by The Times of India on 30 September 1974 explained the difference in numbers by the fact that political prisoners, when arrested for alleged criminal offences, are not entitled to the special classification for political prisoners-provided for in the 1956 jail code rules.
The state of serious overcrowding in West Bengal prisons and the inadequate medical facilities was subsequently confirmed by the West Bengal Jail Code Revision Committee, set up by the present government in 1972, and which presented its report in February 1974. On page 32 of the report, the committee states: "The immediate problem that challenges the administrators is to devise effective means of reducing the jail population in the bigger interest of the community itself." The committee made its recommendations when the total prison population in West Bengal was 20,000. In September 1974, it had risen to 24,000.
The Times of India, the Hindustan Times and the Indian Express, in reacting to the AI report, were among the leading papers which requested in their editorials that prisoners detained under the Defence of India Rules and the Maintenance of Internal Security Act be brought to trial without further delay, and that an impartial inquiry be instituted to investigate the allegations of torture. Although AI has received reliable reports since then stating that the number of political prisoners in the state has been reduced to to some 8,000, because of the releases of many "under trial" prisoners on bail, the Indian government has not—as far as AI is aware—taken positive steps to investigate any allegations made in the report.
Mr Ennals, while attending the AI Regional Conference in New Delhi (see chapter on Membership) met the Indian Home Secretary N.K. Mukarji, as well as other officials in the Home Ministry. During his discussions, Mr Ennals stressed the need fc«- an independent investigation into prison conditions in West Bengal and also raised the issue of the continuation of preventive detention laws in force since the declaration of a state of emergency in 1971.
The most important of these laws, the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, has over the past year been used to detain political opponents, members of trade union movements, as well as participants in widespread disobedience movements led by Jayaprakash Narayan. Since detention of such prisoners usually is for only a short time, AI has not taken up their cases on an individual basis. The powers of preventive detention under the Maintenance of Internal Security Act were enlarged by a Presidential Order of 16 November 1974 in a move against "economic offenders". The order also removed the right of appeal to the courts against illegal detention, as guaranteed in Part 3 of the Indian Constitution.
As far as AI can assess, these enlarged powers of arrest and detention have not
91
been used to detain political prisoners. But whereas the continuation of the state of emergency and the preventive detention legislation is being increasingly questioned within India, the government introduced on 8 May 1975 a bill in ParHament increasing the period of detention without trial to two years, not subject to review by an advisory board as provided for in article 22 of the constitution.
AI over the past year has taken further steps to ensure the early release of some Pakistani nationals who fled from East Bengal during the Bangladesh war. One of them, Iftikar Mahmood Randhawa, was released shortly after he was featured in AI's May 1974 Prisoners of the Month Campaign.
AI Secretary General Martin Ennals raised the issue of capital punishment for the first time with the Indian government when he made a special appeal on 22 November 1974 on behalf of Kista Gowd and Bhoomaiah, two peasants from Bihar and members of the Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist), who had been sentenced to death in January 1972 and are awaiting execution.
Indonesia
More than 55,000 political prisoners, all detained without charge or trial since 1965, are now in their 10th year in prison.Their position is increasingly desperate because despite the passage of many years, the government's policy towards them has remained essentially unchanged. In the past year the government has attempted to define away the problem by insisting that there are no political prisoners in Indonesia and by re-naming political prisons as "rehabilitation centers". Official estimates continued to be given for the number of prisoners detained and these have varied between 20,000 and 35,000.
An Amnesty International delegation from Australia led by Richard McGarvie, Chairman of the Victoria Bar Council, and including Senator Peter Baume, Liberal Member of Parliament, Reverend Neil Gilmore, President of the Australian Council of Churches, and Mrs Leonore Ryan of AI's Victoria Section, arrived in Jakarta in January 1975. They were joined by the Head of Asian Research at the International Secretariat, Wen-hsien Huang. Regrettably Indonesian ministers and officials who were directly concerned with political imprisonment refused or were not able to meet the delegation to discuss the problem of imprisonment. The delegation therefore was unable to obtain from any ministry or department a statement of the goverrmient's view of the problem, nor was it possible to reconcile the government's claims regarding the total number of people detained with the figures compiled by independent observers.
Whereas the Indonesian government statistics in the last years have varied around 30,000, several reliable observers put the total number of prisoners held at nearer 100,000. As more is known about the problem it has become evident that there are large numbers of political prisoners held outside recognized prison institutions. Throughout the many islands of the republic, in every town that serves as an administrative center, political prisoners are to be found, often in very small prisons that hold no more than between 10 to 20 detainees, or in military garrisons where the prisoners are used as unpaid labour in conditions that can be described as enforced serfdom.
There are an estimated 1,000 women political prisoners. The husbands of many of the married prisoners are themselves detained, and their children have
92

u.

been practically orphaned for 10 years. In April 1975, the International Secretariat and coordination groups publicized the special plight of women prisoners in a campaign centered around Kartini Day, which is officially celebrated in Indonesia as Women's Day to commemorate a famous national heroine. In the context of International Women's Year, Indonesia is prominent as the country with probably the largest number of women political prisoners.
Approaches were made from the International Secretariat and from national sections to the member states of the Inter-Governmental Group on Indonesia, a consortium of 13 governments which has provided extensive development aid to Indonesia since 1967. It was emphasized to the member governments that the Indonesian authorities have not responded to the many discreet appeals in the past to improve the conditions for prisoners, to make better provision for fair trials and to release all those held without trial.
Although the main reason given by the government continues to be that the 1965 prisoners constitute a subversive communist threat if released—despite contrary evidence relating to the majority of those prisoners—it is apparent from official policy regarding detention of others held in connection with the January 1974 events that its overall policy has identical effect for those whom the government cannot, and does not, claim to be communist.
Of the more than 700 people arrested in January 1974, about 40 are still in prison without trial. Although less than 10 were released in early 1975, an official spokesman stated that they could be re-arrested at any time. Moreover, although detention without trial under the Subversion Law of 1963 is limited to one year, the official view is that at the expiry of that year, all that is required by the authorities to continue holding the prisoner is to charge him again under
93
the Subversion Law. This apparently can be done repeatedly.
Despite promises made by leading Indonesian officials to, among others, the Dutch parliamentary mission to Indonesia in September 1974, so far only two of those prisoners detained in January 1974 have been brought to trial. Hariman Siregar, a student leader, was sentenced to 6 years' imprisonment on evidence which indicates no more than that he had expressed disagreement with the government's economic and social development policy. Similarly, in the trial of Sjahrir, the prosecution had asked for a sentence of 16 years, on the basis of evidence which shows that the defendant had merely criticized the government's development policy.
Trids for the 1965 prisoners continue at a slow rate: the nimiber of prisoners who have been brought to trial since 1965 is probably about 700. Despite repeated government promises that the courts would expand to cope with more trials, the annual average is still about 100 cases. In April, four women political prisoners were brought to trial and charged with alleged involvement in the 1965 events. The prosecution has demanded life imprisonment for one of the defendants and 20 years' imprisonment for the others. The prosecution further asked that there should be no reduction in sentences to allow for the nine years the defendants had already stayed in prison. Two of the prisoners are adopted by AI. This is the first time that leading members of the now-banned women's organization Gerwani have been brought to trial.
The permanent "resettlement" of Category B prisoners in labour camps is a stated objective of government policy. In September 1974, Indonesian journalists were again taken to visit the camps on Buru Island, to which some 150 wives and their children have now been transported. Conditions in prison units on the island are known to be very bad, the food allowed to the prisoners is inadequate and medical care is virtually non-existent.
The government in September 1974 stated that, of all the people arrested in connection with the 1965 events, more than 540,000 have been released. By definition, these people belong to the sub-category CI, and this figure of 540,000 is consonant with previous government claims about overall release figures. As early as January 1972 President Suharto had announced that all Category C prisoners had been released. (He said then that there had been 22,000 remaining prisoners belonging to Category C in the preceding year.)
However, Indonesian Prosecutor-General Ali Said told the Dutch parliamentary mission in September 1974 that in fact the government was still, in late 1974, trying to implement the release of Category C prisoners. Apparently the territorial military commanders had been given the power to decide on the implementation of release in phases, and individual commanders varied in doing so. According to the Prosecutor-General, it was possible that one territory had reached its target before another, but he maintained that ultimately in 1975 everyone would certainly have solved this problem.
The claimed overall figures of releases of 540,000 indicates the dimensions of the problem in terms of numbers of people waiting to be released. The government's claims that only 20-35,000 prisoners remain are meant to refer only to prisoners of Categories A and B, since by their own claims, all Category C
94
prisoners have already been released. As it is now officially admitted by the Prosecutor-General that Category C prisoners awaiting release still remain, it is clear that the official total figures very much underestimate the real numbers in prison.
Despite an official announcement last year that "certificates of non-involvement" in the 1965 attempted coup are no longer required, most released prisoners face difficulties in getting official and private employment because they do not possess the certificates, and consequently find it hard to make a living.
AI groups now work for a total of 218 cases. There have been releases, for the first time this year, of AI adopted prisoners from 1965. In January 1975, a longstanding AI adoptee, Sitor Situmorang, the distinguished writer, was released from prison and placed under house arrest. He was one of about 10 former PNI prisoners, all classified as Category B, released in January.
Democratic People's Republic of Korea
In April 1975, President Kim Il-sung said during a visit to Peking that North Korea would not stand by "with arms folded" if revolution came to the Republic of Korea (i.e., South Korea). The cold-war climate which pervades North-South Korean relations has been a particularly serious obstacle to Amnesty International work.
In North Korea, there has been an almost total suppression of information about the "re-education" of political prisoners. Two exceptions to this were the cases of foreigners imprisoned in North Korea—and adopted by AI groups. The Venezuelan poet Ali Lameda was released in September 1974 after 7 years' imprisonment. He had been sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment in 1967 on political charges. His release is thought to have been the result of high-level, diplomatic initiatives by the Venezuelan government. Another adopted case was that of the French writer and translator Jacques Sedillot, now reported to be released and living in North Korea.
Republic of Korea
The 1972 Constitution gave the President the power to suspend basic rights and freedoms "in case the national security or the pubhc safety and order is seriously threatened or is anticipated to be threatened" (article 53). During the past year. President Park Chung-hee has employed this power in the name of national security against the presumed threat from the North, so that the position of basic human rights has seriously deteriorated.
In his report on his mission for Amnesty International to South Korea in July-August 1974, American lawyer William Butler concluded that "no evidence was found from any source indicating a present external and internal threat of communist takeover sufficient to justify such a total denial of human freedom' Furthermore, "even if such a threat did exist, the use of torture by any government must be condemned as inhuman and barbarous and not acceptable to any civilized nation".
President Park invoked article 53 to introduce two emergency decrees, Num -
95
ber 1 of January 1974 prohibiting criticism of the constitution, and Number 4 of April 1974 imposing heavy penalties, including death, for anyone found to "praise, encourage or sympathize with" the activities of an outlawed student organization. A total of 203 individuals were imprisoned as a result of these two emergency decrees. Although both decrees were rescinded in August 1974, and the sentences of 168 of the prisoners suspended, conditional on good behaviour, in February 1975, the sentences still apply and may be reinvoked at any time.
Among the 80 prisoners adopted by AI were students belonging to the group of 54 whose trial by court martial in July 1974 Mr Butler tried unsuccessfully to attend. Many well-known Koreans who supported the students were adopted. These included the poet Kim Chi-ha and the Roman Catholic bishop of Wonju City, Monsignor Daniel Tji Hak-son, who is Honorary President of AFs South Korean Section. In addition, a special postcard campaign was initiated on behalf of the eight men sentenced to death for their alleged part in the student "plot".
There was widespread interest in the case of the eight men sentenced to death and of the 14 others also imprisoned for their part in the so-called "People's Revolutionary Party"(PRP) case. In December, an American missionary was expelled from Korea following his investigation into the case. He maintained that the charges made by the Korean authorities against the PRP, that it had engineered student riots and served the interests of North Korea, were a complete fabrication.
In March 1975, a second AI mission was sent to South Korea to inquire into allegations of torture made by released prisoners. The delegates, Dr Eric Karup Pedersen, a Danish surgeon, and Brian Wrobel, an English lawyer, were hindered by official intimidation, including the effects of a new law prohibiting criticism of the government in conversations with foreigners. Despite this, the mission obtained evidence that torture had been used systematically.
During the course of the mission, the PRP case went on appeal to the Supreme Court on 8 April, and Mr Wrobel attended the hearing. The death sentences on the eight men were confirmed by the Supreme Court, in the absence of the defendants and their lawyers. Etespite an assurance given to the mission by the Public Prosecutor's office that sufficient time would be granted for an appeal for clemency or for re-trial, as is guaranteed by law, the eight men were hanged without any opportunity to appeal less than 24 hours after the Supreme Court had passed its verdict. In its report, the mission strongly deplored the execution of the eight men. Moreover, the mission found that torture had been used to extract false confessions and as a tactic of intimidation; that lawyers acting for defendants in political trials were continually harrassed; and that pre-trial irregularities prevented an innocent defendant from presenting an adequate defence.
Mr Wrobel gave evidence on the findings of the mission at the hearings in May before the Sub-Committee on International Organizations and Movements of the Congressional Committee on Foreign Affairs of the United States House of Representatives. The mission report was also read into the record of the inquiry into international human rights by the US Senate Foreign Relations Sub-Committee on Foreign Aid.
96
Malaysia
The exact number of men and women imprisoned without trial in West and East Malaysia is not known, part of the problem being that lists of detainees are no longer published in the parliamentary records. It is thought, however, that several hundred alleged communists and communist-sympathizers are detained under the provisions of the Internal Security Act in West Malaysia, and that most of them have been, or are being, moved to the new Kamunting camp in Perak. Since June 1973 over 70 persons who were held awaiting deportation are believed to have been released and authorized to stay in Malaysia, leaving about 12 people still held under banishment orders in Seremban Prison.
In East Malaysia, while Amnesty International has taken up the cases of only a few prisoners who, it seems clear, have had no involvement whatever in violence, it is known that there has been a sharp decrease in the number of detainees following the surrender of nearly 500 communist guerrillas in Sarawak.
A government spokesman announced on 3 May 1975 that only 81 men and women were still under detention in Sarawak, al^iough it was reported the same day that 62 people had been arrested in April for allegedly givii^ food and money to guerrillas in their area.
In October 1974, two leaders of the opposition Sarawak National Party and eight others were arrested under preventive detention laws. These arrests followed the detention in August, shortly before general elections were due to begin throughout the Federation of Malaysia, of members of the opposition Social Justice Party in neighbouring Sabah. At least three Social Justice Party candidates are believed to be still held without trial. AI has received no reply to a letter sent on 21 November 1974 to Tan Sri Muhammad Gazali bin Shafie, the Minister of Home Affairs, in Kuala Lumpur seeking information on all these detainees.
Early in December 1974, there were large-scale demonstrations in various parts of West Malaysia by students protesting primarily against the government's handhng of the problems of rural poverty and high prices. Over 1,000 demonstrators were arrested and charged with unlawful assembly after clashes with police. At one point para-military police entered the campuses of the University of Malaya and the adjoining National University to conduct room-to-room searches.
Apart from those charged with unlawful assembly, who were later released on personal bonds pending trial, at least 18 people were arrested in December under the Internal Security Act, which authorizes detention without trial. These included student leaders, a prominent youth leader and three lecturers of the University of Malaya. A number of people were also detained under the Internal Security Act in the months after December, including a lawyer who was arrested two days after he had begun the defence of 48 squatters and students charged in September with unlawful occupation of state land. Although there have been many releases in the meantime, nine such cases are currently under investigation and three prisoners have been adopted.
Besides the cases of persons detained in or after Decemer 1974, AI groups were active on the cases of 17 men and women who have been held without trial in Malaysia for periods ranging from nine years to less than one year.
97
Nepal
Political imprisonment in Nepal showed little sign of change over the last year, although two members of parliament, Ratna P.Kharel and K.P. Bhandari, both AI adoptees, were released early in 1974. By .the end of 1974, AI had details of 206 political prisoners, detained in 26 prisons in Nepal. AI groups working on behalf of 25 adoption and 72 investigation cases took part in a major campaign for a general amnesty, to coincide with the coronation of King Birendra on 24 February 1975.
In a letter of 24 October 1974 to the King launching the campaign, Secretary General Martin Ennals suggested that such an amnesty could include all political prisoners held under the R^j-Kaj Act and the Security Act—insofar as they had not been charged—pohtical prisoners now ill, and persons arrested since 1960-63 in connection with anti-state activities. Although the King announced at the time of his coronation that a commission would be set up to recommend appropriate constitutional reforms, and that 401 criminal prisoners would be released in an amnesty, no political prisoners were included.
On his way to AI's South Asia Regional Conference, Mr Ennals called on the Home Minister, Horn Bahadur Shrestha, on 17 March 1975. The Home Minister stated that there were presently between 140 and 147 prisoners held in Nepal for political reasons and promised that he would check the list of 206 prisoners AI presented. At the time of writing this report, no communication has been received from the Minister. Martin Ennals stressed that some political prisoners, such as the Al-adopted Supreme Court lawyer Ram Raja Prasad Singh, have been held longer than the maximum of three years detention without trial provided for under the Security Act. The Minister did not deny this and announced that "special courts" were being set up to deal with "special cases".
On 30 September 1974, the Executive Director of the AI Nepalese Section, Professor Shesh Kanta Aryal, was arrested in connection with the establishment of a now-defunct social welfare organization, set up under the auspices of the Nepali Congress leader, B.P. Koirala. Mr Ennals sent a telegram expressing his concern about the arrest.
On 17 December 1974, ex-Foreign Minister and United Nations representative Rishikesh Shaha, who is also the Chairman of AI's Nepalese Section, was briefly arrested and held for investigation. Both members were released after a short time. However, among the political prisoners now detained in Nepal are six members of the Nepalese Section.
Pakistan
Political tension-increased in Pakistan as a result of continued demands for a greater autonomy in Baluchistan and the North West Frontier Province. Armed rebellion occurred on a wider scale and on 8 February 1975, the Provincial Home Minister was killed in a bomb explosion at Peshawar University. This incident was followed by the arrests under the Defence of Pakistan Rules of at least 400 members of the opposition National Awami Party (NAP), including its leader. Khan Abdul Wall I^an, and members of the National Assembly and Senate. The NAP was immediately banned and many students were arrested, nearly all of whom have now been released.
According to the NAP, 7,000 prisoners were detained in the summer of 1974
98
for political reasons in Baluchistan and the North West Frontier Province. Amnesty International at present is working for only 61 individual cases of prisoners held largely under the Defence of Pakistan Rules, some of whom have been charged with specific offences. Fourteen of these persons have now been adopted, including three Baluchistan leaders, Mirghaus Bizenjo, Khair Baksh Marri and Ataullah Khair Mengal, who are still awaiting trial following their arrest in August 1973.
The assassination of the Home Minister was followed by a number of legal and constitutional changes restricting fundamental rights. By way of the Third Amendment to the Constitution, passed on 12 February 1975, parliament was deprived of its six-monthly obligation to approve the continuation of the state of emergency (and thus also the existence of preventive detention legislation such as the Defence of Pakistan Rules, whose abuse by the police forces was admitted by the Attorney General before the Second Pakistani Jurist's Conference held in January 1975).
The maximum period of detention before producing a detainee before an advisory board was increased to three months, and preventive detention for an indefinite period of time was introduced for persons "acting or attempting to act in a way prejudicial to the security of the state". These provisions were later laid down in the Preventive Detention Laws (Amendment) Bill. Since the February arrests also included members of the assemblies and of the Senate, an ordinance was passed on 10 February 1975, depriving members of the National and Provincial Assemblies retroactively of immunity from arrest during the session period.
In an earlier attempt to counter acts of violence, the government had already set up special courts by way of the Suppression of Terrorist Activities (Special Courts) Ordinance of 5 October 1974, later followed by a bill of the same name. These provide for trial by a High Court judge of a wide range of scheduled offences, and also contain provisions for trial to be held in camera and for changing the burden of proof. The special courts are now widely in use.
One of the prisoners tried before such a court is former Minister of State and Public.Affiars, Mairaj Mohammed Khan, sentenced to 4 years' imprisonment on 9 January 1975. He was tried and sentenced in camera in Karachi Central Jail on charges of making objectionable speeches. He was adopted by AI and featured in the April 1975 Prisoners of the Month Campaign.
The government also introduced the death penalty for those guilty of explosions causing death or serious injury, by way of the Explosive Substances (Amendment) Bill, passed on 5 April 1975. AI Secretary General Martin Ennals discussed recent constitutional and legal changes with Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto during his three-day visit to Pakistan in March 1975. He also met with the Home Minister and had discussions with senior officials in the Foreign Ministry.
Mr Ennals raised with the Prime Minister the question of the increased number of political prisoners held without trial and the continued detention of the three Baluchistan leaders. He expressed concern about the serious departure from normal rules in the Special Courts procedure.
Mr Ennals also discussed the machinery to deal with complaints against abuse of poUce powers in view of a number of specific allegations of torture which had
99
been submitted to the High Courts of Pakistan and which had come to AI's attention. Allegations recently received include the hanging of political prisoners by the hands upside down and severe beatings as well as insertion of chilli pods in sensitive parts of the body.
The Prime Minister said the government would deal firmly with any excesses brought to his attention, and stressed his firm belief in the rule of law. He emphasized that all action taken in Pakistan was in accordance with the law and constitution. AI remains deeply concerned however at what appears to be a serious erosion of human rights in Pakistan despite the assurances of the Prime Minister.
The Philippines
The country continued to be governed under martial law which was imposed in September 1972. In December 1974, President Ferdinand Marcos announced for the first time statistics about political imprisonment under martial law. He said he had ordered the release of 622 of the 1,165 people so detained at the time. Some observers have pointed out that the 622 people released included a proportion who were actually prisoners awaiting trial on criminal chaises. Moreover, the number of people detained under martial law is estimated to be far larger. An American missionary. Reverend Paul Wilson, expelled from the Philipines after being arrested and detained in June 1967, estimated the total number of detainees at 1,600. Another American, Professor John Swomely, estimated the overall figure to be 15,000 people detained in prisons throughout the Phihppines.
One reason for the wide variation in estimates was because of difficulties in classifying the many prisoners held in detention centers. Some are held for suspected criminal offences for long periods awaiting trial, many are detained because of their political or religious beliefs, and others are imprisoned because of alleged involvement in activity against the government. The total number of prisoners of conscience detained after the presidential amnesty of December 1974 is probably about 1,000.
In a report by the Roman Catholic Major Religious Superiors in the Philippines, based on a nation-wide survey on the role of the Church under martial law, grave concern was expressed for violations of basic human rights. The report said that "there are frequent reports of physical torture from all regions of the country". Apparently the methods of torture employed were not restricted to physical brutality. Addictive drugs were used to alter the mentality of prisoners, who were also subjected to "rehabilitation" by psychologists and psychiatrists. Another church report quoted the military commandant of Camp Crame, a much-criticized detention center, as saying: "call it what you may, call it brain-washing or whatnot, but simply we have to change the attitude of these persons, and that is not a simple job to do". In August 1974, Amnesty International Secretary General Martin Ennals, in a letter to President Marcos, called for an investigation into incidents involving torture allegations.
Detailed allegations of torture were made by a political detainee at Camp Olivas near Manila, Father Edicio de la Torre, who described how he was beaten after arrest in December 1974, as well as brutal treatment administered to fellow
100
prisoners. Severe torture included the application of electric shock to the genitals of prisoners, Father Edicio said. Father Edicio and another Roman Catholic priest. Father Manuel Lohoz, went on hunger strike in protest against the torture and the indefinite detention of political prisoners at Camp Olivas.
On 2 January, the Secretary of National Defence, Juan Ponce Enrile, armounced an official inquiry into these and other allegations of ill-treatment and torture, after an appeal to the government by the Archbishop of Manila. In a letter to President Marcos, AI urged that the inquiry be truly independent, allowing for all parties to be heard fairly and guaranteeing full protection from reprisals to those who testified. The President was urged to make the full report public.
Defence Secretary Enrile was later reported to have admitted privately to the Archbishop of Manila that incidents of torture against martial law detainees had indeed occurred. According to a press report of 17 January, Mr Enrile also said that some colonels and other high officials had been court martialled. It was further reported that the Military Commission of Inquiry had found evidence that torture was used against some martial law detainees and had recommended that stern measures be taken against the personnel responsible.
Throughout the year, the Roman Catholic Church of the Philippines had taken a consistently firm stand against the injustices of martial law. In a statement issued in November 1974, Archbishop Jaime Sim of Manila expressed deep concern over the indefinite detention "for security reasons" of prisoners. He described such detention as unjust. "We cannot jail a man indefinitely and still call ourselves Christian," he said. He asked the President to issue a clear definition of subversion, because "right now it is a catch-all term that includes almost anything". He spoke of the "creeping climate of fear and uncertainty that is threatening the country".
Among the prisoners released in the last year was José Diokno, a former senator, who was a leading political critic of President Marcos and had been detained for two years without trial. He was released in September 1974 with four other prisoners in an "act of executive clemency" on the occasion of the President's 57th birthday. Mr Diokno and one of the other prisoners had been adopted by AI.
On 14 May, Al-adoptee Benigno Aquino ended a 40-day hunger strike in protest against politick imprisonment under martial law. Mr Aquino was formely the most prominent opposition senator and was widely considered as a strong candidate for the Presidency.
Sikkim
On 23 April 1975, the Lok Sabha (parliament) of India voted for the inclusion of Sikkim into the union of Indian States. The move, which changed the status of the Sikkimese monarchy from protectorate in 1973 to an associated state and eventually into the 22nd constitutional state of India, met with strong opposition from the Chogyal (ruler) Palden Thondup Namgyal and those loyal to him.
On the basis of reports that the Chogyal and Princess Yapshi-Pheunkang were under house arrest, Amnesty International Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to Prime Minister Indira Gandhi of India seeking assurances that full freedom of movement would be restored to members of the royal family and that adequate
101
measures were beii^ taken to ensure their safety. Singapore
Releases during the period January 1973-May 1974 probably brought the total of prisoners still held without trial in Singapore down to 20, most of them detained under the provisions of the Internal Security Act. In June 1974, however, the trend towards freeing political prisoners was reversed whbn more than 30 persons were detained under the Intemal Security Act. The government alleged that they were all members of the Malayan National Liberation Front, an arm of the banned, underground Malayan Communist Party.
Amnesty International estimates that some 60 men and women are now held without trial in various detention centers and holding centers in Singapore, their periods of detention ranging from 12 years to a few months. While it is quite possible that some of those arrested in June 1974 might have been released after questioning, it is almost certain that there have been no releases among the 17 detainees who were adopted or whose cases were under investigation before June.
Of particular concern are four men who have been detained since 1963, one of whom is held under a banishment order. Five other men and one woman are held under banishment orders. It is probable that they have all refused banishment to China or Malaysia and that they are detained awaiting deportation.
The Research Department estimates that some 40-50 people who were arrested in or after June 1974 are still in detention. The exact number is not known, but it is almost certainly higher than the figure of 30 generally quoted in June, since it is clear that arrests have continued since then.
These detainees, who probably include eight to 10 women, are of varied backgrounds. Among them is a well-known lawyer who has been active in the defence of political prisoners, an accountant, a journalist and two translators who were working for the Sin Chiew Jit Poh newspaper, businessmen, construction workers, students and civil servants. In March 1975, AI received detailed, though incomplete, lists of persons believed to have been detained in June 1974 or in the months following and, at the time of writing (June 1975), most of these cases are being taken up, initially on an investigation basis.
In September 1974, the Director of Prisons described at a specially-called news conference how convicted criminals are caned in such a way that they are scarred for life. A maximum of 24 strokes may be ordered by the courts as punishment for certain drug offences and crimes of violence. Strapped naked over a trestle with padding to prevent accidental injury to the spine, the prisoner is beaten with a cane more than one meter long and more than one centimeter thick by specially-trained prison officers. Normally, after three strokes the skin at the point of contact has split open and the buttocks are covered in blood.
Prisoners are said to struggle violently at first, but at the end those who have received more than three strokes are in a state of shock. Many collapse, but the medical officer and his assistants are on hand to revive them and apply antiseptic to the wound.
The Director of Prisons said that the caning is intended to give criminals "a taste of the violence they had inflicted on their victims". AI's Campaign for the Abolition of Torture wrote to Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore on 25
102
September 1974 pointing out that the caning of prisoners cannot but be seen as a violation of article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which states that no one shall be subjected to torture, or to cruel, inhuman or degradii^ treatment or punishment.
Sri Lanka
Of the 18,000 young prisoners detained after the insurgency, staged by the Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP) in April 1971, some 2,000 remain in detention today. Prisoners were arrested under the Emergency Regulations, but as of 31 December 1974, 192 have been sentenced to terms of imprisonment ranging from 2 to 20 years by the Criminal Justice Commission, a judicial committee set up especially to try those accused of complicity in the 1971 events, before which the normal rules of criminal procedure do not apply. At the end of January 1975, 391 prisoners were still to appear before the commission.
In January 1975, Amnesty International sent a mission to Sri Lanka to investigate the prospects of trial and release of prisoners held under the Emei^ency Regulations. Louis Blom-Cooper, an English lawyer, accompanied by the researcher for South Asia, Yvonne Teriingen, had extensive discussions with the Minister of Law and other senior officials in the Law and Prison Departments who cooperated in every way with the AI delegates. They visited WeHkada and New Magazine Prison in Colombo, as well as Pallekelle Camp near Kandy and attended proceedings before the Criminal Justice Commission. A report was prepared following the mission and presented to the Prime Minister, Mrs Sirimavo Bandaranaike, on 8 May 1975.
The report argued that standards of criminal justice should never, as had happened with the Criminal Justice Commission, be compromised. It said that the abandonment of longstanding legal procedures - such as the exclusion of hearsay, the inadmissability of confessions and the partial shifting of the onus of proof, to mention a few — jeopardized public regard for independence of the judiciary and subjected political offenders to a kind of second class system of justice. The report recommended that prisoners be tried before fully independent courts and that the Criminal Justice Commission Act be repealed. It also called for the repeal of any measures that discriminated against political prisoners.
Under the Emergency Regulations, prisoners can still be held for a period of 15 days in police custody without any kind of judicial control or access to legal assistance. This provision has given rise to a number of allegations that acts of police brutaUty were being committed during the 15-day period. While the AI mission was not in a position to verify the allegations, AI submitted in its report that there was no longer a need for detention in police custody without judicial control. It recommended its abolition and that prisoners be produced before a magistrate within 24 hours of their arrest.
Some prisoners are still being detained on suspicion of having committed offences punishable under the Emergency Regulations. A very small number of these prisoners appeared to have been detained without trial or charge since 1971. The report recommended that an inquiry be instituted into all penal establishments in Sri Lanka to investigate the cases of these prisoners, with a view to their immediate trial or release without further delay if no specific
103
charges exist. A few prisoners, generally members of Marxist splinter groups who did not participate in the 1971 insurrection, are held for security reasons on orders of the Executive. They can be detained indefinitely under the Emergency Regulations. AI urged that the government review and possibly abolish provisions that keep such prisoners in detention without an independent machinery for review.
The Sri Lanka government has put considerable emphasis on the rehabilitation of prisoners during their detention and after their release. A number of restrictions, however, on freedom of movement, association and speech are presently in force on some released prisoners, the majority of whom have not been tried. AI recommended that such restrictions should now be reviewed. The report also made a number of detailed recommendations regarding prison conditions of political prisoners. The report concluded that there had been a large increase in the number of executions in Sri Lanka since 1972 (two prisoners, having taken part in the 1971 insurgency, were sentenced to death before the criminal courts), and recommended abolition of the death penalty.
Specific mention should also be made of the efforts of many AI groups who worked for 35 prisoners of the Tamil minority, arrested in 1972 and 1973 and detained under the Emergency Regulations. The Minister of Justice informed the AI mission that all but three of the prisoners would be released. At the time of writing, however, 20 such prisoners remain imprisoned.
The continuation of the state of emergency now affects many areas outside the scope of the original reasons for its declaration. By way of Emergency Regulation 143/1, the government made it an offence to criticize Sri Lanka's constitution outside the National Assembly or the courts of law, thus depriving the Tamil minority of an important means of expressing its opinion democratically.
Thailand
In December 1974, two months after the drawing up of a new constitution (an occasion traditionally marked by an amnesty), the interim National Assembly unanimously passed a bill designed to free more than 9,000 political prisoners. The prisoners, whose release under the terms of the amnesty bill took place in early 1975, had been jailed by decree under the old regime of Prime Minister Thanom Kittikachorn, which ended after student riots in October 1973.
According to the Ministry of the Interior in Bangkok, among those set free were 347 accused of involvement in communism, while others had been detained for a variety of reasons, including personal rivalry with, or in opposition to, the Thanom regime. Unofficial sources claimed that the great majority had been accused of communist activities. AI Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to Prime Minister Kukrit Pramoj of Thailand on 19 May 1975 seeking confirmation that the release of the 9,000 political prisoners has been completed, and requesting details of other categories of prisoners to whom the amnesty may not have applied.
Democratic Republic of Vietnam
Amnesty International groups continue to press inquiries about a small
104
number of adopted prisoners in North Vietnam, but with absolutely no response from the authorities in Hanoi. They include several members of a musical group of "pop" musicians imprisoned in 1971, and two members of the so-called Nhan Van group of writers and intellectuals (named after a newspaper of the same name) given 15-year sentences in 1960 on espionage charges. During the next few months, fresh attempts will be made to get details of the last two cases, first adopted by AI in October 1969, in view of the fact that they are now due for release.
Republic of South Vietnam
On 30 April 1975 the Vietnam war ended and the Provisional Revolutionary Government (PRG) assumed control in South Vietnam. All the tens of thousands of political prisoners held by the defeated regime reportedly gained their freedom. On behalf of Amnesty International, Dirk Börner, Chairman of the International Executive Committee, cabled PRG President Huynh Tan Phat welcoming the return of peace to Vietnam and requesting confirmation of the reported releases. The International Secretariat subsequently advised AI groups with South Vietnamese prisoners to regard these cases as closed.
Early reports from journalists and other observers staying in Saigon after its "liberation" painted a favourable picture. Although the new administration quickly began a moral and material "clean-up" campaign, promising "severe punishment" for a wide variety of "illegal acts", ranging from "spreading rumours" and "collecting information" to "opposing the revolution", it was intent on emphasizing "national reconciliation and concord" (a concept drawn from the January 1973 Paris Agreements on Vietnam).
Close monitoring of reports from South Vietnam by the International Secretariat, where an expert temporary researcher was appointed to deal with the emergency situation, revealed few substantiated accounts of reprisals or executions in the weeks immediately following the change of government. A PRG representative in Paris assured Amnesty International Secretary General Martin Ennals that the PRG was opposed to capital punishment as a matter of policy. In late May, however, reports began to be received of street executions of criminal offenders as the PRG began to tackle the widespread problems of petty crime. As for prisoners, it seemed clear that in the Saigon area at least, the number of new detainees remained comparatively small.
By mid-May, those whose position was least clear seemed to be higher-ranking military, para-military and civilian personnel of the old regime. Thus in early May a PRG spokesman was quoted as saying that while over 100,000 private soldiers and non-commissioned officers of the old regime detained in Danang since March were being allowed to return home, some 6,000 officers-were being held for "reeducation". A television team from the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation visited one of the officers' camps near Danang, and their report suggested that conditions, while spartan, were not oppressive. In Saigon in mid-May, General Tran Van Tra confirmed that some military and a few civilian personnel were being held in detention; but further details were not forthcoming.
In April and May 1975, discussions took place in Algiers, Paris and London between high-ranking officials of the PRG and members of the International Executive Committee and International Secretariat. The talks centered on finding
105
out more about released political prisoners, and on a proposal for an AI mission to visit South Vietnam (and perhaps Hanoi) later in the year. A letter formally proposing such a mission was sent to PRG President Huynh Tan Phat in mid-May. Apart from maintaining and developing AI's relations with the PRG, the proposed mission would look into the PRG's policies towards law and order in general, and political imprisonment in particular, as well as into the question of aid for the rehabilitation of released prisoners.
In the 12 months preceding the collapse of the old administration in Saigon, the condition of South Vietnamese political prisoners seems to have remained largely as it was in July 1973 when AI published its report Political Prisoners in South Vietnam, at least as regards the four large national prisons at Chi Hoa, Thu Due, Tan Hiep and Con Son. Fresh evidence obtained by the AI German Section Coordination Group on Vietnam in autumn 1974 confirmed the continued existence of many of the abuses outlined in the report, including the widespread use of torture during interrogation, the reclassification of political prisoners as common criminals, the continued detention of political prisoners after their sentences had been served, and the dispatch of many of those eventually released to serve in the front-line units of the army.
AI marked the second anniversary of the January 1973 Paris Agreements on Vietnam by calling on the signatories (the United States, North Vietnam, Saigon and the PRG) and the participants in the February 1973 Paris Peace Conference (including the members of the now-defunct International Commission for Control and Supervision) to discharge their legal and moral responsibility to ensure the release and humane treatment of civilians detained throughout South Vietnam, or publicly to renounce any continuing responsibility as guarantors of the agreements. AI national sections were asked to take supplementary actions, with approaches to their local Vietnamese embassies.
Efforts by AI groups to keep track of individual prisoners were often frustrated by the large-scale and allegedly forced transfer of prisoners from one prison to another. Thus according to reliable reports from Saigon, in May 1974 some 500 Buddhist monks were forcibly dispersed from Chi Hoa to various provincial prisons, while in August and November, several hundred prisoners were taken from Tan Hiep and Chi Hoa to Con Son, after police had used tear-gas and beatings.
Fresh arrests continued throughout the 12 months in question though the total number of political prisoners - while certainly still exceeding several tens of thousands — remained the subject of disagreement and the object of conflicting propaganda claims. Among those arrested in the Saigon area from June 1974 to January 1975 were more than 45 members of the "Saigon People's Anti-Hunger Front", a pressure group involved in opposing the soaring costs of food. In February 1975,18 journalists were arrested and charged with being members of a subversive communist group after a number of newspaper presses were confiscated (February 1975). The journalists and most of the Front members were adopted by AI as prisoners of conscience.
When the war ended and the prisoners were released in April-May 1975, AI groups were working on 236 adoption and investigation cases in Saigon-administered areas. In addition, work had continued on the cases of 13 people
106
alleged by the former administration of President Nguyen Van Thieu in Saigon to have been "abducted and held by the communists". These included 11 Montagnard nuns, allegedly abducted from Dakto in the Central Highlands in 1972. In April 1975, following presistent group inquiries, a report was received from Vietnam that the nuns had been released after being detained by the communists for more than two years. At that point, AI's investigations were overtaken by events.
In June 1974,118 South Vietnamese men, women and children of Chinese origin were caught by the Hong Kong authorities as they tried to enter the British Crown Colony by boat unobserved. A few days later they were sent back to Sa^on on the basis of being "illegal immigrants", where they were detained for having broken South Vietnamese emigration laws. Relatives in Hong Kong made strong allegations that the 118 were tortured after their arrival in Saigon, and there were reports that a number of them had been killed.
Amnesty International gave publicity to these allegations in an effort to avert possible ill-treatment. In August 1974, A.J.J. Sanguinetti, member of Justice (the Hong Kong-British section of the International Commission of Jurists), went on a mission to Saigon to investigate the condition and status of the 118. In October 1974, the 118 were reportedly tried by a civil court: 10 were acquitted and the rest received light sentences.
In November, 33 men of military age among them were tried for desertion: 10 were acquitted and the others given sentences of up to 10 years. In the October trial, it was revealed that one of the prisoners had died. Subsequently, a second death among the 118 prisoners was reported by a reliable source in Saigon.
Before the 118 were sent back to Saigon, AI had appealed to the British and Hong Kong governments to delay any decision about their return pending a review in depth of each individual case on humanitarian grounds, to determine whether they would be permitted to reside in Hong Kong or elsewhere. Some of them with relatives in the colony appeared to have "a possible claim to entry to Hong Kong had they chosen to apply through normal, official channels", as the then Director of Immigration in Hong Kong, W.E. Collard, put it later. A number of them were men of draft age who apparently objected to serving in the Army of the Republic of South Vietnam (Saigon).
In spite of the assurance given to AI on 12 June 1974 by the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office that a "reasonable opportunity" should be given to explore the possibility of the 118 residing in third countries, they were expelled from Hong Kong on 17 June.
Europe
After a series of dramatic political developments, all political prisoners in Greece and Portugal were released. In Turkey a major amnesty followed a lengthy political crisis. In all, 261 adopted prisoners were released in the three countries during 1974. But these welcome changes were neither permanent nor did they extend to other parts of Europe. In Turkey some prisoners were not included in the amnesty, and others have since been arrested. In Portugal new groups are now in prison, and in Spain the present situation is one of grave deterioration in all aspects of human rights. Only in Greece has the new government shown a serious determination to create a society in which there is freedom of conscience, and there are signs—releases and reductions of sentences— that in future a more liberal attitude towards conscientious objectors may prevail.
Work on eastern Europe has concentrated on Yugoslavia where a series of political trials afforded Amnesty International the opportunity of sending two observer missions during the last 12 months. In the Soviet Union, a major report on the treatment of prisoners in camps and psychiatric hospitals has been written for publication. While welcoming the Soviet amnesty for women prisoners, AI protested in the strongest terms against the arrest of three members of the Moscow AI group.
Lawyers have attended trials in Spain, the Dutch member of the International Executive Committee undertook a legal mission to examine the working of the Emergency Provisions Act in Northern Ireland, and an Austrian lawyer attempted unsuccessfully to attend the Supreme Court appeal in Bulgaria of a United Nations economist sentenced to death for economic espionage.
During the year there has been a program of research and action on imprisoned conscientious objectors. AI has adopted conscientious objectors in eight European countries. The attitudes of these various states to conscientious objection are by no means the same, nor are the positions taken by the conscientious objectors themselves.
In some European countries—West Germany, Italy, France, Switzerland, The Netherlands—the right to conscientious objection exists, but only for men who object to fighting in all wars for religious or philosophical reasons. Yet even
108
these must perform alternative service. In other countries—Spain, Greece, Poland—there is no right to conscientious objection, and anyone who refuses to perform military service for any reason is Uable to imprisonment. The positions taken by the conscientious objectors themselves range from refusal even to register for military service, to the classic pacifist position: refusal to bear arms, but willingness to perform non-combatant duties within the armed forces, or alternative civilian service. A new phenomenon is the selective conscientious objector who is not a pacifist, but who objects to fighting in a specific war, or to his country's particular defence agreements. It is this type of conscientious objector who provides most of AI's cases in countries which do allow conscientious objection of the more traditional variety. A report on this subject is being written.
AI's own position on conscientious objection Annual Report 1973-74) has been extended over the years, so that it now encompasses all the types of conscientious objectors referred to above. AI's adopted conscientious objectors include Jehovah's Witnesses in Greece and Spain, anarchists in Italy and citizens of France whose objection to conscription is essentially political.
Albania
During 1974-75 Amnesty International tried to obtain more information about political imprisonment in Albania but it proved extremely difficult due to the country's continuing isolation from the outside world. An approach by AI to the Albanian legation in East Berlin proved fruitless.
A Greek ex-prisoner, however, supplied more details about the camp of Ballsh, where 1,000 prisoners are held. He had spent more than a year in the camp after escaping from a Greek prison in the island of Corfu in 1972.
It is impossible to estimate the total number of political prisoners in Albania, but figures like 300,000, frequently mentioned by Albanian refugees, seem to be grossly exaggerated. The number of religious prisoners is believed to be particularly high in Albania where the performance of religious rites is illegal and severely penalized. Banishment to labour camps is common practice and is invariably applied to those who step out of the Communist Party line. In 1975 the names of six prominent Albanian writers and artists, still imprisoned or in corrective labour camps, reached AI. Albania, however, remains an almost closed society about which little is known in human rights terms.
Bulgaria
In June 1974, Dr Heinrich Spetter, a 53-year-old Bulgarian economist of Jewish descent and former United Nations staff member in Vienna, was condemned to death for alleged economic espionage. Amnesty International arranged for Dr Werner Sporn, an Austrian lawyer, to observe his appeal hearing and twice protested to Todor Zhivkov, President of the Bulgarian State Council. Following a worldwide campaign for commutation of the death sentence, the Bulgarian authorities decided suddenly on 22 August 1974 to release Dr Spetter, who is now living in Israel but still waiting for his family to join him. A similar case taken up by AI was that of Solomon Ben-Joseph, a top official in the Bulgarian Ministry of Chemical Industry, punished in August 1974 with a 15-year prison
109
sentence, later reduced on appeal to I IVi years, also for alleged economic espionage.
On 31 October 1974 the Bulgarian Assembly approved an amnesty bill which applied to all Bulgarian citizens who had left the country illegally and who wished to return by the end of 1975. The amnesty law, however, does not affect those who have been deprived of their Bulgarian citizenship, nor those considered "dangerous recidivists".
In April 1975, AI received further details about a dozen imprisoned or banished persons in Bulgaria. Banishment or "compulsory re-settlement" to labour-corrective communities is still being practiced widely in Bulgaria without any judicial interference. Some reports say that banishment can be life-loi^, as in the case of Ivan Sirakov, who was expelled by a police order in January 1968 from his native city Sofia to permanent residence in the remote provincial town of Biala. According to Mr. Sirakov, who succeeded in escaping to Austria in autumn 1974, Biala has a large psychiatric institution where several dissident intellectuals are being kept without any medical justification.
At present AI is working on 12 cases in Bulgaria.
Cyprus
On 28 June 1974, Amnesty International Secretary General Martin Ennals, wrote to Archbishop Makarios, the President of Cyprus, requesting him to initiate an independent investigation into allegations of torture made by members of the EOKA B organization against the Cypriot security forces. The Secretary General recognized that the government was faced with problems of maintaining peace and order, but expressed the hope that "...what appears to be a lawless vendetta between official security forces and the EOKA B can be brought within the jurisdiction of the law courts of Cyprus, in which Amnesty International has the utmost confidence".
On 15 July 1974 there was a coup d'etat in Cyprus, the eventual outcome of which was the landing on the island of Turkish troops and the fall of the military regime in Greece. AI received many appeals for help from Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots, but in the early stages of the conflict, there was no possibility of effective AI action. By the end of August 1974, AI received more detailed information about prisoners, other than prisoners-of-war, and on 29 August 1974, Martin Ennals wrote to Turkish Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit asking for information about the treatment of Greek Cypriots who had been taken to the Turkish mainland.
In October 1974 the Secretary General wrote to the Acting President of Cyprus, Glafkos Clerides, appealing to the Cyprus government to reconsider its reported plans to introduce the death penalty in cases of illegal arms carrying. At the same time, AI Deputy Secretary General Hans Ehrenstrale, visited the Cypriot High Commissioner in London, Costas Ashiotis, to discuss Al's position on capital punishment.
In February 1975 appeals were still being received for help in tracing missing persons and the Deputy Secretary General wrote to the new Turkish Prime Minister, Sadi Irmak, to ask whether any Greek Cypriots were still held on the Turkish mainland. Inquiries about missing individuals were addressed to
110
Rauf Denktash, the Turkish Cypriot leader, and in a further letter to Mr Denktash on 4 March 1975, AI Secretary General Martin Ennals raised the matter of the continued detention of many people in the Dome Hotel, Kyrenia.
Also in March 1975, the Campaign for the Abolition of Torture published well-documented information about the torture by electrical shock of a Greek Cypriot sailor in September 1974 while he was being held, together with 400-500 other Greek Cypriot prisoners-of-war, in Turkey.
AI has no adopted prisoners in Cyprus. Although there are still large numbers of missing persons, it is not known how many of these may still be held in detention. The International Secretariat is, however, in contact with the Cypriot government through its High Commission in London.
Czechoslovakia
Since the end in 1972 of the much publicized trials of the Dubcek supporters, information on political imprisonment in Czechoslovakia has been difficult to obtain. Most trials take place at district and regional courts and, with few exceptions, receive no publicity. Amnesty International groups are currently working on 16 adoption cases and four investigation cases. In October 1974 Secretary General Martin Ennals protested to the Czechoslovak authorities against the deterioration of prison conditions.
In January, Mr. Ennals cabled Dr Gustav Husak, First Secretary of the Czechoslovak Communist Party, urging that members of the Kurdish Student Movement in Prague should not be deported to Iraq. In view of the widespread arrests, torture and even execution of Kurds, their lives could be in jeopardy. No deportations to Iraq took place,but Fadil Rash, secretary of the movement, who had been arrested, was expelled from Czechoslovakia to East Berlin.
Two campaigns were launched by Al during the year. In November 1974 national sections sought the release of two prominent supproters of the 1968 reform movement, Jiri Müller and Professor Jaroslav Sabata, to mark the third anniversary of their arrests. In April 1975 appeals were made for the release of all prisoners of conscience on the occasion of the 30th anniversary of the liberation of Czechoslovakia by the Soviet army. An amnesty was later announced but applied only to criminal prisoners.
Prison conditions continue to cause concern. One particularly harsh feature of the Czechoslovak system is the legal obligation placed on released prisoners to repay the costs of their maintenance while in prison to the state.
France
Amnesty International's attention in France has been focused mainly on conscientious objectors, of whom eight more were adopted and seven released in 1974-75. A further 20 are being investigated. The presidential amnesty of 16 July applied only in part to conscientious objectors, with the effect that the majority of those sentenced remained in prison.
For the first lime there were manifestations of political action within the ranks of conscripts. On several occasions soldiers went out into the streets to try to make the French public aware of the great need for reform of the conscription system. Their widespread discontent continues to grow and finds expression not
Ill
only through the wave of organized appeals for reform inside and outside the ranks, but also in the tragic occurrence of suicides, cases of mental illness and hunger strikes among the young conscripts who have failed to obtain the status of conscientious objectors.
There has also been a steady flow of information about prison conditions in France and in her overseas territories. On 15 May 1975, AI Secretary General Martin Ennals sent a letter of appeal to President Valéry Giscard d'Estaing in which he asked for the release of three Tahitian pacifists, imprisoned three years ago for their opposition to nuclear tests in French Polynesia.
German Democratic Republic
For the first time since the 1972-73 amnesty, in which approximately 6,000 political prisoners were released, the number of those detained for political reasons in the German Democratic Republic (GDR) has again reached 6,000. Although the majority of the cases known to Amnesty International are of people sentenced for attempting to leave the country, others, such as five persons arrested for demonstrating for the observance by the GDR of human rights as guaranteed by the United Narions Universal Declaration of Human Rights, have been adopted. AI groups are now working for 126 prisoners.
In August and September 1974, AI Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to Minister of the Interior Friedrich Dickel drawing attention to contraventions of the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners in Cottbus and Hoheneck prisons. On 11 November 1974, Mr Ennals cabled the Chairman of the GDR State Council, WUli Stoph, requesting commutation on humanitarian grounds of the death penalty passed on Karl Gorny for alleged crimes committed during World War II. Mr Gorny was executed on 31 January 1975.
No amnesty was announced on the occasion of the 25th anniversary of the founding of the GDR, but according to one AI adoptee, he and about 30 other prisoners were released on that date and allowed to emigrate to West Germany. Two United Kingdom citizens, Susan Ballantine and Alan Watson, both of whom were adopted by AI, were released in December 1974 and March 1975 respectively after intense pressure and wide publicity.
The Research Department is also investigating allegations that a Syrian national imprisoned in the GDR has been ill-treated. In addition, the department is studying the problem of prolonged solitary confinement which has been applied in certain cases during pre-trial detention.
Federal Republic of Germany
The prolonged pre-trial detention of members of the Red Army Faction, better known as the "Baader-Meinhof group", and the bitter public debate in Germany about their treatment and conditions, led many individuals, both inside and outside Amnesty International, to seek an initiative by the International Secretariat. AI decided not to adopt the members of the group, but, in response to the multiple allegations that the prisoners were being ill-treated and their con-
112
tinued detention without trial, Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote letters on 15 November 1974 to individual Ministers of Justice in each of the Länder where Baader-Mainhof prisoners have been detained, urging them to examine the allegations of ill-treatment and to consider adjusting legislation in view of their prolonged detention without trial. The replies he received stated that the conditions in West German prisons had been improved and compared favourably with the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.
In an attempt to break the deadlock which had developed between the prisoners, then on hunger strike, and the authorities, a private mission of mediation was undertaken by Reverend Paul Oestreicher, Chairman of AI's British Section. In a public statement, confirmed by the International Executive Committee, Reverend Oestreicher said on 16 December 1974: "In the opinion of Amnesty International ..Jit the present time the allegation of so-called torture by isolation is not justified...As such, the organization cannot intervene. That Amnesty International is ready and willing to help find a solution in the present crisis is demonstrated by my presence [in Germany]."
To assist AI groups working on German conscientious objectors, of whom three were adopted tlm year and many more are under investigation, a comprehensive background paper was prepared by the Research Department. Two of the adopted conscientious objectors were soon reported released from detention as a result of publicity in the German press. They are determined pacifists who refuse to wear uniform and use arms.
An Eritrean student, who regards himself as a political refugee but whom the authorities accused of alleged drug smu^ling, was also adopted. Adoption of four foreign workers from Turkey is also being considered on the grounds that they have been detained for one year without proper indictment.
These two examples are disquieting signs that West Germany is showing increasing reluctance to grant political asylum to apphcants from third world countries.
Greece
The most important event of the past year in Greece was the fall in July 1974 of the military regime which, in various guises, had ruled the country since April 1967. One of the first acts of Constantine Karamanlis, the new Prime Minister, was to release all the political prisoners (approximately 350). In a cable of congratulations to Mr Karamanlis, Amnesty International Secretary General Martin Ennals urged him to establish an official inquiry into the torture of prisoners over the past seven years. Subsequently, in letters to members of the new government who were former political prisoners, the Secretary General renewed his appeal for an inquiry into torture and also for the rehabilitation and compensarion of victims of torture. In November 1974 three of AI's former adopted prisoners, Constantinos Alavanos, Stelios Nestor and Gerasimos Notoras, came from Greece to attend a working party in London organized by the Campaign for the Aboliton of Torture (see chapter on Campaign).
Jehovah's Witnesses who are still imprisoned in Greece because of their refusal to perform military service continue to be a matter of concern to AI.
113
There is no provision in Greek law for conscientious objection to military service but AI knows of no imprisoned conscientious objectors other than Jehovah's Witnesses, who refuse to be conscripted and who are, therefore, sentenced to successive terms of imprisonment until they are beyond military age. Although AI has worked in the past for these prisoners, the Research Department discontinued work on their behalf at the request of the Jehovah's Witnesses themselves, for the period of the military regime.
The most recent sentences were passed after the men concerned refused to bear arms during the general mobilization at the time of the crisis over Cyprus. They received extremely heavy sentences of between 8 and 20 years, but recent information is that these sentences are being substantially reduced on appeal. In a letter to the Greek Prime Minister on 17 September 1974, the Secretary General asked him to "...give your earliest attention to ensuring that provision is made in Greek law for conscientious objection..."
AI groups are working for the release of 96 Jehovah's Witnesses in Greece.
Hungary
Amnesty International groups are at present working on five cases, of which two are re-adoptions: Dr Odon Lénárd and Dr Jozsef Szigeti. Both are Roman Catholic priests who had served long sentences for their perseverance in providing religious instruction to young people, and who were recently arrested again.
On 4 April 1975, an amnesty was proclaimed which also covers defectors in the West willing to return before the end of next year, but excludes political offenders.
Italy
Despite continuing difficulties in obtaining detailed information on political imprisonment in Italy, the number of adoptions increased to six during the year. All are conscientious objectors. Michele Camassa and Sergio Gulmini, both now adopted by Amnesty International, have each been sentenced to more than 3 and 2 years' imprisonment respectively after two successive trials. It is not uncommon for sentences passed by an Italian military court to be augmented in a second trial.
Netherlands
A new law on conscientious objection passed in April 1975 now recognizes the right of all Dutch citizens to be exempted from military service for reasons of their conscience, and particularly in connection with Dutch membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). As a resuh, the conscientious objector Kees Vellekoop, who was sentenced to 21 months' imprisonment in April 1974, was released in April 1975. He was Amnesty International's only adopted prisoner in the Netherlands.
Poland
Amnesty International has taken up three more investigation cases during the past year of ex-Polish citizens who were charged with espionage when they made family visits to Poland as foreign tourists.
114
On 18 July 1974 a wide-ranging amnesty was proclaimed which covered all sentences up to 2 years, but which affected political prisoners only marginally. Although Professor Jerzy Bafia, First Chairman of the Supreme Court, denied the existence of political "delinquency" in Poland, he nevertheless admitted that "there are a few persons in the penal establishments who might be said to have committed offences of a political character and to whom the amnesty may apply". Shortly afterwards it was officially admitted that seven persons had been imprisoned for political offences.
Meanwhile, several political prisoners were released in November 1974, among them three leaders of the	group—persons who were sentenced in 1971 to
prison terms ranging from 4 to 7 years for alleged anti-state activities. Unconfirmed reports from Poland nevertheless allege that more than 80 militants of the illegal pro-Albanian "Communist Party of Poland", led by Kazimierz Mijal, were arrested during the last year and sentenced to long prison terms. (The official ruling party is called the Polish United Workers' Party: officially there is no Communist Party in Poland.)
Portugal
After the April 1974 coup that overthrew the government of Prime Minister Marcelo Caetano, the new Portugese Armed Forces Movement (MFA) government released all the prisoners of the former regime and initially restored freedom of expression. Amnesty Intemational continued to collect information on released prisoners in order to allocate relief funds for those in need of after-care.
After the two abortive coups of September 1974 and March 1975, which resulted in President Antonio de Spinola's exile and the radicalization of the MFA, a new category of people was arrested. It comprised bankers and businessmen, former members of the ousted government members of wealthy families, several hundred soldiers and officers of the armed forces who opposed the policies of the new government, and, more recently, approximately 200 members of the now-banned Maoist Party, the MRPP {Movimento de reorganizagao do Partido do Proletariado). It appears that habeas corpus has been suspended for those under military jurisdiction, that none have been charged, that many of them have been discouraged or prevented from seeing a lawyer, and that a "revolutionary tribunal" will be organized to judge those allegedly responsible for the 11 March coup attempt.
Press reports estimate that more than 500 prisoners are still held for political Feasons-a figure that takes no account of the 1,000 members of the former political police (PIDE) detained on criminal charges. In June 1975, an AI mission consisting of Secretary General Martin Ennals, French lawyer Christian Bourguet and Josette Bos of the Research Department, visited Lisbon and discussed this situation with President Costa Gomes and other government officials.
Romania
Amnesty Intemational is currently working on nine cases which roughly divide into two main categories: persons imprisoned for religious beliefs and members of ethnic minorities. The best known are Vasile Rascol, a Pentecostal
115
minister, sentenced in July 1974 to 2 years' imprisonment for having received and distributed bibles and religious literature from abroad outside official channels, and Zoltan Kallos^ an outstanding folklorist and musicologist of Hungarian extraction, who was sentenced in December 1974 to years imprisonment for alleged homosexual connections. It seems probable that an important factor in the decision to prosecute Kallos was his untiring work collecting Hungarian folk ballads on the territory of Romania.
Most of AI's cases are members of the German minority sentenced for trying to leave the country illegally after being refused emigration passports by the authorities. Unconfirmed information also reached AI about excessively harsh prison conditions under which at least 13 members of the Seventh Day Adventist Church are suffering. The same source reports that a court in the northern Romanian town of Viseul sentenced seven couples to 3 years' imprisonment and deprived them of custody of their children because the parents had insisted that the children should be given religious education.
On 28 October 1974 the Socialist Republic of Romania ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Following an AI appeal to President Nicolae Ceausescu to commute the death sentence on Richard Szattinger, a Romanian citizen, the Romanian ambassador in London was instruc-
116
ted to receive AI Secretary General Martin Ennals on 17 April 1975 to assure him that the death sentence had not been confirmed yet. After discussing the plight of prisonere in Romania adopted by AI, the ambassador promised to pass on the information to the authorities in Bucharest and seek their comments.
Spain
In spite of continuous and wide-ranging work on this country for many years, Spain remains one of Amnesty International's deep concerns.
The new government of Carlos Arias Navarro, who in January 1974 succeeded the assassinated Admiral Luis Carrero Blanco as Prime Minister, at first raised hopes of "liberalization". Trials, however, continued and the civil Public Order Courts and the military courts martial were all fully active, dealing with conscientious objectors, members of clandestine political parties, students, intellectuals, members of the various workers' movements, etc.
During 1974 an estimated 9,000 cases came before the political courts, and between April and May 1975, the introduction of a state of emergency in the Basque country, with suspension of habeas corpus, brought about more than 2,000 arrests, of which more than 900 remain in prison. AI adoptions in Spain have increased to a total of approximately 450 cases in spite of the fairly regular release of prisoners as they finish their sentences.
The major concerns of AI not only remain unresolved, but have drastically increased. The number of death penalties asked for both political and non-poli-tical prisoners has risen, so has the number of lawyers, doctors and priests arrested and fined for carrying out their professional duties. Allegations of ill-treatment have increased and AI remains concerned at the denials of access to defence and at the fact that conscientious objection is still considered a crime.
In October 1974, Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to the Prime Minister, the Minister of Justice and the Minister of Foreign Affairs asking them to receive an AI delegation. The purpose of the mission was to establish official contact with the new government; confirm that letters and visits from AI groups to their adopted prisoners could continue, and discuss the specific issues of human rights concern to AI. The Spanish authorities made no response, and the mission did not take place.
In December 1974, a wave of hunger strikes started in Spanish prisons as part of a campaign for a general amnesty for political prisoners on the occasion of Holy Year in 1975. The strikes spread to all prisons where political prisoners are detained. Participants were sent to solitary confinement cells as a result. All AI groups working for Spanish prisoners were asked to send telegrams to the Ministry of Justice expressing concern and showing support for such an amnesty.
In specific cases the Secretary General intervened directly, and missions were sent to observe two important trials. On 8 October 1974, Mr Ennals sent a telegram to Minister of Justice Francisco Ruiz-Jarabo. He expressed deep concern about the disturbing news of the ill-treatment of several Spanish intellectuals, among them Genoveva Forest, who were allegedly connected with the Madrid bombing in September 1974 and the assassination of Prime Minister Carrero Blanco in December 1973. Mr Ennals asked for the restoration of the right to access to defence and respect for human lives. The detainees were said to have
117
been subjected to torture and extremely long periods of solitary confinement.
At the end of October 1974, a French lawyer, Dr Mario Stasi, went to Madrid in an attempt to secure for the detainees the right to a proper defence and access to lawyers. His report made it clear that the conditions under which the detainees were held seriously contravened fundamental rights. AI groups with Spanish prisoners and national sections appealed to the Spanish authorities for a pubhc and fair trial with full rights to defence and expressed concem at the strong allegations of ill-treatment. All of the 14 detainees involved were taken up as investigation cases. They are to be tried by a military court under legislation which carries the death penalty. An AI observer will attend the trial.
In February 1975, a Swiss lawyer. Christian Grobet, attended the appeal hearing of 10 leaders of the outlawed trade union organizations, the Comisiones Obreras, all of them adopted by AI. The Spanish court sharply reduced the long sentences imposed in late December 1973 on this group who had become known as the "Carabanchel 10", Four were released immediately and the other six had their imprisonment cut to 6 years from original sentences that varied from 17 to 20 years. Although this means that they are still serving extremely long sentences, the outcome is one good result of international pressure on Spanish authorities.
Another important trial is that of five people accused of being leaders of the clandestine political organization FRAP (Revolutionary Anti-Fascist Patriotic Front). A Portugese lawyer. Manual Correla Neves, went to Madrid on 7 March to represent AI in conjunction with the International Commission of Jurists, but the trial was postponed until June. The prosecution is demanding 15 to 18 year sentences on charges of illicit association.
In April 1975, Martin Ennals cabled the Head of State, General Francisco Franco, appealing for the commutation of the death sentence confirmed by the Supreme Court on José San Juhan Jimenez a common law prisoner.
Adoption of individual prisoners remains one of the most important aspects of AI's work in Spain. Between May 1974 and May 1975 more than 150 new adoption cases were taken up and 121 prisoners for whom AI groups had been working were released.
Switzerland
Hans Schuppli, Amnesty International's third and last adopted conscientious objector in Switzeriand, was released in 1974 after 3 months' imprisonment. But Swiss law is unchanged: 545 conscientious objectors were convicted in 1974-75, and AI is investigating new cases.
Turkey
In June 1974, Amnesty International received new reports that political prisoners in Turkey had been ill-treated. The reports related to prisoners held at the Mamak Military Prison in Ankara and allegations were made that some prisoners had suffered serious injuries as a result of being beaten while they were handcuffed. Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to the then Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit, naming the people allegedly responsible for the attacks and appealing for an official investigation.
118
In July 1974, the Turkish Constitutional Court ruled that political prisoners should be included in the general amnesty which had been announced in May 1974, and as a result all prisoners adopted by AI in Turkey were released. Thomas Hammarberg, a member of AI's International Executive Committee, and Anne Burley of the Research Department were in Turkey at the time of the releases and were able to meet many of AI's former adopted prisoners. They also had an interview with Turkish Minister of Justice Sevket Kazan, with whom they discussed various matters of concern to AI, including the retention of articles 141 and 142 of the Turkish Penal Code, under which all of AI's adopted prisoners had been charged.
Further imprisonments of people charged under articles 141 and 142 have taken place since the amnesty and in two cases, those of Demir Kugukaydin and Diindar Erenler, publisher and editor of a weekly paper called Kivilcim, sentences of 40 years 6 months were imposed for allegedly propagating communism and forming a communist organization. The sentences were subsequently reduced to 36 years' imprisonment to be followed by 13 years 6 months exile, because this is the maximum term of imprisonment allowed under Turkish law. Both men have been adopted by AI groups as have the accountant and distributor of Kivilcim, who were also imprisoned, but received lighter sentences.
In March 1975, 26 people connected with the publication of a magazine called Aydinlik were brought to trial, accused of "establishing a secret organization aimed at establishing the domination of a social class over other social classes" (Article 141). On 7 March Mr Ennals wrote to the new Prime Minister, Sadi Irmak, to ask that an official investigation be made into the beating of a 15-year old boy, Celal Kagmaz, who was taken into custody by the police at the Aydinlik offices and was reported to have been so badly beaten that he was under treatment at the Bakirkdy Mental Hospital. The policemen allegedly responsible for beating the boy were named in the letter.
The four prisoners mentioned above are the only cases at present adopted by AI in Turkey, but others are being investigated by the Research Department, including those of the Aydinlik group. The exact number of political prisoners in Turkey is not known. Some people remained in prison after the amnesty because they had been involved in offences not covered by the amnesty or because of the length of their sentences. Some others who have been arrested since July 1974 have already been referred to, but many arrests have been reported in connection with student disturbances, and it is not known how many of these people are still held.
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
The number of Amnesty International-adopted Soviet prisoners of conscience remains around 350. These are individuals arrested for religious activity, activities in defence of human rights in general, nationalist activity or expression, or attempts to leave the country. As in the past, most adopted prisoners have been convicted under Soviet laws which specifically restrict the exercise of fundamental human rights: freedom of speech, of assembly, of worship, etc. Most adopted prisoners are confined to corrective labour colonies. Those held in prisons or in psychiatric hospitals represent (together) around 15% of the total.
119
While many categories of prisoners of conscience have remained numerically constant, the numbers of adopted Lithuanian and Armenian prisoners have increased considerably. A major development (and a welcome one) in the opposite direction occurred in the autumn of 1974 when Soviet authorities revealed that 60 dissident Baptist prisoners, most of them AI adoptees, had been released before the expiry of their sentences. AI has since learned the names of a number of these Baptists.
However, a number of other dissident Baptists have been arrested or tried since the autumn of 1974, the best known being Pastor Georgy Vins, who was sentenced in January 1975 to 5 years' imprisonment, followed by 5 years' internal exile. In October 1974 seven Baptists were arrested in Latvia for operating a clandestine printing press which produced Bibles and other religious literature, and a number of other dissident Baptists have been imprisoned in connection with their religious activities.
AI took formal action to help a number of prisoners arrested within the past year. Unsuccessful attempts were made to send observers to the trials of Georgy Vins (January 1975) and Vladimir Maramzin (February 1975). In December 1974 Secretary General Martin Ennals cabled R. A. Rudenko, Procurator General of the USSR, urging a fair trial for Mikhail Shtern, a Jewish doctor accused of certain kinds of malpractice after members of his family had requested permission to emigrate.
National sections took part in urgent action campaigns on behalf of a number of prisoners, including Georgy Vins, Vladimir Maramzin, Valentyn Moroz, Leonid Plyushch, Anatoly Marchenko and two detained members of AI's Moscow group, Sergei Kovalyov and Andrei Tverdokhlebov (see below).
In September 1974, the International Executive Committee decided to recognize the formation of an AI group in Moscow—the first-ever AI adoption group in the USSR. The group was assigned adoption cases from Spain, Yugoslavia and Sri Lanka. However its incoming AI mail was stopped almost from the group's inception.
In November and December 1974 several group members were subject to searches, and at the end of 1974 group member Sergei Kovalyov was arrested, ostensibly in connection with his domestic human rights activity rather than as a result of his AI work. In April 1975 two other members, Andrei Tverdokhlebov and Mykola Rudenko, were arrested. Mr Rudenko was later released provisionally, but Mr Tverdokhlebov has been formally charged with "disseminating fabrications known to be false which defame the Soviet state and social system".
Numerous reports emanating from the USSR indicate that over the past five years, prison and colony conditions have become more severe, particularly for political prisoners. Discipline has become more rigorous and punishments more arbitrary. As before, the life of Soviet prisoners is characterized by chronic malnutrition, medical neglect and overwork. One adopted prisoners, the Buddhist scholar Bidya Dandaron, died on October 1974, apparently as a consequence of mistreatment and medical neglect.
Hunger striking has become a widespread form of protest by Soviet prisoners. Some hunger strikes are carried out by lone individuals, Valentyn Moroz being the most prominent example. Mr Moroz fasted for almost five months in an
120
effort to obtain transfer from Vladimir prison. He eventually ended his action in November 1974 after the prison administration promised to lodge him with a pohtical prisoner rather than with criminals or in solitary confinement. National sections undertook a vigorous campaign in support of Mr Moroz. Other hunger strikes are carried on by large groups of political prisoners.
Because many of the most famous persons confined to psychiatric hospitals on account of their political or religious views had been released by 1974, there was a temporary hope that the Soviet authorities had restricted this practice. However, a number of reports emanating from the USSR in late 1974 and early 1975 (particularly in A Chronicle of Current Events) described recent instances. It appears that Soviet psychiatry is still being abused for political purposes on a regular basis.
The most well-documented current case is that of Leonid Plyushch, who has for almost two years been subjected to "treatment" with drugs in the Dniepropetrovsk special psychiatric hospital. In April 1975, on the initiative of AI's French Section and in cooperation with the International Committee of Mathematicians in Defence of Leonid Plyushch, AI sponsored an International Day for this prisoner.
AI has protested against every death sentence passed in the USSR which has come to its attention. In Soviet law the death penalty can be applied for a wide range of offences, including certain kinds of economic crimes. A number of national sections acted with particular vigour on behalf of Mikhail Leviev, a Moscow Jew sentenced to death after being convicted of large-scale misappropriation of state property.
On 16 May 1975, the Soviet Union announced a partial amnesty for women prisoners to mark International Women's Year. The amnesty appHed to women and minors serving sentences of up to 5 years, and also to mothers of minority-age children, expectant mothers, women over 55 years of age and invalids, regardless of the length of their sentence. It cut by half the remaining terms of women serving sentences of more than 5 years.
The amnesty did not apply to those women prisoners serving sentences for "especially dangerous crimes against the State", nor to "especially dangerous recidivists". Ten of AI's adopted women prisoners have been sentenced for "especially dangerous crimes against the State", and in a letter to President Nikolai Podgorny, Secretary General Martin Ennals welcomed the amnesty but expressed the hope that it be extended to include these 10 women. He also asked for confirmation that eight adopted prisoners, who should have benefited from the amnesty, had in fact been released.
AI's work for Soviet prisoners of conscience over the past year has received greater media publicity than in the past. At the same time, more groups have obtained replies from some of the Soviet authorities to whom they have written.
United Kingdom
Pat Arrowsmith, a pacifist and a staff member of the International Secretariat of Amnesty International, was the only adopted prisoner in. England during 1974. She had been arrested while distributing leaflets describing how British soldiers who did not want to serve in Northern Ireland could receive help in
121
leaving the armed forces. After having served eight months of her 18-month sentence, she was released on appeal in December 1974, when her sentence was reduced on technical grounds.
During 1974-75,16 other pacifists were arrested under the Incitement to Disaffection Act. The literature which provoked their arrest was a revised version of the pamphlet Pat Arrowsmith had given out called "Some Information for Discontented Soldiers". None of the 16 was charged with giving the leaflet to soldiers, but 12 were charged with possession of the leaflet. More seriously, all 16, some of whom had never met before appearing in court, have now been charged with conspiracy to contravene the Incitement to Disaffection Act. Conviction carries a maximum sentence of life imprisonment. All were released on bail.
The uncommon but increasing use of the conspiracy laws in the United Kingdom has been of concern to AI in the past year, since they contravene some fundamental principles of civil liberties and can be used as a political measure for putting pressure on those whose activities would not normally incur punishment.
The problems arising from the current situation in Northern Ireland are complicated by additional legislation in Great Britain: after a series of bomb explosions, the Prevention of Terrorism Act was passed in November 1974 and renewed in May 1975. This act gives the police the power to detain without warrant for up to five days, and exclude from Britain anyone—including UK citizens—suspected of involvement in terrorism. It even allows UK citizens to be excluded from a particular part of the United Kingdom.
In a letter to British Home Secretary Roy Jenkins, AI Deputy Secretary General Hans Ehrenstrale sought an assurance that, during the five-day detention period, individuals would have access to their lawyers. Referring to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which proscribes torture, Mr. Ehrenstrale said: "...it is unmistakably clear that the indispensable condition for violations of Article 5 to take place is the possibility of detaining individuals incommunicado". In reply, the Home Office said that normal rules applied whereby a person in custody must be allowed to speak to his soHcitor subject to "the usual proviso" that this will not hinder "the processes of investigation" or "the administration of justice".
In October 1974, Dr Alfred Heijder, Dutch member of AI's International Executive Committee and Professor of Law at Amsterdam University, went to Belfast to examine the working of the Emergency Provisions Act, under which those suspected of terrorist activities can be detained indefinitely or tried by special no-jury courts. He was also asked to report on conditions in the Maze Prison. Professor Heijder met Lord Donaldson, Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, police and military officials and lawyers. During a visit to the Maze Prison, he spoke with detainees.
Professor Heijder recommended, inter alia, that arrested persons should be allowed prompt access to their solicitor, that machinery be established to examine complaints against the army and the police, that confessions should be accepted as evidence only if made in the presence of a solicitor, the abolition of detention without trial, and the immediate radical improvement of conditions in
122
the Maze Prison, to bring them in line with the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.
His report was then submitted to a committee set up by the British government under Lord Gardiner's chairmanship to examine the Emergency Provisions Act and recommend possible changes. The Gardiner Report was published at the beginning of 1975, but AI found its recommendations lacking in certain vital aspects and direct approaches were therefore made by national sections to the British govemment through its embassies.
During the year AI groups worked for 13 adopted prisoners and investigated another 25 cases. These included five men who had been detained since August 1971, three of whom had suffered in-depth interrogation and ill-treatment after arrest.
After the ceasefire declared by the Provisional wing of the Irish Republican Army (IRA) in December 1974, the number of releases sharply increased. All the women detainees, nine of them AI cases, were released by the end of April 1975. Six AI investigation cases and one adoption case remain. It is still extremely difficult to identify prisoners of conscience and emphasis has therefore been placed on legal procedures and prison conditions, rather than on the adoption of individual prisoners.
Yugoslavia
At present Amnesty International groups are working on more than 50 adoption and investigation cases in Yugoslavia and the Research Department has several dozen more under preliminary investigation. The department has written new background material on the country for AI groups whose work has been helped by the excellent efforts of the Austrian Section's Coordination Group on Yugoslavia. Since there are no published official statistics for the number of political prisoners in Yugoslavia, AI can only refer to one unpublished official source. This gives the total figure of persons charged in Yugoslavia in 1973 with crimes "against the State and Nation" as 1,849, of whom 672 were sentenced.
Since 1974, punishment of dissidents of different beliefs has markedly increased, reflecting the trend for tighter security in Yugoslavia. The effort to re-establish political and ideological discipline has been noticeable in all spheres of life.
In September 1974, a group of 32 "Cominformists" (pro-Soviet communists opposed to President Tito's independent policy) were jailed for a total of 200 years after a secret trial in Montenegro. Individual sentences ranged from 2 to 14 years. This was followed in March 1975 by the arrest of another allegedly pro-Soviet group in the Bosnian town of Tuzla.
In October 1974, Dr Djuro Djurovic, aged 74 and ill, was sentenced in Belgrade to 5 years imprisonment, and his co-defendant, Mrs Zagorka Kojic-Stojanovic, received a sentence of 3 years' rigorous imprisonment, for their alleged connections with emigre organizations. Dr Djurovic, who spent 17 years in prison after 1945 for his wartime association with the Cetniks (a rival resistance movement to Tito's partisans), appealed against the sentence, but the appeal hearing has not yet taken place. AI, which adopted Dr Djurovic,
123
sent a prominent Dutch lawyer, Professor Frits Ruter from the University of Amsterdam, to observe his trial in Belgrade.
In January 1975 about 100 youi^ Albanians were arrested in Pristina, capital of the autonomous privince of Kosovo. Five Albanians received sentences of 3 to 9 years on "anti-Yugoslav" charges.
In mid-February 1975, after a three-month secret trial in the Dalmatian town of Zadar, 15 Croatians were given sentences ranging from 18 months to 13 years for alleged subversive activities. Two more groups of students are said to be held incommunicado in the Croatian capital Zagreb. No specific information about them reached the outside world because the poHce, at the time of writing, had not allowed either their parents or their lawyers to visit them.
In October 1974 the leading dissident writer Mihajlo Mihajlov was arrested. His trial, after being postponed twice, took place at the end of February 1975 in Novi Sad. It was attended on behalf of AI by Professor Riiter and by Dr Broekmeyer. Mr Mihajlov was found guilty of "hostile propaganda" and sentenced under article 118 of the Yugoslav Penal Code to 7 years' imprisonment and to 4 years' ban on publishing anything after his release. Mr Mihajlov refused to appeal against the sentence on political grounds.
Soon after the trial, both defence lawyers were threatened with suspension and possible prosecution; neither threat was carried out. Lawyer Kovacevic had referred in his final plea to President Tito's speech of 25 February, made while the trial was in progress, and which attacked Mr. Mihajlov. The lawyer recalled the first Serbian Codex from the 14th century in which Tzar Dusan had admonished judges that they should not fear the Tzar but judge only in accordance with the law. Lawyer Barovic's son, then in his final year of law studies, was suddenly called up for military service despite the fact that this was against the Yugoslav National Service Law.
Professor Riiter's trial reports significantly contributed to AFs knowledge about the judicial and penal system in Yugoslavia. In his assessment of the I>jurovic trial, Professor Ruter concluded that Dr Djurovic's conviction was a foregone conclusion for poHtical reasons even before the trial started; that the defence lawyers were denied those legal rights guaranteed under Yugoslav law; that the court had shown itself prejudiced against the accused; that important graphological testimony was inadequate; and that insufficient account was taken of Dr Djurovic's state of health. The report was sent to the Yugoslav authorities and also to a number of European political leaders.
There have also been signs of increased pressure on the Roman Catholic Church particulariy in Croatia and Slovenia, resulting in the confiscation of several issues of the Catholic periodicals Glas Koncila and Druzina, which defended religious freedom against discriminatory practices in Yugoslavia.
The prolonged campaign against unorthodox Marxists reached its peak in January when eight dissident teachers from the Philosophy Facuhy in Belgrade were dismissed from their posts and the well-known philosophy journals Praxis and Filozofija were banned from circulation. Further intimidation followed against philosophy teachers at Ljubljana and Split universities. This move against nonconformist thinkers was preceded earlier in 1974 by persecution of students who had taken part in drafting a resolution in support of the Praxis
124
group. The students included Vladimir Palancanin from Belgrade, tried in June 1974, and a group of six students tried in Ljubljana in September 1974. All seven received prison sentences of 10 months and were immediately adopted by AL
The Middle East
This year has seen positive and negative developments in the situation of political imprisonment in the Middle East. In Iraq, with the government's intervention in the year-long war with the Kurds, there has been a serious decUne in the observance of human rights. In Saudi Arabia, the accession of a new ruler was marked by a much-welcomed amnesty for political prisoners, and a new government in the Yemen Arab Republic announced that all political prisoners, except those convicted of sabotage, were to be released. The recent increasing tension between Iraq and Syria resulted in the arrest of many alleged pro-Iraqi elements in Syria. In Egypt worsening economic conditions and growing opposition to the government from students and workers have led to wide scale arrests among all sections of Egyptian society.
In other areas the situation has remained largely unaltered. Iran and the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen continue to cause grave concern. The continuing Arab-Israeli conflict has resulted in many arrests in both the West Bank and Jordan, in spite of international endeavours to obtain a peaceful settlement.
Amnesty International has taken up the issue of detention without trial with most governments in the Middle East, of deportation with Israel, of disappearances and kidnappings with the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen and of torture, which has frequently resulted in death, with Iraq. But perhaps the greatest causes of concern in the area are the continuing high incidence of official and unofficial executions in Iran and the alarming increase in death sentences in Iraq.
There has been an encouraging increase in the response and cooperation from many governments over the past year. The development of personal contacts at governmental level, among the legal profession, etc., is still an important priority of AI's work in the Middle East, and several different types of missions to the area have contributed to this end.
In October 1974 a French member of the International Executive Committee attended, as an observer, the Congress of the Union of Arab Lawyers in Baghdad. This provided an opportunity not only to renew contacts made during AI's first visit to Iraq in May 1974, but also to make the acquaintance of many
126
lawyers from different Arab countries.
In March 1975, AI sent a Turkish lawyer to observe a trial in Alexandria in Egypt. In October 1974, a three-man mission investigated allegations of ill-treatment and torture in Syria and Israel, and their report was published in April 1975. In May 1975, a high level mission visited the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen and the Yemen Arab Republic for the purpose of talking to the governments about Amnesty International and its work, and about the human rights situation in their countries. Visits by members of the International Secretariat to a number of embassies in London have further helped to establish direct contact with governments.
The Middle East department is currently handling 270 adoption and investigation cases, of which 16 are "group adoptions".
Bahrain
In August 1974, Amnesty International Secretary General Martin Ennals appealed to the ruler of Bahrain, Sheikh Issa bin Sulman AI Khalifa, to release 29 trade unionists who had been arrested in June 1974, following worker strikes. A news release was issued to this effect. All 29 were subsequently adopted by AI groups, and of these only three are now still in prison.
Apart from these three, for whom AI groups are still working, the Research Department knows of only seven other political prisoners in Bahrain.
Egypt
Over the past year there has been growing criticism of the Egyptian government, particularly among workers, caused by inflation at home, and re-alignments in foreign policy. The resentment culminated in New Year's Day worker demonstrations in Cairo. These were the most serious disturbances since the student demonstrations in 1972-73. The latter were sparked off by frustration at the "no peace, no war" situation, at the curb on freedom of expression and by economic factors. After the October 1973 war with Israel the government had promised that the new "open door" economic policy would raise living standards, but this has not resulted quickly in the expected improvements. There have been relaxations since then in censorship, but demonstrations are still illegal, and all political parties, except for the Arab Socialist Union, are banned.
As the government has felt its authority weaken in the face of growing opposition, there have been wide-spread arrests among all sections of the community. Persons detained include those who have expressed their opposition by demonstrating, by distributing anti-government pamphlets, by forming or belonging to secret organizations, or even by singing songs critical of the government. In August 1974,14 people were detained for a brief period for singing songs, or possessing tape recordings of songs, criticizing the government. The detainees included Sheikh Imam, the composer, and Ahmad Fouad Negm, the lyric writer of these songs.
Amnesty International adopted a group of six Egyptians, consisting of a surgeon, a lawyer, a student, a teacher and two employees from the public sector, who were arrested in October-November 1974 and charged -under
127
article 98 of the Penal Code—with forming a communist organization and printing or possessing anti-government pamphlets. Their initial appeals for release on bail were refused, but in March 1975, AI learned that another appeal had been granted. The date of their trial is not yet known at the time of writing (June 1975).
AI has taken up the cases of over 150 people who were arrested as a result of the New Year's Day demonstrations. They include workers, trade unionists, students, journahsts, lawyers, writers and artists. After the 1975 budget was announced, more than 1,000 workers demonstrated in the streets of Cairo over the worsening economic situation. Students and leftwing sympathizers joined in, and rioting broke out when workers were prevented from presenting their case to the National Assembly.
Some of the demonstrators were arrested, and during the following weeks other arrests were made, including students (students had demonstrated on three separate occasions for the release of detained workers) and well-known leftwing intellectuals and former members of the Communist Party (the Communist Party is banned in Egypt and many of those arrested had been imprisoned for long periods during President Gamal Abdul Nasser's era). The government blamed the leftwingers for provoking the disturbances. Exact numbers of those arrested are not known, but are believed to run into the hundreds. A few were later acquitted and some were successful in appealing for their release on bail.
AI is also looking into the cases of those arrested during violent demonstrations which broke out in March at the Mehalla AI Kobra cotton mill complex, again over prices and inflation.
AI sent a Turkish lawyer, Dr Yuksel Ersoy, as its observer at a trial on 23 March of 14 Alexandrians, mostly textile factory workers, who were arrested in June 1973 and charged under article 48 of the Criminal Law with forming and belonging to a communist organization with the aim of overthrowing the existing social order. (Nineteen persons were in fact charged: three had escaped arrest and two had been released on bail.) AI's main concern in these cases was the very long period of detention without trial and the allegations that one of the defendants had been seriously maltreated during interrogation. On 23 March the Supreme State Security Court ordered their release on bail and adjourned the trial until 22 June.
Secretary General Martin Ennals sent cables on 26 November and 30 January to President Anwar Sadat pressing for the commutation of death sentences passed on Egyptians accused of spying. In 1974-75 three people were executed and seven others were sentenced to death, although at the time of writing, AI had not heard whether the sentences have been carried out or not.
AI has received some allegations of torture in Egypt, but nonetheless there have been encouraging signs that steps are being taken in Egypt to safeguard fundamental human rights. In April 1975, an Egyptian imprisoned during the 1960s and who had been subjected to severe maltreatment, was awarded substantial damages by a court. In a letter to President Sadat, Mr Ennals welcomed this step and expressed the hope that the Egyptian government would continue its exemplary efforts for the cause of human rights.
128
The allegations of torture concern one of the detainees from Alexandria (mentioned above) who claims to have been tortured by electric shocks during interrogation. In addition, members of the Islamic Liberation Party, arrested after the attack on the military academy in April 1974 in which 11 people died, alleged in court in November 1974 that they had been tortured. The court ordered an immediate inquiry. In a letter to the President in January 1974, Mr Ennals expressed concern at these allegations. He stressed the importance of detainees having immediate access to legal counsel of their choice and to their relatives, since it is during periods of incommunicado detention that torture and ill-treatment are most likely to occur.
Iran
The situation of political prisoners in Iran has given Amnesty International even greater cause for concern during the past year than in previous years. Although no official executions of political prisoners have been announced by the government, nine political prisoners, including seven adopted by AI, were allegedly "shot while trying to escape" in April 1975. In a cable to the Shah of Iran, Secretary General Martin Ennals called for a medical commission of inquiry into the deaths, and in a news release AI expressed "serious doubts about the credibility of the official account of the death of these men".
The men were known to have been among 114 political prisoners who had been moved to Evin prison at the beginning of March 1975, and reports of their torture had reached AI from that time. After the death of the nine men, there were reports that 5,000 civil and political prisoners at Qassar prison in Teheran had gone on hunger strike. The Secretary General appealed to the Shah to allow an International Red Cross mission to visit the prison.
One of the seven Al-adopted prisoners who died, Hassan Zia Zarifi, was the subject of an urgent appeal in January 1975, after news had reached AI that he and two other political prisoners, Massud Batai and Shokrollah Paknedjad, were being tortured.
Urgent action was taken on behalf of prisoners in Iran in October 1974. The appeal concerned Dr Simian Salehi, Lotfbllah Meysami and Sherin Moazed. Dr Salehi was seven months pregnant at the time of her arrest, and conflicting reports of her condition, as a result of torture, have been received by AI. One report was that she had died, while another stated that her baby had been stillborn, but that Dr Salehi herself was still alive and in bad health. At the time of writing no further news has been received about her. Information relating to deaths under torture has been received during the year. In particular, AI was informed of the death of a young woman, Maleaheh Pazoki.
Although, as mentioned earlier, no official announcements have been made of executions of political prisoners, in July 1974 the Iranian government announced that 239 drug pedlars had been executed by firing squads in 2Vi years. This large number of executions has caused particular concern because of the inadequacy of trial procedures in Iran. Further executions, of two Iraqi hijackers, were reported in April 1975.
Two amnesties for prisoners sentenced by military tribunals have been announced during the past year. The first, which coincided with Human Rights
129
Day (10 December 1974) was for 102 prisoners. The second amnesty, for 270 prisoners, was granted to mark the Iranian New Year, beginning 21 March 1975. It is not known whether any Al-adopted prisoners were released as a result of these amnesties.
AI groups are working on 10 adoption cases and 89 investigation cases of Iranian prisoners. The total number of political prisoners has been reported at times throughout the year to be anything from 25,000 to 100,000 but AI is not able to make any reliable estimate.
Iraq
The Kurdish war has dominated events in Iraq this past year and brought a considerable increase in repressive measures against Kurdish civilians, supporters and others believed to oppose the government. On 22 November 1974 Amnesty International Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to President Hassan AI Bakr and other members of the Iraqi government, expressing concern at the large numbers of arrests for political or religious reasons, summary executions and the torture of prisoners which in some cases had resulted in death. Mr Ennals noted the apparent lack of legal guarantees— reflected in summary trials by military courts-the absence of the right of defence and the right of appeal. He appealed for the release of all political prisoners and called for a review of the government's policy with regard to the death penalty.
Among those arrested for political reasons were a group of 200-250 people associated with freemasonry prior to the 1958 revolution (after which freemasonry was banned). Almost all were elderly, professional people (doctors, lawyers, senior civil servants, etc.) whose names appeared on a list of invitees to a Masonic dinner in 1949. This list had recently been found in a deed box belonging to an Englishman who had left the country in 1958.
Some were arrested in February 1974 and of these one elderly man, Darwish al Haydari, died in prison, allegedly as a result of ill-treatment. Others were arrested in October 1974. They were charged with "cooperating with reactionary forces", an offence for which a law passed in October imposes the death sentence. They were tried by a revolutionary court in October or November, after which many were released. An unknown number were, however, sentenced to terms of imprisonment and it was reported that five were executed, but this has not been confirmed.
There has been an alarming number of executions over the past year. AI has received the names of 91 people, including two women, who have been executed since April 1974. They include Kurds and Kurdish sympathizers, religious leaders, right and left wing opponents and critics of the government, members of illegal organizations and of the Iraqi armed forces. Five Sh'ite religious leaders were sentenced to death in November, accused of membership of an illegal organization called The Islamic Mission. AI appealed, unsuccessfully, to the Iraqi government to commute the sentences.
The number of offences punishable by death was increased in 1975 to include espionage (specifically, cooperating with reactionary forces, making an appeal to a foreigner or a foreign organization) and those who endanger the national economy (specifically, breaking the economic blockade of the
130
Kurdish areas in the north—a law was passed to this effect in October 1974).
A reply from the Iraqi government assured Al that these allegations were untrue. It said: "We are not in the least surprised at the chaises made against the Government of Iraq by inimical and spiteful circles. The fact that we have solemnly pledged ourselves to an unremitting fight against imperialism and reaction arouses the ire of many people and leads them to embark upon conspiratorial activities against the country and to hurl charges at Iraq and at its leadership."
On 7 April Amnesty International again wrote to the President expressing concern at reports that, during the peirod of hostilities, "Kurdish and non-Kurdish civilians had not been accorded the protection guaranteed by international humanitarian law". AI requested, now that the Iran-Iraq agreement had brought hostilities to an end, that all Kurdish detainees be released "and that they and all other Kurdish civilians be accorded the protection guaranteed by the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights ratified by your country".
AI also urged that investigations be initiated into allegations of ill-treatment and torture and into the alarming number of executions. Al had received the names of 551 Kurdish civilians, including women and children, who had been detained, and 43 Kurds who had allegedly been tortured to death. Of the 43, most of them had previously been detained in Kirkuk or Mosul security prisons or Abu Ghreb prison in Baghdad, and their bodies, when returned to their families, showed signs of torture.
One such case was a Kurdish religious leader, Mulla Ali Shamdani from Zakho, who, because he was thought to be a supporter of the Kurdish rebellion, was in June 1974 tortured to death, including having his eyes gouged out.
Some AI national sections were asked to appeal to their governments to intervene with the Iraqi authorities for the release of Kurdish detainees.
Letters have been sent to the Iraqi government from the International Secretariat and from adoption groups on behalf of two Jewish prisoners, Akram Baher and Shua Sofer, but no news has been received which would confirm that they are still alive.
Israel
During the past year, Amnesty International raised many individual cases of imprisonment in Israel in letters to the Attorney General. In November 1974, Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin expressing AI's concern regarding two aspects of the administration of the West Bank territory by the Israeli authorities: deportation and administrative detention. In his letter the Secretary General urged upon the Israeli government "the termination by the administering authorities of the practice of deporting residents of the administered territories..."and appealed to them to permit "the return of those who have been so deported". Similariy, the Israeli government was requested to give urgent consideration to the possibility of suspending the practice of administrative detention.
Allegations of torture relating to administrative detainees were received following the arrest of several hundred Arabs from the West Bank who were
131

ß
S£ PROHIBE I
PEN5/IR EN VQZ ALTA


-S
'Thinking Aloud Prohibited'
alleged to be members of the Palestine National Front. In October 1974, a three-man mission, consisting of two Scandinavian lawyers and a Dutch doctor, travelled to Israel and Syria to investigate allegations that prisoners of war in both countries had been ill-treated during and following the October 1973 war (see chapter on Campaign for the Abolition of Torture).
The delegates were also asked to investigate all allegations concerning the torture of political prisoners in Israel and Syria which had been received by Al, but in neither country were they allowed the access to poUtical prisoners that would have enabled them to carry out this part of their mission. Consequently, no allegations of torture of civilian prisoners in Israel have been subjected to independent investigation during the past year and it is therefore not possible for AI to comment on their validity.
AI groups are investigating the cases of 50 men originally held under administrative detention orders, but in a few of these cases the men have since been brought to trial and sentenced. Three men whose cases were being investigated were deported to Lebanon. In addition, an AI group is still working on the case of Rami Levneh, an Israeli Jew who was referred to in last year's annual report. His sentence was reduced from 10 years' imprisonment to 4 years by the Supreme Court in July 1974.
There are approximately 2,500 Arabs imprisoned in Israel and the occupied territories for alleged security offences.
132
Jordan
Amnesty International has no adopted prisoners in Jordan, but during the past year several actions have been taken on behalf of imprisoned Palestinians. In July 1974 the Campaign for the Abolition of Torture initiated a campaign for Saleh Raafat, a former member of the Executive Committee of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) and a member of the poUtical bureau of the Popular Democratic, Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PDFLP). As was pointed out in a letter from Secretary General Martin Ennals to the Jordanian Ambassador in London, AI intervened in this case before knowing what charges has been brought against Mr Raafat because of reports that he was being ill-treated in prison.
In August 1974, AI sent a cable to King Hussein of Jordan urging him to free nine Palestinian trade unionists who were being detained without charge or trial. Details of the case were given in a news release issued at the same time. In November 1974 an amnesty for political prisoners was announced by King Hussein, following his return from the Arab Summit Conference in Rabat, and the Secretary General of AI was informed by the Jordanian Prime Minister, Zaid Al-Rifai, that all nine trade unionists were now free.
In February 1975, however, reports of new arrests of Palestinians appeared in the press, accompanied in some instances by allegations that the prisoners were being ill-treated. In a letter to the Jordanian Prime Minister, AI Deputy Secretary General Hans Ehrenstrale requested the reason for the arrests and said that he "would be grateful to receive your assurance that under no circumstances would torture be sanctioned by the Jordanian government".
It is not known exactly how many political prisoners there are in Jordan at the present time, but the number is possibly around 100.
Libya
Amnesty International has learned that, of the 300-400 Libyan's arrested following the popular revolution in April 1973 for their alleged opposition to the government, 130 still detained were tried in the summer of 1974. The court ordered their release, but the government authorities countermanded the order and they were re-arrested the same day.
Since then many more have been released and about 40 remain in detention: two alleged Trotskyists, 12-15 members of the Moslem Liberation Movement and 22 alleged Marxists. None have been sentenced and none now have access to their lawyers. Almost all are in Tripoli Central prison where treatment and conditions are said to be satisfactory. Efforts are being made to establish whether the four Libyans adopted by AI are among those still in detention.
Oman
Murad Abdul Wahab, the only prisoner in Oman for whom an Amnesty International group is working, was previously believed to be imprisoned in Bahrain and was the subject of a postcard campaign in October 1974. However, the Bahraini authorities subsequently informed the International Secretariat that Mr Wahab had been deported to Oman in March 1973, and AI has since regarded him as being a prisoner in Oman.
133
On July 1974, Secretary General Martin Ennals sent a cable to the ruler of Oman, Sultan Qabus bin Said bin Taimur, appealing for the commutation of a death sentence, and later in July the then Vice-Chairman of AI's British Section, Sir Osmond Williams, visited the Omani Ambassador in London, Nassir El Bualy, to discuss AI's work in relation to Oman.
In January 1975 Mr Ennals wrote to Sultan Qabus about allegations of torture which had been made regarding Oman, in particular about the alleged torture of Sa'ud al-Marzugi, who was subsequently sentenced to death together with three other men in April 1975. Mr Ennals once again appealed to Sultan Qabus for the repeal of the death sentence.
Saudi Arabia
During the year Amnesty International took up the cases of 36 Saudis, most of whom were allegedly involved in the planned coup attempt in 1969 and who have been detained ever since without charge or trial. In addition, work continued for eight similar cases.
On 25 March 1975, King Faisal ibn Abdul Aziz was assassinated. He was succeeded by his brother. Crown Prince Khalid ibn Abdul Aziz who, on 6 April, ordered the release of all political prisoners in Saudi Arabia and granted an amnesty to all those accused or convicted of political crimes living abroad. AI sent a cable to the new King expressing delight at this news. It was later reported that 62 political prisoners, who were serving prison sentences of between 6—30 years, had been released.
AI is currently trying to ascertain whether there are any other poUtical detainees in Saudi Arabia (the Research Department had previously collected the names of more than 200 people believed to be detained in Saudi i^abia), and whether all adopted prisoners were included in this amnesty.
Syria
In March 1975 a wave of arrests took place in Syria. An estimated total of between 100 to 200 people, both civilians and military, were detained on suspicion of forming subversive pro-Iraqi cells. The arrests reflect the acceleration of the long-standing feud between the Syrian and Iraqi factions of the Baath party, and the Syrian fear of increasing Iraqi attempts to overthrow President Hafez Assad's government following the Iraqi-Iranian pact of 6 March.
Amnesty International is investigating the cases of 69 people whose names are known so far, including Marwan Hamawi, director of the Syrian Arab News Agency, and eight lawyers. AI understands that the civilians arrested include a number of teachers, government officials and workers. A further 29 arrests were made in April, and nine in May. Their cases are also under investigation.
It has been difficult to establish with any degree of certainty the extent of political imprisonment. Many people believed to be in prison have never been formally charged or brought to trial, and the imprisonment of those believed to have been tried and sentenced has not been officially acknowledged. They are, or are suspected of being, poUtical opponents of the present government and comprise people of a variety of poUtical persuasions. Many are suspected of complicity in a planned coup alleged to have been inspired by the Iraqis in 1970.
134
Efforts have been made over the last year to establish the veracity of these cases, and AI now has the names of 110 political prisoners (excluding those arrested in 1975), of whom 92 still remain without charge or trial and four have been kidnapped from Lebanon. Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to President Assad on 25 June 1975 calling for the release or fair trial of these prisoners.
AI is continuing to work for the 23 previously adopted prisoners. AI has received information that the 12 former ministers of the Atassi government are still being held, without charges, in a separate part of AI Mezze prison, where their treatment is reported to be satisfactory. Two of the three adopted Jewish prisoners, Nissim Katri and Joseph Swed, were released in July 1974, without any charges having been brought agaii^t them. AI has received information that Swed's mental condition is disturbed and that he is limping as a result of ill-treatment.
There is no recent news of the third adopted Jewish prisoner, Albert Elia, previously head of the Jewdsh community in Lebanon, who was kidnapped from Beirut in September 1971. The Syrian government continues to deny his imprisonment, but AI has recently heard that, prior to August 1973, he was held at AI Rowda investigation center in Damascus, where he was robbed of his money and tortured by fallaka (beating on the soles of the feet).
No news has been received of the eight Kurdish prisoners arrested in 1973 for addressing a memorandum to President Assad in protest against the deportation of 120,000 Syrian Kurds as part of the Arab Belt plan, but they have probably not yet been brought to trial.
AI belives that the conditions of the Syrian Jews have eased slightly. Some of the restrictions, such as the curfew and the 2^ kilometer travel limit unless a permit is obtained, appear to be applied with less stringency. AI knows of Jews who have been permitted to leave the country, one on a permanent basis, and has heard that four other Jews were allowed to leave during the past four months. Two Syrian Jews, Azur Zalta and Joseph Shalouh, charged in March 1974 with the murder of four Jewish girls killed while attempting to escape to Lebanon, were released on bail on 29 September 1974, and it is thought that the trial will be postponed indefinitely.
A three-man team visited Syria in October as part of its mission to investigate allegations of ill-treatment and torture in'both Syria and Israel (see chapter on Campaign for the Abolition of Torture). Although they were not permitted to investigate the question of ill-treatment of civilians, it is hoped that AI may have established a basis for future cooperation on this issue.
AI has acquired a substantial amount of information on prison conditions, treatment of prisoners and the legal system over the past year.
People's Democratic Republic of Yemen
Work has continued for 10 Amnesty International adopted prisoners in the country, and the cases of three others were taken up during the year, including the case of Tawfiq 'Az'azi, a barrister from Aden who disappeared from his fiat in the summer of 1972 and has not been heard of since.
There are continuing reports of people disappearing or being executed, but the
135
fragmentary nature of much of the material makes it difficult to substantiate these reports.
There were reports that a large number of political prisoners, including some of those adopted by AI, were released following the National Front Party Congress in March 1975, but no details of these releases have yet been received.
In May 1975 an AI mission visited the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen and the Yemen Arab Republic. The delegates were British lawyer John Platts-Mills and Katrina Mortimer from the Research Department. They met the Chairman of the Presidentail Council, Salem Rubia Ali, and officials in the Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Interior and Justice and discussed with them the problem of political imprisonment, prison conditions, detention without trial, disappearances and executions. The delegates also visited AI Mansura prison and met those Al-adopted prisoners held there. They were not, however, permitted to visit any other prisons in the country.
Yemen Arab Republic
This is still a country about which Amnesty International has very little information as far as political prisoners are concerned. The few reports AI has received may not be indicative of the actual situation.
In May 1974 AI received reports about a teenage boy, Abdul Wahid Ali Qassem Saif, who had been arrested after the execution of h^ father in April 1973. The father had been found guilty of sabotage. It was reported that an earlier death sentence passed on the boy was later commuted to 3 years' imprisonment. Inquiries were made for further details of this case, and a letter was sent meanwhile to President Qadi AI Iryani requesting that the prisoner be allowed family visits which up until then, it is claimed, had not been permitted. Later it was learned from a reliable source that his mother was now being allowed to visit him. No other information about this case has been received.
In June 1974 there was a change of government when a military junta took over in a bloodless coup. The new President, Colonel Ibrahim AI Hamdi, announced that the cases of all political prisoners would be reviewed. In a letter to the then Prime Minister, Muhsin AI Aini, AI welcomed the move, and in August it was reported that all political prisoners, except for those convicted for sabotage, had been released.
In May 1975 an AI mission visited the Yemen Arab Republic and the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen. The delegates were British lawyer John Platts-Mills, and Katrina Mortimer from the Research Department. The mission's main purpose was to introduce Al's aims and methods to the leading members of the government and of the religious community. The delegates also held discussions with the appropriate ministers on political prisoners, on the legal system in relation to political offences and, following a visit to a number of prisons in the capital, on prison conditions.
Covers of Greek, Dutch, French, Japanese, Portuguese and Italian editions of Amnesty International Report on Torture.
137
Missions: June 1974 to May 1975
Country	Date	Delegate	Purpose
Chile	May/June	Horst Woesner (German)	to observe trials of military
			and civilian prisoners
Cuba	June	Inger Fahlander	talks with government
		(Swedish)	officials
Morocco	June	Bruno Monflier (French)	research
Namibia	June	Cedric Thornberry	to observe trials of SWAPO
		(British)	leaders
South Korea	June	William Butler	talks with government
		(American)	offjcals/inquiry into emergen-
			cy decree laws/to observe
			trial
Bulgaria	July	Werner Sporn	to observe appeal hearings
		(Austrian)	before Bulgarian Supreme
			Court of Dr Heinrich
			Spetter, sentenced to death
Ivory Coast	July	Marie-Claire Piccard	to observe trial of 170
		(French)	people detained since
			October 1970 and charged
			with "crimes against the
			security of the state"
Lesotho	July	Barend van Niekerk	talks with government
		(South African)	officials/research
Namibia	July	Cedric Thornberry	to observe trial of SWAPO
		(British)	leaders
Spain	July	E. Ziegler-MuUer (Swiss)	to observe trial of José Pons
			Llobet and Oriol Sole
			Sugranyes
Turkey	July	Anne Burley	research
		(New Zealand)	
Tunisia	August	Monique Desforges	to observe trial of over 200
		(French)	people charged with, inter
			alia, "plotting against the
			security of the state
USA	August	Sorton Jones	to observe legal hearings
		(Canadian)	brought by Martin Sostre
			before the United States
			Court of Appeals
138
Vietnam
Namibia Ecuador USA
Northern Ireland Israel/Syria
Spain
Yugoslavia
Lesotho
USA
Indonesia
Sri Lanka
South Africa Ethiopia
Spain USA
Yugoslavia Egypt
Bangladesh, Nepal, Pakistan, India
August A.J.J. Sanguinetti (Hong Kong)
September Cedric Thornberry
(British) September Lisandro Martinez
(Colombian) September Roger Plant (British) October Alfred Heijder (Dutch) Angela Wright (British) October Asbj^irn Elde (Norwegian) Peter Nobel (Swedish) Kees van Vuuren (Dutch) October Mario Stasi (French)
October C.F. Ruter (Dutch)
November Barend van Niekerk
(South African) December John Dugard
(South African)
January Wen-hsien Huang (British) Neil Gilmore (Australian) Peter Baume (Australian) Richard McGarvie (Australian) Leonore Ryan (Australian) January Louis Blom-Cooper (British)
Yvonne Terlingen (Dutch)
February Jorn-Erik Gutheil
(German) February Hans Ehrenstrale (Swedish) John Humphreys (Canadian) February Christian Grobet (Swiss)
February Armand Shcpard
(Canadian) February C.F. Ruter (Dutch) Marins Broekmeyer (Dutch)
March Yuksel Ersoy (Turkish)
legal inquiry into position of 118 South Vietnamese refugees deported from Hong Kong to Saigon to observe trial of SWAPO leaders
to investigate case of Galarza and others Cuba research
legal inquiry into working of Emergency Provisions Act inquiry into allegations of torture of prisoners of war and others in both countries inquiry into legal status and allegations of torture of Genoveva Forest and others to observe trial of Dr Djura Djurovic
to observe treason trial
to observe hearings of petitions brought by three Ai adoptees before the Superior Court of North Carolina talks with government officials
inquiry into the position of political prisoners detained following April 1971 and into working of the Criminal J ustice Commission research
talks with government officials; attendance at trial
March/April Martin Ennals (British)
to observe appeal hearings of adopted trade unionists to observe trial of Martin Sostre
to observe trial of Mihajlo Mihajlov
to observe trial of 19 Alexandrians detained since June 1973 charged under article 98 of the Criminal Law and Law 34 of 1970
talks with governments
139
South Korea	March/April Erik Karup Pedersen
(Danish)
Brian Wrobel (British)
Rhodesia	March	Clinton Bamberger
(American)
Lesotho	April	Barend van Niekerk
(South African)
Taiwan	May	James Seymour
(American)
South Korea	May	Kenkichi Nakadaira
(Japanese)
North/South May	Katrina Mortimer
Yemen	(British)
John Platts-Mills (British)
to inquire into allegations of torture/to observe appeal hearings of seven prisoners sentenced to death to observe proceedings of Special Court set up to review Reverend N. Sithole's detention order to observe treason trial
talks with government officials
to observe trials of Kim Chi-ha and Han Seung-hon talks with government officials
140
News Releases 1974/75
1974
6 June. Amnesty appeals to Bulgaria not to execute former UN staff member.
16	June. Joint Amnesty-ICJ report says political suspects in Uruguay are systematically tortured because of absence of lega! protection./Amnistía Internacional y la Comisión Internacional de Juristas informan sobre la tortura en Uruguay de sospechos políticos quo carecen de proteción legal.
21 June. New wave of arrests, disappearances and torture in Brazil makes mockery of "economic miracle", Amnesty International says.
12	July. Amnesty International urges South Korea to commute death sentences.
24 July. Amnesty International asks new Greek leader to free political prisoners and set up an inquiry into torture practices.
1 August. Amnesty International appeals to Chile to commute death sentences.
1 August.Amnesty International seeks urgent inquiry into reported deaths on Con Son of 14- including two children-of Vietnamese deported from Hong Kong.
13	August. Amnesty shock at confirmation of Bulgarian's death sentence.
18 August. Amnesty asks Bahrein to free workers detained two months.
without charge; release also sought for nine trade unionists in Jordan.
5 September. Amnesty International Annual Report calls for UN commissioner for human rights.
8 September. Amnesty International Council meeting acts on South Korea, GDR, Uruguay, Philippines and Vietnam; elects ex-Turkish prisoner of conscience to executive; and makes new moves on torture and capital punishment.
10 Swptember. Major Amnesty International report documents repression of human rights by junta in Chile./Un sustancial informe de Amnistía Internacional documenta la represión de los derechos humanos ejercida por la junta chilena.
17	September. Amnesty International says Naxalite prisoners in India held without trial in grossly overcrowded prisons.
8 October. Statement by Amnesty International on award of 1974 Nobel Peace Prize to its recently-retired chairman, Sean MacBride.
141
18	October. Amnesty Intemational asks Soviet leader to free political prisoner who Sakharov says is near death.
6 November. Amnesty International calls for Argentine probe into murder of Umguayan exiles./El gobierno argentino debe investigar el asesinato de exilados uruguayos. Declaración de Amnistía Intemacional.
13 November. Amnesty Intemational calls for release of all political prisoners in Mali/Amnistie Intemational sollicite la libération des détenus politiques au Mali.
19	November. Amnesty Intemational urges release of prisoners on hunger strike in Ecuador. / Se pide libertad para prisioneros de Ecuador, los prisioneros han declarado huelga de hambre. Comunicado de Amnistía Internacional.
26	November. Amnesty Intemational appeals to President Ford for US Thanksgiving Day amnesty.
28	November. Amnesty International asks American ILO states to help stop harassment of Umguayan trade unionists./Detener la persecución de sindicalistas en Umguay—Amnistìa Internacional pide la intervención de los Estados Americanos miembros de la OIT.
29	November. Amnesty International urges Ethiopia to spare lives of remaining detainees and ensure they receive fair trial.
1	December. Amnesty Intemational lists 229 trade unionists imprisoned in 17 countries.
2	December, Victims confirm international cooperation on torture training (news conference following Campaign for the Abolition of Torture workshop).
12	December. Amnesty Intemational queries "all political prisoners freed" statement by Rhodesian leader.
17 December. Amnesty Intemational appeals for general amnesty in Cameroun./Appel d'Amnesty Intemational pour une amnistie générale au Caméroun.
1975
13	January. Amnesty International report says torture still used systematically by many countries throughout world (revised edition of Report on Torture).
15 January. Amnesty International concem at crackdown on dissidents in Lithuania.
19 January. Amnesty International urges freedom for hundreds of political prisoners in Chad./Amnesty International demande la libération de centaines de prisonniers politiques au Tchad.
23	January. Amnesty International dismayed at Council of Europe decision.
24	January. Amnesty International condemns executions in Somalia.
27	January. Amnesty International hits at Vietnam agreement signatories over failure to act on tens of thousands of prisoners./Amnesty Intemational met en cause les signataires des accords de Paris pour n'avoir pas assuré la libération de dizaines de milliers de prisonniers civils vietnamiens.
12 February. Amnesty International says gross violations of human rights have reached new peaks in Paraguay, Uruguay and Argentina./Amnistia Intemacional acusa: violaciones a derechos humanos en Paraguay, Umguay y Argentina, (accompanied by article entitled: "Arbitrary Arrest, Torture, Kidnapping and
142
Murder: The Effects of Anti-Subversion Measures in Paraguay, Uruguay and Argentina")-
17 February. Amnesty International urges clemency for prisoners in Gabon./ Appel d'Amnesty International pour les prisonniers politiques au Gabon.
14 March. Amnesty International appeals to Ivory Coast to free 85 detainees. /Appel d'Amnesty International pour la libération de 85 détenus en Côte d'Ivoire.
2 April. Amnesty International observer calls Rhodesian proceedings against Sithole a "sham".
9	April. Amnesty International protests execution of 8 in South Korea and manhandling of its official observer.
10	April. Amnesty International inquiry says both Israel and Syria committed abuses gainst prisoners of war {Report of an Amnesty International Mission to Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic to Investigate Allegations of Ill-Treatment and Torture).
13	April. Amnesty International appeals for end to atrocities in Equatorial Guinea (with background notes).
16	April. Amnesty International asks Iraq to free Kurdish civilians and probe torture.
17	April. Amnesty International concem for safety of detainees in Uruguay.
19	April. Amnesty International urges USSR to free members of its Moscow group.
20	April. Amnesty International lists 252 women political prisoners in 25 countries.
22	April. Amnesty International says seven Iranians reportedly "shot while trying to escape" may have been tortured to death.
11	May. Amnesty International lists 71 imprisoned journalists in 17 countries.
14	May. Amnesty International sends mission to Taiwan.
16 May. Amnesty International resumes publication of Soviet human rights journal (A Chronicle of Current Events 28-31).
21	May. Amnesty International asks President of Zambia to intei-vene after reports of torture of detained ZANU supporters.
23	May. Amnesty International urges USSR to extend partial women's year amnesty to all women prisoners of conscience.
25 R4ay. Amnesty International appeals to Jamaica to reprieve two under death sentences.
143
Some Amnesty International Statistics
As of 31 May 1974 there were:
1,592 groups in 31 countries, an increase of 109 groups over 1973-74. More than 70,000 individual members in 65 countries, an increase of 30,000 members and eight countries over 1973-74.
3,650 prisoners under adoption or investigation.
During the calendar year 1974:
2,458 new prisoners were taken up and 1,403 prisoners released, respective increases of31%and 32% over 1973.
During 1974-75 Amnesty International:
Took action on violations of human rights in 107 countries. Dispensed about £100,000 (US $240,000)* in relief to prisoners and their families.
Sent missions and observers to 31 countries.
Published three major reports, reprinted three other major reports and resumed publication of A Chronicle of Current Events. Issued 50 news releases.
Held two expert seminars in connection with the Campa^n for the Abolition of Torture and a major conference in New Delhi on AI development in Asia.
* A rough approximation since groups often do not report all the money they send to their adopted prisoners and families.
144
International Executive Committee 1974/75
Eric Baker Maggie Beirne Andrew Blane Dirk Börner Thomas Hammarberg Alfred Heijder Marie-José Protais Mümtaz Soysal Kevin White
Britain
Staff representative
United States
Germany, Chairman
Sweden, Vice-Chairman
Netherlands
France
Turkey
Ireland, Treasurer
International Secretariat
Martin Ennals Hans Ehrenstrale Stephanie Grant Martin Enthoven Mark Grantham Nigel Rodley Les Haswell John Humphreys Inger Fahlander Wen-hsien Huang Clayton Yeo Shobhna Shah Dick Costing Sherman Carroll
Secretary General
Deputy Secretary General
Head of Research
Executive Secretary
Head of Information and Publications
Legal Adviser
Administrative Manager
Deputy Head of Research, Head of African Research
Head of Americas Research
Head of Asia Research
Head of Europe Research
Finance Officer
Campaign for the Abolition of Torture Campaign for the Abolition of Torture
The International Secretariat, which comprises 16 nationalities, has 66 full-time staff members-14 more than last year-six part time staff and nine volunteers. The largest unit is the Research Department which, in addition to the Head of Research, has 13 full-time researchers, two-part-time researchers, 11 executive assKtants to researchers, 13 secretaries and one copy typist.
145
National Sections and Committees
Australia: (New South Wales Branch) Mrs Norma Williams, 2/8 Evans Road, Elizabeth Bay, New South Wales 2011
{Queensland Branch) David Mason, PO Box 162, Moorvale, Queensland 4105 {South Australia Branch) PO Box 779, GPO Adelaide, South Australia 5001 {Tasmania Branch) Mrs Bertha Rolls, 194 Waterworks Road, Hobart, Tasmania 7000
{VictoriaBranch) Rev. John Graf, 1 Mason Street,CoUingwood, Victoria 3066 {Western Australia Branch) Mrs Hannah Downie, 39 Clifton Crescent, Mount Lawley, Western Australia 6050 Austria: 1020 Vienna, Franz Hochedlingergasse 8/5
Bangladesh: Mr Mohammad Hafizullah, c/o Orr, Dignam & Co., 195 Motijheel
Commercial Area, Dacca Belgium: {Flemish speaking) 202 Oudergemlaan, 1040 Brussels
{French speaking) Avenue Géneral Eisenhower 38, 1030 Brussels Britain: 55 Theobald's Road, London WCIX 8SP
Canada: Mrs Susan Nichols, c/o First Unitarian Congregation of Ottawa, 2101
Algonquin Avenue, Ottawa, Ontario K2AIT2 Denmailc: Frederiksborggade 1, 1360 Copenhagen K Faroe Islands: Mrs Anette Wang, Tróndargt. 47, PO Box 23, 3800 Tòrshavn Finland: Mannerheimintie 16 B 19,00100 Helsinki 10 France: 20 rue de la Michodière, 75002 Paris
Gambia: Mrs Joanna Kambona, c/o The Land Office, Local Government, Banjul
Germany, Federal Republic of: 2000 Hamburg 76, Stuckenstrasse 70
Ghana: Dr I.S. Ephson, lien Chambers, PO Box 6354, Accra
Greece: Pavlos Zannas, Lycavittou 15, Athens
Iceland: Box 128, Reykjavik
India: A-1 Kailash Colony, New Delhi 48
Ireland: Mrs Anne Clissmann, 57 «Bayside Walk, Sutton, Co. Dublin Israel: PO Box 37638, Tel Aviv Italy: Via della Penna 51, Rome
Japan: Room 54, 3-18 Nishi-Waseda 2-chome, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160 Korea, Republic of: Amnesty International Korean Committee, IPO Box2934, Seoul
146
Lebanon: Maitre Joseph Rizcallah, Rue Cléménceau, Imm. Minkara, Beirut Luxembourg: Case Postale 1914, Luxembourg Mexico: Ap. Postal No. 20-217, México 20, D.F. Nepal: Mr Rishikesh Shaha, Sri Nivas, Kamal Pokhari, Naxal, Lai Durbar, Kathmandu
Netherlands: 3®Hugo de Grootstraat 7, Amsterdam New Zealand: Box 3597, Wellington
Nigeria: Samuel Ade Oyewole, 17 Kobiti Street, Alakara/Idi-Oro, Yaba/Lagos Norway: Oscarsgt. 50, Oslo 2
Pakistan: Hashmat Habib, Karachi Press Club, Ingle Road, Karachi Peru: Dra. Laura Caller, Jirón Pachitea 279 - Of. 500-501, Lima Sri Lanka: Edward de Silva, 79/15 Alexandra Place, Colombo 7 Sweden: Barnhusgatan 4,111 23 Stockholm Switzerland: Postfach 1051, CH-3001, Bern
United States: Room 64, 200 West 72nd Street, New York, New York 10023
There are also AI members and supporters in the following countries:
Argentina	Kenya	South Africa
Barbados	Malaysia	Spain
Bermuda	Malta	Surinam
Botswana	New Guinea	Tanzania
Colombia	Paraguay	Thailand
Cuba	Philippines	Turkey
Egypt	Portugal	USSR (group)
Hong Kong	Rhodesia	Yugoslavia
Jamaica	Sierra Leone	Zaire
Jordan	Singapore	Zambia
147
International Secretariat
Summary and Allocation of Budget for 1975-76
Salaries and related expenditure	£ Research Department (including Campaign for the
Abolition of Torture)............................172,900
Other........................102,900
Reference Library..................................2,000
Travel
Executive, meetings, etc..........................7,600
Research, missions, and field secretaries........11,300
Printing and stationary................................18,000
Postage..........................................13,000
Telephone, telex and cables............................9,500
Rent and rates....................................17,000
Heating, cleaning and insurance..........................4,500
Service and rental, contracts and miscellaneous................5,300
Depreciation of office fittings and equipment................2,500
Audit, accountancy and professional fees....................5,500
372,000
Less: Sales of Publications................................5,200
_£366,800
Budget 1975-76 (Figures rounded to nearest £1,000)	£
Secretary General's office (including	^q nrvi Ugal Office)
■ Administration	39 000
Information and Publications	25,000
Coordination Unit	25,000
Field Secretaries	8,000
Campaign for the Abolition of Torture	28,000
Research	203,000
^	£367,000


■■M ■f
■ ■
V

	^. i
	
	
	"■''I ' ■■
	
' T.	
	■ ♦
/
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL PUBLICATIONS Amnesty International Report on Torture
A survey of torture allegations in more than 60 countries. Issued in conjunction with Amnesty International's worldwide Campaign for the AboHtion of Torture. 246 pages. £1.50 (US$3.75). Second (updated) edition. January 1975. Report of an Amnesty International Mission to Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic to Investigate Allegations of Hi-Treatment and Torture. The report of the commission which visited Israel and Syria, 10-24 October 1974 to investigate allegations arising from the October 1973 war. 34 pages; 50 pence (US $1.25). April 1975. A Chronicle of Current Events, numbers 28-31
The journal for the defence of human rights in the USSR records the arrests, searches, interrogations, detentions, trials, and confinement in labour camps and psychiatric hospitals of intellectual, religious and national dissenters in the Soviet Union. Translated from the original Russian samizdat and published in one volume, illustrated, 168 pages. 95 pence (US$2.50). May 1975. Earlier editions of this unique publication are still available. Numbers 17, 18, 21, 24, 27, published singly: 65 pence (US$1.60) each. Double volumes 19-20, 22-23, 25-26: 85 pence (US$2.10). Chile: an Amnesty International Report
A detailed study of the fateful year that followed the bloody military coup that overthrew the Allende government in September 1973. It documents the political imprisonment, executions, disappearances, systematic use of torture and abuse of legal procedures by the junta. 80 pages in English, 88 pages in Spanish, both illustrated. 85 pence (US $2.10). September 1974. Political Prisoners in South Vietnam
A report on the 100,000 or more civilians detained by the then Saigon Government with reference to political prisoners also held by the PRG. 36 pages, illustrated. 35 pence (US $0.90). July 1973 Report on Allegations of Torture in Brazil
The other face of Brazil's much-vaunted "economic miracle": a report on how torture has become an institutional instrument of terror and repression in the country. 108 pages. £1.20 (US$3.00). First pubUshed September 1972. Second edition reset with revised preface and commentary. July 1974.
Report of an Inquiry into AUegatiom of W-Treatment in Northern Ireland
An Amnesty International investigation into 30 cases of alleged brutality by the security forces against detainees. 48 pages. 75 pence (US$1.85). March 1972. Reprinted July 1974.
Political Imprisonment in Spain
This report, which traces the history of post-civil war political imprisonment in Spain, describes the legal machinery used to repress opponents of the government and shows the brutality and discrimination suffered by them. 32 pages. Illustrated English edition: 50 pence (US$1.25), Spanish edition, vwthout illustrations: 30 pence (US $0.75). August 1973.