ARGENTINA
1989 was a year of great importance to the social, political and economic development of Argentina. Presidential elections took place in May. The transfer of power between civilian governments marked an important turning point in the life of democracy in Argentina as it was the first time a constitutionally elected government succeeded another in over 40 years. Nonetheless, the abrupt and early resignation of President Alfonsin amid deepening economic strife posed a risk to the exercise of democracy. President Menem took power six months early and eight days after Mr. Alfonsin left office.
President Menem brought a measure of stability to the economic tailspin which led to Mr. Alfonsin's resignation, but his economic initiatives were insufficient to correct the rapid deterioration of the economy. The underlying economic structures proved too weak, the deficit too deep and the foreign debt too high for any quick fix to turn the economy around. The poor and middle class bore the brunt of many of the government's economic changes.
Public confidence in Argentina's democratic institutions also suffered when on October 6, 1989, President Menem, acting in the name of "national reconciliation," pardoned 39 senior military officials charged with human rights violations during the military governments of 1976-83. Since the beginning of the prosecutions of military officials for human rights violations, the armed forces have pressed civilian governments to drop all charges, grant amnesty to those convicted and vindicate their so-called "dirty war." President Alfonsin acceded to military pressure when he passed the Punto Final law halting new prosecutions in late 1986 and the 1987 Due Obedience Law relieving all but senior officials of culpability. The State Department's report gives little attention to future destabilizing effects of such compromises with a politically active military.
The other major event in 1989 which weakened civilian control over the military was the attack on an army base at La Tablada by an armed leftist group in January. The military's role in domestic affairs grew in the wake of the La Tablada incident. President Alfonsin established a National Security Council in which the armed forces participate, and he issued a decree allowing military intelligence agencies to engage in domestic operations. This attack, based on perhaps intentionally misleading information that a coup was in the making at La Tablada provided the military with an
11
Argentina
opportunity to enhance its tarnished reputation as guardian of the" national security and to discredit the leh and human rights groups. The life sentences imposed on the captured militants stand in stark contrast to the October 6 pardon granted by President Menem to military officials whose rebellions against civilian authorities in 1987 and 1988 resulted in civilian casualties.
The report indicates that there were no politically motivated killings in 1989, yet mentions charges that some of the survivors of the La Tablada attack were killed after surrender. Evidence indicates that up to five of the attackers were murdered after surrendering. For instance, while authorities claim that Francisco Provenzano was killed in the counter-offensive, according to witnesses he had surrendered alive. Likewise, a judicial investigation has produced no information or conclusions regarding the "disappearances" of Carlos Samojedny, Ivan Ruiz and José Díaz after their surrender. Such cases come within the definition of "political and other extrajudicial killings" in Appendix A of the country reports. The investigations of these cases have stalled; they have been rendered more difficult because of irregularities in recording and preserving evidence necessary to establish individual responsibility or piece together the cause of death of the assailants. The excessive use of force in repelling the La Tablada attack also should have been mentioned in the report, especially given claims by the attackers of their repeated unsuccessful attempts to surrender.
The report fails to indicate that surviving attackers of La Tablada were reportedly beaten and tortured after surrendering. There is substantial evidence that prisoners captured at La Tablada and in its aftermath were tortured and mistreated (including beatings, chokings, threats and mock executions) throughout their detention, especially before being placed under civilian court jurisdiction. The investigations of these and other charges of torture and abuse by the security forces have made little progress, and one prosecution arising out of the charges was dismissed on the grounds of insufficient evidence.
The report correctly mentions that deaths sometimes result from the routine use of force by the police. Such abuses are corrected only with difficulty because the police often threaten to kill anyone reporting police mistreatment. Finally, while politically motivated bombings occurred, the State Department's report does not analyze the historic context of such bombings, predominantly linked to military intelligence or military fringe groups, nor the fact that the
12
Argentina
government has not seriously investigated the bombings. In 1989, bomb attacks occurred in the offices of the construction workers union, the office of former President Alfonsin and, contrary to the report's statement that "the perpetrators never claimed responsibility for these bombings," the office of a newspaper in Lanus, for which a right-wing group claimed responsibility.
One "disappearance" was reported in 1989 to the UN Commission on Human Rights' Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, but has not been independently verified. Reversing earlier proclivities, the judicial system has been uncooperative in helping to reunite children of "disappeared" parents with their grandparents or relatives. Unfortunately, by slowing or impeding the process of discovery and reunification, the courts reinforce the status quo. The report identifies the case of twins taken by a former police station chief, Samuel Miara, who fled to Paraguay and was eventually extradited to Argentina. The paternity of the children was later confirmed by medical tests which showed them to be sons of a "disappeared" couple, but the courts have yet to return the twins to their rightful family.
As the report notes, the police and security forces are accused of routinely using torture during pre-trial detention. While stating that "critics accuse the police of mistreatment of prisoners," the report fails to express its own conclusion on the issue, and, as noted earlier, fails to mention the most serious case of torture that occurred involving the La Tablada attackers who surrendered. Finally, while prison conditions in Argentinean jails are generally not salubrious, prisoners with AIDS suffer worse treatment. However, their situation improved in the last year after a successful series of habeas corpus petitions by a local human rights organization.
Argentinean police may arrest anyone accused of a misdemeanor {e.g., prostitution, drunkenness and drug use) and those arrested may be detained by the police for up to 30 days. Such detentions are appealable. Human rights groups have opposed as unconstitutional this power and another law allowing police to detain anyone for 24 hours without a specific reason {e.g., "investigation"). Most incidents of police use of torture occur while detainees are under such police custody. The report does not mention specific instances of arbitrary arrest that occurred in 1989 following the food riots in May when, under state of siege powers, the government arrested leftist political leaders, including the highest ranking officials
13
Argentina
of the Workers Party, upon their exit from a meeting with the Minister of the Interior.
Bombings and threats, and threatened prosecutions of judges who questioned the validity of the presidential pardons of officials implicated in human rights abuses compromise the independence of the judiciary in Argentina and go unmentioned in the report. One bomb attack against the home of a district judge in San Nicolas killed his son. The Solicitor-General considered sanctioning prosecutors who challenged the constitutionality of the pardons, initiating two disciplinary proceedings against federal prosecutors. Such actions, combined with the presidential pardon and earlier application of the Due Obedience Law, indicate the power which the political system, especially the military, holds over the judiciary in Argentina. The courts have given much less attention and little judicial relief in cases of human rights violations, families seeking restitution of their grandchildren sequestered with their "disappeared" parents, and legal attempts to seek information concerning the whereabouts of the "disappeared."
The report notes that political prisoners were also released under the presidential pardon issued in October. Sixty-four such individuals were listed in the presidential pardon decrees, apparently to imply some sort of "justice" by pardoning those charged with terrorist offenses along with the military officials prosecuted for human rights violations. Some of those named had already been acquitted, 12 had been listed as "disappeared" in the report by the National Commission on Disappeared Persons and the bodies of two others had been uncovered. Six political prisoners remaining from the period of military rule were finally released by July; they had been imprisoned over 10 years after trials, widely believed to have been unfair, by the former military government. However, all received conditional release, similar to parole, under which they may not travel outside certain areas and are required to report regularly to authorities.
As the report notes, the government wields substantial control over the media through its ownership of a large number of the television and radio stations and its use of the large state advertising budget for political purposes. The state thus limits the range of expression by pulling its advertisements from alternative or opposition publications, which can then only continue to function in a very limited fashion. Similarly, while academic freedom is respected, the government uses political criteria to dispense what is the dominant
14
Argentina
source of scientific research funding in the country; after President Menem came to office, his team substituted its personnel and projects in such funding organizations.
The report neglects several incidents of governmentally imposed limits on press freedoms, including halting the circulation of an Uruguayan paper which had published a communiqué from an Argentinean guerrilla group and suspending the broadcast of the second program in a series on events in the 1960s and 1970s under pressure from the military. The government also eliminated the dutyfree importation of magazines from various countries.
Death threats reported against defense lawyers and human rights groups in the wake of the La Tablada attack, in which a former human rights lawyer was killed, apparently were not investigated by the government. The State Department's report erroneously states that the government has facilitated recourse by domestic human rights groups to the UN and OAS human rights bodies. In fact, the government has opposed the jurisdiction of the UN and OAS human rights organs over cases brought by human rights groups and victims who seek to use international law to overturn the grant of amnesty to accused human rights violators.
Instances of anti-Semitism not mentioned in the report include an advertisement published in Argentina's largest circulation daily commemorating Hitler's 100th birthday, calling him "one of the greatest heroes in the history of humanity." A federal court dismissed the case to stop the advertisement brought under Argentina's antidiscrimination law.
The report mentions criticism by the International Labor Organization of stringent membership requirements for legalizing alternative trade unions. It fails to describe how the union hierarchy lacks elemental democracy and obstructs possibilities for independent union representation.
15
