BELIZE
Belize is, as the State Department notes, a functioning parliamentary democracy. Political killings are unknown, and political prisoners have been rare if not nonexistent. Freedom of speech and assembly are not only tolerated, but part of the political culture. Thus, human rights are not the concern they are in most Central American countries. Nevertheless, the picture presented annually in the report is one of a flourishing civil society, characterized by informed political debate, where violations of individual rights by government and police are virtually unknown, and most people enjoy secure labor rights as well as the ability to participate in the political life of the country.
This picture has been overly rosy in three areas deserving comment -- police intimidation and abuse, restrictions on the media and trade union rights. While 1989 saw a dramatic improvement with regard to both police practice and the media, the situation regarding trade union rights remains generally poor.
During the last three decades, police intimidation and abuse of suspects and detainees has been common; lawyers routinely secured acquittals on the basis of improperly gathered testimony. Since access to the best legal representation is not open to everyone, a practice that has led to the acquittal of those with resources has simply been endured by those without. In recent years, notably 1986 and 1987, police abuses were particularly common against refugees and others from neighboring Central American countries.
This situation improved significantly in 1989, both before and after the national election campaign during the summer. Instances of police brutality or intimidation reported to the Human Rights Commission of Belize — established in December 1987 -- numbered 41 in 1988; in 1989 the number was 6.
This drop can be attributed to a number of factors. First, a bipartisan effort to make police and others more aware of human rights. Early in the year, a bipartisan committee of the National Assembly -- the Constitutional and Foreign Affairs Committee --traveled throughout the country receiving testimony. Chapter 2, Section 5 of the Constitution, guaranteeing the right to be informed of charges and the right to legal counsel, is now prominently displayed in all 60 police stations in the country. In addition, in August 1988 the Human Rights Commission began to introduce a
16
Belize
basic human rights manual and appropriate training through the National Teachers Union in August 1989, a program it has recently expanded into the police recruit curriculum.
In July 1989, on the recommendation of the Constitutional and Foreign Affairs Committee, the National Assembly approved an amendment to the Constitution reducing the time that a suspect can be detained before being brought before a magistrate's court from 72 to 24 hours. Investigations found that abuses under this law were not systematic, but occurred when individual officers felt they could get away with it. One practical problem not mentioned in the report is that the chronically underfunded Legal Aid Office (which receives no government subsidy and relies on pro bono work) is still not very effective — the poor do not get lawyers and magistrates tend to believe the police in the absence of legal counsel for the person charged.
In the case of refugees, no involuntary deportations occurred in 1989; this was confirmed by both the Human Rights Commission and by SPEAR, a non-governmental organization (NGO) which has previously expressed concern with the situation regarding rights of refugees. Violations of refugee rights tended to be violations of privacy, with the police searching individuals and homes for drugs and illegal firearms (for which a warrant is not needed). Another problem refugees face is that while documentation and work permits are meant be issued within three to six months, in practice this can take up to a year or longer. People working with refugees have reported that the Office of Immigration is generally not helpful in processing the necessary documentation, and until it is completed, refugees cannot work legally; they are consequently easy to exploit. The report fails to discuss this situation.
In general, however, 1989 saw an overall improvement with regard to the treatment of refugees in Belize. This had reached a low point in 1987, when an Immigration Advisory Committee report to the Foreign Ministry recommended Belize not sign the United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, in part because "no refugee should be discriminated against because of country of origin"; thus "should the Belizean government wish to treat Guatemalan refugees differently from other refugees, this will not be in accordance with the Convention." The Foreign Ministry consequently recommended that the role of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Belize "be reduced and gradually phased out" in favor of assistance from other outside agencies. While the United
17
Belize
Nations Convention has still not been ratified, in 1989 Belize began to work more closely with the UNHCR in an effort to coordinate policy on a regional basis, and in May the government participated in the International Conference on Central American Refugees in Guatemala City. The resulting declaration and plan of action in favor of Central American Refugees, Returnees, and Displaced Persons included reference both to the approximately 5,000 officially recognized "refugees," as well as to measures for an additional 15,000 to 25,000 "displaced persons."
Perhaps the most notable improvement regarding guarantees of personal freedom came immediately after the election in September 1989, when the new government of the People's United Party (PUP), led by Prime Minister George Price, moved to abolish the Security and Intelligence Service (SIS). This armed unit, which began operations in January 1987, reported directly to the Minister of Home Affairs, outside the police chain of command. It was invested with various powers of domestic surveillance, which human rights monitors considered both arbitrary and excessive for the intelligence needs of a small, open society.
The unpopularity of the SIS resulted in public protests and demonstrations in the midst of which, in November 1987, the home of the Minister of Home Affairs, Hon. Carl Thompson, burned down, allegedly the result of arson. The prime minister promptly accused the opposition party of responsibility for the fire and the police questioned over 30 ranking party leaders, including the former prime minister, solely on the basis of their known opposition to the bill setting up the SIS. Three people were arrested and charged, including a former PUP electoral district chairman and a former major in the Belize Defence Force. Charges against all three were ultimately dropped in November 1988.
The outcry concerning the operations of this body, including the monitoring of travel and telephone calls by members of at least one nongovernmental organization -- SPEAR, headed by former government minister Assad Shoman -- led to the questioning of a number of arbitrary procedures concerning the treatment of NGOs and other informal organizations. While formally all NGOs are subject to the same regulations concerning the import of goods duty free, for example, in practice this was applied very selectively in recent years. It is to be hoped that the new government policy will be not only different with regard to SPEAR, but will be applied impartially and subject to review.
18
Belize
The media in Belize, while not actively repressed, has suffered under a number of constraints due both to limited resources and the government's dislike of criticism. The radio, which until recently was the only form of electronic media, has always been a government monopoly, and license applications by independent newspaper editor Evan X. Hyde have been repeatedly denied by both post-independence governments. Television, which caught the PUP government unawares, grew in the form of programs pirated from the United States by satellite dish. Owners of station licenses, while theoretically required to produce 1% (not 2% as the State Department reports) local programming, are in fact under no pressure to do so, as the "requirement" is more of a recommendation, and owners are content merely to take the satellite transmission. Local organizations that have sought television time have been obliged not only to find their own programs but to find the advertising support as well. Finally, the opposition press has historically been subject to harassment ranging from bans on attendance at ministerial press conferences to repeated charges of libel and contempt of court.
During 1989, however, this situation also saw significant improvement, in large part due to the PUP's emphasis on press freedom as part of its successful electoral campaign. Currently the new government is implementing a sweeping new policy with regard to the media. It will no longer own a radio or television station itself, but instead has moved to establish an independent broadcasting authority along the lines of the British Broadcasting Corporation.
The government also quickly approved Mr. Hyde's application, and Radio Krem, as it is called, started broadcasting in Belize City in the fall of 1989. Mr. Hyde and partners have now applied for a national frequency as well as a television license. In addition, the government has begun producing a few documentaries as well as a local television news program. In the new climate. Great Belize Productions, owned by a naturalized Belizean who has pioneered local documentary television, has begun a bimonthly interview program. Spotlight, hosted by young leaders in each party, in which current events, both local and regional, are discussed openly. Other local efforts have not been so successful, however, since the unwillingness of station owners to take any program without in effect being paid to do so remains unchanged.
The State Department's report made a point of noting that PUP candidate George Price declined the opportunity to debate the
19
Belize
incumbent, Manuel Esquivel. Mr. Price declared that he would not participate in any television debate until the broadcast media was opened up and reorganized — a major issue in his campaign — though it remains to be seen whether he will now do so.
Two legislative measures were immediately taken by the new government with regard to press freedom; the offense of criminal libel, under which the editor of the Belize Times was repeatedly charged in 1987 and 1988, was abolished, along with the denial of the right to appeal contempt of court decisions. The contempt charge was successfully used in 1988 to stop publication of an editorial by the Belize Times questioning the independence of the judiciary. A 1987 UDP effort to establish the offense of intentional libel, which would have been judged by a magistrate without right to a jury, was withdrawn that same year after widespread public protest.
The State Department neglects to note that the new government was not so quick to repeal an ordinance that gives the Minister of Finance broad discretion regarding the information allowed to enter the country, that is, the importation of "printed sound or visual media capable of suggesting words or ideas, which are, in the opinion of the Minister contrary to the public interest." This measure, which in practice leaves the decision as to what is contrary to the public interest subject to the whim of customs officials — was enacted in August 1988 and has yet to be repealed.
The situation regarding labor and trade unions is exceedingly hard to document; no source pretends to be authoritative and practically no statistic is reliable. But few labor organizers are currently proud of their achievements in Belize, or optimistic about the future. Yet the 1989 State Department report declares that the "labor union movement is a significant factor in Belize's economy" and that 30% of the labor force is unionized. This surprisingly high figure, also given in 1988, is hard to confirm. In the 1987 report the figure was only 15%, which is the figure given in the CIA World Factbook 1988. But it would be a mistake to conclude that union representation has doubled since 1987. In its "Investment Climate in Belize" of March 1989, the U.S. Embassy states that there are 8,500 union members out of a labor force of 58,000 — a rate of 15%. And in an April 1989 report to the Department of Commerce, the U.S. Embassy reports 8,500 union members out of a labor force of 74,000 -- a rate of only 11%. An effort to clarify the situation through the Ministry of Labor produced yet a third estimated 1989 labor force: 64,000 (which is simply the total population between 18 and 65 years
20
Belize
of age). On this basis, accepting the U.S. Embassy figure of 8,500, those unionized would reach 13%, but it can be argued that 74,000, which presumably includes those aged 17 and 16 (the minimum age for union membership), is more accurate, making 11% more correct.
It is unclear, however, what the figure of 8,500 trade union members is based on. The embassy document itself states that those unionized are "mainly public sector employees." This would include some 1,500 members of the National Teachers Union (only primary school teachers are unionized; secondary school teachers are not) plus government civil servants. While the Public Service Union (PSU), which includes junior and middle level civil servants, can be reasonably regarded as a labor union, this currently includes only 927 members; some 3,000 others are either not in unions or belong either to the Association of Heads of Departments or the Permanent Secretary Caucus, i.e. senior management professional associations. Not until August 1989 did Belize ratify ILO Convention 151, which recognizes the right to independent organization of public sector workers. Immediately the Telecommunications Workers, numbering 250, split from the PSU to form a new union.
For several years the report has repeated the statement — also made by the U.S. Embassy in Belize -- that the national Trade Union Congress (TUC) is affiliated, through the Inter-American Organization of Workers (ORIT), with the International Congress of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU). Although it is not clear what benefits such an affiliation might bestow, it no longer exists: the ICFTU reports it has had no affiliation with Belize since 1986, when the affiliate union was suspended due to nonpayment of dues, and as far as they know ORIT has no affiliate in Belize either.
It is true that Article 13 of the Constitution guarantees the right to join a union. However, neither the Constitution nor the Trade Union Ordinance guarantees that a successful union vote must be recognized. Thus in practice, employers do not have to negotiate with these organizations. While the government adopted the ILO convention requiring union recognition, it never codified the provision into law, and it is thus not enforceable. In the 1970s, the union won a ballot on representation at Belikin Brewery; management fired the workers and broke the union. To this day, workers know they will be fired if they try to form a union.
The report for 1988 recognized this reality. "Theoretically," it stated, "all unions may freely organize. In practice, however, some
21
Belize
employers attempt to block union organizations by terminating the employment of key union sympathizers, usually on grounds purportedly unrelated to union activities." The 1989 report eliminates this accurate observation, unfortunately. Its statement that "union officials and membership rarely, if ever, encounter discrimination" is simply untrue.
In fact, unions in Belize, which emerged in tandem with the nationalist movements of the 1930s, have subsequently been both co-opted and manipulated by both political parties and successive governments. Unions today are weak, fragmented and demoralized. With the Department of Labor, the Labor Advisory Board can merely make recommendations to government; it has no authority. Strikes are virtually unheard of, and workers are, in most places, on their own when it comes to bringing a case of unfair labor practices.
Moreover, unemployment is very high, especially in Belize City. While figures on unemployment, like those on the labor force itself, are difficult to obtain and very unreliable, official unemployment is currently at 15%, and this is far higher for women. An official rate of 16% in 1986 included a rate of 25% for women. Figures collected by the Ministry of Economic Development in 1984 showed unemployment as high as 50% among women in some rural areas.
Another area for the abuse of worker rights is that of migrant workers. Some 1,500 migrant workers enter Belize each year during the harvest to work in the banana and citrus industries in the south and sugar in the north. This figure does not include the undocumented workers, who are most frequently abused by employers. Even documented migrants are subject to abuse and intimidation as it is common for the employer to demand the migrant worker's permit and hang on to it, tying the worker to the enterprise. Typically they fail to pay social security or taxes for these workers and often do not pay agreed-on wages.
Housing, water and sanitation conditions for these workers are very poor; workers build their own huts along the roadside with no sanitary facilities. Due to their uncertain status, these workers are afraid to complain to the Labor Department. The Belize Human Rights Commission has received a number of complaints of this kind in the banana industry in particular; where there is no union representation, layoffs are frequent and new migrant workers are constantly being sought to clear new land.
22
Belize
The State Department's report states that "virtually every sector of the economy has been unionized to some degree." Yet outside of agriculture, where the picture is very different for resident and migrant workers, and transport, union representation is virtually nonexistent. The Human Rights Commission is not aware of any unionized hotels. Indeed, the entire tourism industry is virtually without union representation, as is the commercial and retail sector. So too is the tiny industrial sector; the garment industry, flour and toilet paper mills, breweries, and cigarette manufacturing plant have no unions.
Finally, while it is true that "there are no export processing zones where union organization is officially discouraged," this is only because there are not yet any export processing zones. However, according to the Minister of Economic Development, Said Musa, the establishment of such zones is very much part of the government's economic development program. It remains to be seen whether the new government can balance its commitment to worker and union rights with its desire for investment in such zones.
The report's discussion of the position of women, socially and economically, in contrast to the discussion of trade unions, is clearly an area where the report recognizes a situation of serious discrimination and tries to come to terms with it, at least descriptively. Again, however, it emphasizes the formal rights pertaining to discrimination; thus it falls back on the explanation that "prejudices rooted in social and economic practice" in practice retard equality and explains domestic violence as a "cultural problem," rather than examining the factors that affect the ability of individuals to enforce those rights, and the kinds of support that would be needed to make such efforts possible. Women are seriously under-represented in the labor force; perhaps only when they begin to enter it in larger numbers will they begin to make the kinds of demands that will put government to the test.
23
