BRAZIL
The State Department's report on Brazil is generally accurate. It correctly identifies the three groups of Brazilians subjected to the most serious human rights violations: landless peasants and those who help them in connection with land disputes; Indians; and common criminal suspects. However, the State Department's very selective citing of specific cases combined with few statistical citations tends to downplay the seriousness of these problems in the country.
In its discussion of violence during land disputes — in the section on political killings -- the State Department fails to include or acknowledge information provided in a December 1989 Amnesty International report which states that out of more than 1,000 killings related to land disputes which had occurred since 1980, only five cases had come to trial by the end of 1989. Thus, even though the report accurately states that "Brazilian human rights organizations charge that federal, state, and local authorities have failed to take legal action against those responsible for such killings," it chooses to cite an estimate by another reputable source, the Pastoral Land Commission of the National Conference of Brazilian Bishops, which was substantially more favorable to the authorities. In addition, it would have been appropriate to mention in this section that many labor leaders and peasant workers connected to the movement to promote land reform in the country are currently under death threats, and that the government has consistently done little about these threats even when the individuals threatened have asked for protection.
The section on political killings also fails to mention the murders of two other prominent labor leaders: José Rente Nascimento, Coordinator of the Environmental Protection Project of the Indigenous Communities {Coordenador do Piano de Protegao ao Meio Ambiente e as Comunidades Indígenas)^ in Rio Br anco, Acre State, on May 17, together with two of his assistants, and Joao Almeida do Nascimento, chairman of the Rural Worker's Union in Cumbé, Sergipe State, on May 31. The report should also have mentioned the shooting on October 31 of two rural workers, Generaldo Bonfim de Oliveira and Juvencio Alves de Souza, in the Senhor do Bonfim region of Bahia State. These men were members of a local community association which was in a dispute with a landowner over the title to and compensation for a piece of land. The landowner is alleged to have been in the car with the gunmen who shot at the two rural workers. One of the victims escaped unharmed
24
Brazil
after the shooting. The other was shot in the shoulder and the lung and was later abducted by the same men and tortured.
In the section discussing "disappearances," the State Department correctly states that there were no politically motivated "disappearances" in 1989. There were, however, reports of the disappearance of men suspected of committing common crimes which the report should have mentioned. Francisco Ecliodo Bezerra and Francisco Herminio Bezerra da Silva disappeared on October 14 after their arrest in Manuel Urbano, Acre State, in connection with the killing of two off-duty policemen during a fight. Both men have not been seen since their arrest and police have given contradictory explanations regarding their disappearance.
While the report correctly notes that there are credible accounts of widespread "police beatings and torture," it should have mentioned several specific cases. On March 11, during a State military police operation to expel some 600 peasant families from land they had occupied in Fazenda Santa Elmira, Salto do Jacui, Rio Grande do Sul State, 22 persons were arrested and allegedly beaten after their arrest and tortured by being staked to anthills. On August 29, Ivan Brito de Assis, a leader of the Landless Rural Workers Movement, was allegedly tortured after being taken into police custody in the town of Quebrangulo in the Alagoas State. He alleges that he was stripped and repeatedly beaten during questioning, threatened with death while a loaded gun was pointed at his face and subjected to the "parrot's perch" and electric shocks.
Although the report mentions two prison uprisings, another noteworthy example not included is the inmate rebellion at Canimbe Penitentiary in Cuiba, Mato Grosso State, on April 10. Eleven prisoners and two policemen were killed in that rebellion, and it appears that excessive force may have been used by the police.
In its discussion of freedom of speech and press, the State Department should have mentioned the killing on January 8 of Luiz Alberto Montenegro, a reporter and national editor of the Jornal da Cidade, a daily newspaper based in Bauru, Sao Paulo State, and the killing on July 5 of Maria Nilce Magalhaes, a columnist with Jornal da Cidade, a daily newspaper based in Vitoria, Espirito Santo State, both of whom were allegedly murdered because of their work as journalists.
25
Brazil
In its discussion of discrimination based on race, sex, religion, language or social status, the State Department fails to mention several killings of Yanomami Indians that occurred in 1989: in June, a Yanomami Indian was murdered in the Xidea area of Roraima State near the headwaters of the Orinoco and Mucajai rivers; on August 11, three Yanomami Indians (two women and a child) were killed in Roraima State; and in early November, one to five Yanomami Indians were reported killed at the headwaters of the Mucajai River in Roraima State. The State Department's criticism of the Brazilian government's expulsion of anthropologists, missionaries and doctors from the Yanomami area, while up to an estimated 50,000 prospectors were allowed to remain, was well-founded. However, the report should also have mentioned that, to the Brazilian government's credit, following the killing of the three Yanomami Indians on August II, the Federal Prosecution Service (Procuradoria Geral da República) obtained a preliminary order from a judge in the seventh federal seat in Brasilia requiring the removal of all prospectors from the Yanomami territory. Unfortunately, the order, which was to be carried out by the federal police, had not been implemented as of the end of 1989.
The report's discussion of the right of association is perhaps the most misleading. There were many strikes in Brazil in 1989, and the Brazilian government's reaction was swift and often repressive. On April 27, Justice Minister Oscar Diaz Correa offered state governments the support of the army, navy and airforce to stop possible disturbances caused by strikes. Two days later. President Sarney enacted provisional measure No. 50, which limited the right to strike by requiring that at least one-third of a union's membership vote in favor of a strike to make it legal and prohibiting strikes by those providing essential services. And, on May 2, all striking officials holding leadership positions in the Banco Central do Brasil and Banco do Brasil, S.A. were fired by President Sarney.
In addition, instances of police violence in connection with strikes in 1989 were widespread and in many instances resulted in serious injury. For example, on April 4, between 10 and 32 people were hospitalized after a clash between military police and railroad workers holding a work stoppage to show solidarity with a colleague who had been punished. On May 5, striking metal workers clashed with police in the Diadema Region of Sao Paulo and eight workers were hospitalized (three with bullet wounds). Violence also erupted in connection with a March 14 general strike by the Sole Workers Central and the General Workers Central in Rio de Janeiro, Rio de
26
Brazil
Janeiro State; a March 14 strike by metal workers in Volta Redonda, Rio de Janeiro State; and an April 6 strike by workers of Compania Vale do Rio Doce in Itabira, Minas Gérais State. In all these instances, the official justification for the violence was the protection of the right to work for those individuals who did not wish to participate in the strike. However, in none of these instances was it alleged that the striking workers were using force to prevent their colleagues who were not participating in the strike from working. Thus it appears that while the right to strike is generally respected in Brazil, the right to picket is not.
27
