CHILE
In the last two years, Chile has experienced a movement toward democracy as profound as that occurring in Eastern Europe. This year's report on Chile is correct to praise and highlight that transition. Unfortunately, however, the general tenor of the report is that there was an improvement in the human rights situation during 1989, and a return to democracy in December with no further comment. This approach leaves two major areas of concern untreated.
First, the election of civilian leadership is no guarantee that human rights will be respected. The report completely fails to address the power retained by General Augusto Pinochet and the military after the inauguration of Chile's new leaders. After 16 years of repressive military dictatorship and human rights abuses, it is vital to discuss how much the old government will continue to retain influence over the government of newly elected President Patricio Aylwin. Second, the report fails to stress the significant degree to which, despite several positive changes, human rights violations continued in 1989.
Under the 1980 Constitution (which is subject to challenge, having been put into effect through a plebiscite held under conditions that were unfair), as it was amended during 1989, General Pinochet was able to become a Senator or remain as Commander-in-Chief of the Army. His decision to remain as Commander-in-Chief leaves him with tremendous power. Indeed, in a discussion concerning possible prosecutions of military personnel for human rights abuses, he clearly threatened the use of that power saying, "If they touch one of my men, that's the end of the rule of law." It is surprising that the State Department report makes no mention of this incident and its implications.
The Pinochet military government also attempted to perpetuate its power by freeing the Central Bank from government control, packing the Supreme Court, and privatizing state-owned enterprises. Even more significantly, the binomial system of representation utilized in the December congressional elections counted votes disproportionately in favor of second place finishers, resulting in an inordinate share of seats for candidates from parties supportive of General Pinochet. Though these issues were widely covered in the press, they are absent from the State Department's report.
31
Chile
The report also omits any significant mention of responsibility for past abuses by the Pinochet government. The 1978 amnesty law, which granted amnesty to all armed forces personnel for crimes committed in the previous five years, is not mentioned. In fact, only one brief paragraph discusses the fact that "investigations by the courts of present and past human rights violations made little progress during 1989." The significance of past unexplained and unpunished "disappearances" as a continuing human rights violation is ignored.
The coalition of parties which supported Patricio Aylwin for the presidency has promised to "commit themselves to the truth in cases of human rights violations that have occurred since September 1973." In addition, that group stated that the amnesty law of 1978 "will not be able to impede the establishment of the truth, the investigation of the facts and the determination of penal responsibilities and consequent sanctions in cases of crimes against human rights .... The democratic government will seek the derogation or annulment of the Decree Law on amnesty." However, members of the Pinochet government have made clear their extreme hostility to that position. General Pinochet, as quoted above, has threatened to end the rule of law, and even Air Force Commander General Fernando Matthei, considered the most pro-democracy member of the Pinochet government, said last July, "If they are going to put us in the pillory, as in Argentina, that will bring the gravest consequences."
These kinds of threats from people who continue to hold a large amount of power put tremendous pressure on a legal system which already has difficulty meeting its promises of due process. This concern should have been raised in the report.
On the subject of the continuing power of the military regime, one important measure is discussed in the report. This is the appointment in October of the National Television Council for a six-year term. That body has the power to grant and take away licenses for television channels and to levy sanctions against such channels. The council contains several military officials and no opposition members, thus giving the old regime a great deal of power to censor this highly important medium.
The report fairly discusses a number of human rights abuses which occurred in 1989. Although it does not go into detail, it highlights most notable cases of political and extrajudicial killings.
32
Chile
However, while it mentions the threats to Judge René García Villegas and his possible forced retirement for challenging military judges' investigations of allegations of torture, the report fails to take a principled stance against such unconstitutional intimidation, not only of Judge Garcia but, through him, of all judges who might take similar stands.
This failure in the report is surprising since the discussion of the weaknesses in the judicial system -- both its failure to investigate cases of abuse by the authorities and the inability of the secret processes utilized by the Chilean judiciary to protect the rights of the accused — is very strong. Yet, even in that strong section of the report, the State Department has failed to express its concerns forcefully enough.
The report correctly points out that "broad interpretation of state security laws has greatly expanded military court jurisdiction." The report also mentions the criticism by the President of the Supreme Court that military courts handle many cases and do so with questionable impartiality. But the report does not state the magnitude of that problem. Approximately 80% of prisoners held for political and security reasons are judged by military courts.
Another area where the report is thorough is the discussion of the use of incommunicado detention, which is constitutionally permitted for five days and for up to ten days if the prisoner is held under anti-terrorist statutes. However, in the way it discusses the permissibility of incommunicado detention, the report risks appearing to condone that kind of detention as long as it is "legal."
The report deserves to be commended for its particularly complete reporting on worker rights. Like other sections of the report, this section discusses hard facts, but unlike other sections, it explains specific cases and the general situation in sufficient detail for the reader to draw informed conclusions. In this connection, the discussion of the internal exile and pardons of Manuel Bustos and Arturo Martinez, president and vice-president of the Unified Worker's Central (CUT) is comprehensive.
However, while pointing out that labor unions' demonstrations have occasionally been violently repressed, the State Department misses an important point. The report states that the repression of such demonstrations results from the "illegality" of the demonstrations in question, but fails to emphasize that at least part of that illegality
33
Chile
results from the fact that CUT, which is often the organizer of repressed demonstrations, is still an "illegal" organization in Chile. CUT is an umbrella organization which coordinates most other labor unions, and its participation in the electoral campaign was severely curtailed as a result of its illegal status. The report is deficient in not characterizing instances of violent repression of CUT rallies as more than unfortunate "incidents." They are a manifestation of the continuing repression of free labor unions in Chile.
It is unfortunate that the generally complete discussions in the labor area are not always equalled in the sections on political and civil rights. For example, the case of Clodomiro Almeyda is completely ignored. Mr. Almeyda, a socialist leader and former Foreign Minister, is one of the most famous political figures in Chile. In 1987, after returning from exile, Mr. Almeyda was arrested and tried under Article 8 of the Constitution, which had provided for sanctions against "persons or groups propagating doctrines undermining the family, espousing violence or a concept of the society, the state or legal order . . . contrary to the institutional order of the country." As a result of his conviction on those charges, Mr. Almeyda was banned from political life. In fact, a television advertisement prepared by the opposition in the campaign for the July 30 plebiscite on constitutional reforms was censored because it showed Mr. Almeyda's face.
The report points out that the constitutional article under which Mr. Almeyda was banned was amended in the July 30 plebiscite. However, the report does not mention that Mr. Almeyda and a number of other opposition leaders were nonetheless prohibited from running in the December elections simply because charges were pending against them in military court for crimes of expression.
In its discussion of freedom of speech, of the press, and of freedom of association, the report paints a picture which is more positive than is warranted. The report seems to focus on the decrease in censorship, while only mentioning in passing that military courts may still judge journalists and other persons accused of offending the military. And, while few persons were accused of that crime in 1989, the report ignores the fact that charges are pending against at least 18 journalists on 27 charges.
Journalists have also been the victims of threats and violence from clandestine sources which appear to have ties to the security forces. These include Juan Pablo Cardenas, editor of Análisis magazine, who completed a 541-day sentence of nighttime
34
Chile
imprisonment in December 1988. Análisis ran several articles in November 1989 about wealth that had accrued to the Pinochet family during the course of the military government. Later that month, Mr. Cardenas' house was burned down by unknown assailants for the second time in less than two years. Monica Gonzalez, the journalist at Análisis who wrote those articles, was sentenced to six months of police supervision and 61 days in prison, and has three other lawsuits pending against her for offenses against the Centro Nacional de informaciones, the state security police. Ms. Gonzalez's car was stolen and set afire on November 7, again by unknown assailants, and she received death threats both before and after this attack.
Continuing intimidation of the press is demonstrated by another occurrence ignored in the report. On August 29, Patricia Guzmán, press director of the national television channel, broadcast her interview with Patricio Aylwin. Mr. Aylwin projected a very positive image and, the following day, Ms. Guzmán resigned. Her departure was generally attributed to General Pinochet's displeasure at the broadcast.
The report is also overly sanguine about freedom of association. Although it correctly states that the police showed improved restraint, numerous abuses occurred which were not mentioned in the report. The following are only a few examples of continuing violence by the police: On April 15 at a human rights demonstration under the slogan "No to impunity, in defense of life and the Vicaria de la Solidaridad," 37 persons were detained and two suffered gunshot wounds. On April 18, 51 persons were detained during a national work stoppage. All reported to the Vicaria de la Solidaridad, the human rights office of the Catholic Church in Santiago, that they had been beaten. At a large May Day rally in Santiago, 94 persons were arrested after police used tear gas and a water cannon to disperse the crowd. On July 3, 34 persons were detained during a human rights march which had begun in Valparaiso a week earlier. And on September 11, the anniversary of the 1973 coup against the Allende government, Jaime Castillo, president of the Chilean Human Rights Commission, and others addressed a crowd of 500 persons, which was dispersed with tear gas and water cannons.
A final note is merited regarding an important positive development which was not mentioned in the report. In the amendments to the constitution, which were approved in the July 30 plebiscite, the following language was added to Article 5: "It is the duty of the organs of the State to respect and promote those rights
35
Chile
guaranteed by the Constitution as well as by the international treaties ratified by Chile which are in force."
36
