CHINA
This year's report on the People's Republic of China is excellent. It not only gives a forthright accounting of the brutal government crackdowns in Tibet in March and in Beijing in June, but provides extensive information on Chinese government repression after these crucial events and a strong analysis of long-standing human rights problems in the country. These issues are raised forcefully in the report's introduction:
The human rights climate in China deteriorated dramatically in 1989. On March 5-7, People's Armed Police (PAP) used indiscriminate and excessive force in suppressing demonstrations in Lhasa, Tibet, killing scores of persons. These killings and other serious human rights abuses, however, were dwarfed when the leadership ordered the People's Liberation Army (PLA) and other security forces to suppress forcefully a peaceful, student-led movement seeking greater freedom for China's people. At least several hundred, and possibly thousands, of people were killed in Beijing on June 3-4. The Beijing massacre was followed by a drastic, country-wide crackdown on participants, supporters and sympathizers.
The State Department consistently asserts its own views and reaches its own conclusions in describing events in China. For instance, while citing "credible evidence" and "credible reports" to support its account, the report states unambiguously that the "excessive force employed [by the Chinese leadership] resulted in the deaths of many unarmed civilians," and that "[Ijarge numbers of persons who participated in or supported the spring demonstrations were detained."
The report provides official Chinese versions of events but does not hesitate to examine them critically. After noting that the Chinese government "repeatedly argued" that individuals executed by the government were guilty of non-political criminal offenses, the report provides a convincing rebuttal in the form of a detailed description of the June 6 incident in Shanghai that resulted in three persons being convicted and sentenced to death for burning a train. The report raises serious questions about both the guilt of those arrested and the fairness of the trial procedures. The report forthrightly concludes: "Given the near total lack of procedural
37
China
safeguards in these trials, government claims that the accused received 'due process' are not credible."
The report also provides instances where the State Department apparently raised concerns with the Chinese authorities. For example, the report states that since the Chinese government statement in June providing figures on the number of detainees, the government "has refused to comment on the number of additional detentions since that time or to provide any information on those detained." This and other reports of apparent State Department inquiries to the Chinese government are welcome.
While the focus of this year's report is obviously the tumultuous events of 1989, the report does well not to ignore human rights abuses continuing from past years. These include the continued detention of persons from "previous cycles of repression," such as "Democracy Wall" dissident Wei Jingsheng, and tight restraints on freedom of religion.
There are a few omissions in the report worth noting. The report should have provided greater detail on individual cases. The report does not, for instance, mention the detention of Wang Dan, one of the top student leaders of the pro-democracy movement who was arrested after the June 4 crackdown. Furthermore, while the report states that reports of torture have been "persistent and consistent," it only specifically mentions beatings, and should have noted the use of such torture as hanging a person by their thumbs, starvation, and the use of electric cattle prods. Likewise, the report mentions that a March 1989 congressional staff report on Tibet related accounts of "cruel and unusual punishment," but it fails to provide any details. The State Department report notes only that medical personnel faced "hardships" in treating the dead and injured from the Beijing massacre; there have been credible reports that hospital personnel not only braved gunfire to retrieve bodies of the dead, but were ordered at gunpoint not to treat the injured and were beaten by soldiers when they attempted to do so.
The report provides greater detail on the situation in Tibet than last year's report, but it still downplays the seriousness of human rights violations there. With respect to religious freedom, the report should have given more emphasis to restrictions on Tibetan Buddhists to teach and engage in religious debate. Chinese officials control and interfere with the election of abbots, take money from monasteries, strictly control the number of monks allowed to join monasteries and
38
China
fine individuals who leave. The Chinese authorities outlawed tsampa (barley flower) throwing and juniper burning after Tibetans celebrated in this manner after the Dalai Lama won the Nobel Peace Prize, despite the fact that such acts are used in a number of rituals unrelated to the Peace Prize celebration.
The report should have provided further information on restrictions of freedom of movement within Tibet. Martial law identification requirements have been enforced more stringently on Tibetans than on Chinese. Furthermore, Nepali citizens of Tibetan origin have been unable to leave Tibet for up to six months because of the refusal of Chinese officials to provide them with exit visas.
While the report addresses abuses related to population control policy, it incorrectly states that "members of ethnic minorities, particularly in remote areas, are ... generally not subject to the same strict limitations imposed on the Han majority." There is no evidence to suggest that minorities are free from birth control regulations although restrictions may not be centralized by the Beijing government. Evidence does exist that in Tibetan cities, the same strict limitations are imposed on Tibetans as on the Chinese. In other regions, the restrictions are the same as for the rural Chinese.
The report mentions the eugenic regulations in Gansu province prohibiting people with severe mental handicaps from having children. The report fails to note statements of Chinese officials that Tibetans have a "lower mentality" and are therefore better suited to the application of this population control policy.
There is considerable job discrimination against Tibetans based on language. To be hired for many jobs, including low-level positions, it is often necessary to know Chinese rather than Tibetan, even though Chinese is not actually used for the job. This leaves many Tibetans with sharply reduced opportunities for employment. Furthermore, the educational system is structured so that those who choose to speak Tibetan are prohibited from learning English. Chinese authorities have reportedly pressured families of the best primary school students to continue their education outside of Tibet for up to seven years.
Despite these shortcomings in the discussion of Tibet, the China report overall is a model for human rights reporting and analysis that the State Department would do well to emulate in its other country reports.
39
