ZAIRE
The 1989 report on Zaire conveys important information and identifies many of the major human rights abuses in the country. Nevertheless, the report suffers from wishful thinking in its discussion of purported reforms by the government, in addition to errors of omission and several mischaracterizations of facts.
In its discussion of the security forces, the State Department cites the recently announced effort to consolidate control of the forces. The State Department reports that in May 1989 the government placed four of the security forces under the authority of a single ministry. Late in 1989, according to the report, the official in charge of this ministry "took preliminary steps toward implementing effective coordinating mechanisms which could enhance the discipline of these forces." At the end of 1989, however, no change had actually been made to the structure or leadership of the security forces themselves. In light of their jealously guarded independence, even members of the government and officials of the single party, the Popular Movement for the Revolution (MPR), were not optimistic about the prospects of the new ministry.
In any event, nothing has occurred to suggest that the conduct of the security forces will change in any way. In an August interview with a Lawyers Committee delegation, General Singa Boyembe Mosambayi, who is in charge of the new ministry, strongly defended the conduct of the security forces, and did not indicate the need for any significant changes.
The report's greatest distortion is directed towards the activities of two government organs, the Department of Citizens Rights and Liberties (DCRL) and the Judicial Council. This year's report refers to their "continued efforts to prevent human rights abuses" and "continued successful efforts ... to regularize arrest authority." These organs have now been in place for more than three years. Neither the Lawyers Committee nor any other independent human rights organization has found evidence of measures to institutionalize meaningful human rights reform. Nevertheless, the State Department heralds the activities of these state organs as indications of the government's commitment to human rights.
Although slightly tempered in comparison with past years, the report's still positive assessment of the DCRL is particularly misplaced. The Department and its head, Maître Nimy Mayidikia
259
Zaire
Ngimbi, have demonstrated repeatedly since 1986 that the DCRL lacks the will and capacity to address human rights abuses in the country. In fact, the DCRL's most vigorous efforts are aimed at defending Zaire's human rights record, rather than the rights of its citizens.
The State Department report recognizes some of the DCRL's deficiencies. It acknowledges that the Department has "exhibited little capability for systemic redress of human rights abuses" and comments later that the DCRL has achieved few results in regard to human rights concerns such as arbitrary arrest, prolonged detentions, illegal seizures and abuses by security forces. But it fails to mention the frequent efforts by the DCRL to defend or actually to cover up human rights abuses by the government.
These efforts are clear from the DCRL's own literature, its responses to foreign organizations and, in particular, its submissions to United Nations human rights organs. The Lawyers Committee encountered such efforts in connection with its visit to Zaire in August 1989. When armed men claiming to be Zairian government forces broke into the homes of people who sought to meet with the Lawyers Committee delegation, a highly placed official in the DCRL told the delegation not to suspect the security forces. He suggested that bandits were responsible.
At least six of the people who met with the delegation were arrested. Several weeks later, the same official informed the Lawyers Committee by telex that three of the men were released and a fourth was still being held. Without explanation, the telex noted that the arrests and detentions were in accordance with the legal authority of the security forces. The three men referred to in the telex have subsequently claimed that they were dropped barefoot and blindfolded at various distances up to 100 kilometers from their homes in Kinshasa. The fourth man was held for two months and released. The four men all claim that, in flagrant violation of Zairian law and international obligations, they were beaten in custody and then held without charges and without access to a judge or lawyer.
In documents submitted to the United Nations, the DCRL claimed to have investigated and settled cases in which it has played no noticeable role, including those of two of the men mentioned above and that of Tshisekedi wa Mulumba, a detained leader of the banned opposition party, the Union for Democracy and Social Progress (UDPS). In the case of the two men, Kalolo Nkima and
260
Zaire
Omene Samba, the DCRL claimed to have settled the cases despite refusing to respond to repeated requests from the Lawyers Committee and the families of the victims for assistance and further information. Mr. Omene later reported that the DCRL refused to see him after he was released and sought to discuss his case.
The DCRL's claim with respect to Mr. Tshisekedi is particularly disturbing. During 1989, the DCRL represented the government of Zaire before the (UN) Human Rights Committee in a claim brought by him under the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. During a July visit to the United States, at a time when Mr. Tshisekedi was under house arrest, Maitre Nimy of the DCRL reported to the press that Mr. Tshisekedi was entirely free. In November, the Human Rights Committee held that the government of Zaire was violating the rights of Mr. Tshisikedi under the Covenant. Nevertheless, Mr. Tshisekedi was not released.
The DCRL's annual and quarterly activity reports confirm the high value which it places on defending Zaire's record abroad. They are largely reports of foreign travel and meetings by the two principal officers, Maitre Nimy Mayidika Ngimbi and Maitre Sabi Ngampoub, with foreign diplomats. Their speeches defending the human rights practices of Zaire abroad are reported in particular detail. By ignoring the DCRL's overt propaganda role, the State Department fails to convey the true nature of the DCRL's activities and thus gives a misleading interpretation of its role in promoting and protecting human rights.
In the past years, the report has also praised the initiatives taken by the Judicial Council and its president, NSinga Udjuu Ongwakebi. President NSinga gained considerable popular support for his public initiatives aimed at spotlighting abusive detention practices and corruption within the justice system. Nevertheless, major problems remained. In fact, in the opinion of many practicing lawyers, President's NSinga's initiatives had no cognizable effect.
Most of the details in the report concerning particular human rights are correct and conveyed in their proper context. However, they are largely limited to violations that occurred in the capital city of Kinshasa. The report makes no reference to events in the eastern region of the country, including extrajudicial killings reported by the Brussels-based rights group MSAADA Association (MSAADA is the
261
Zaire
Swahili word for "assistance"), expropriation of peasant lands, and the systematic use of chains in the prisons of Bukavu and outlying areas.
The report contains errors of omission regarding extrajudicial killings and "disappearances." The State Department reports that there were no reported cases of politically-motivated killings in 1989 and cites only one specific case of "disappearance." The MSAADA Association has reported the names and circumstances for the deaths of 20 people reportedly killed by soldiers in the eastern region of the country during 1989. The Lawyers Committee is aware of at least two other reports of "disappearance" and political killing that should have been included in the report under the State Department's definitions of "disappearance" and "political and other extrajudicial killing" in Appendix A to the report.
One such case is that of Solomobo Mokamo, an inspector for the Customs Bureau, who was fired in June 1989, reportedly on suspicion of embezzling funds. In July, he was picked up by the National Documentation Agency (AND), the national security police, for further investigation. According to family members, he was held and severely beaten by the FIS (Special Intervention Force of the AND). He was never brought before a magistrate. In the course of his detention the FIS broke his arm and caused internal injuries which required hospitalization. He was taken to the AND clinic located at the prison and, according to friends and family members, died there on August 9.
Another case concerns Kamunga Mwimpe, a 24-year-old woman who "disappeared" on June 23, 1988. There have been repeated reports that Ms. Mwimpe was kidnapped by security forces at the behest of Citoyenne Mayuma, a member of the Central Committee of the MPR. Her "disappearance" is well known to authorities in Zaire. The DCRL has been charged with investigating the case and during a press conference held in November 1989 by Amnesty International, the family made public the kidnapping claim. There have been unconfirmed reports of her death in detention.
The State Department makes passing reference to deaths and "disappearances" in connection with student demonstrations in February 1989. The report indicates that a number of students were killed by security forces "while quelling student-led disturbances." This reflects the Zairian government's explanation of what happened and is strongly contested by student groups and the opposition UDPS. The UDPS has circulated the names of 11 students killed and 48
262
Zaire
students and professors injured in Kinshasa alone. The Lawyers Committee received eye-witness testimony regarding three other students killed. The report merely indicates that the figures could not be confirmed. The report also notes that three security officers were convicted in connection with these events, but is unable to determine whether the sentences had been carried out.
To its credit, the State Department report gives an accurate overview of the practice of arbitrary arrest, detention and exile in Zaire. Its description is marred, however, by the same overly optimistic assessment of Judicial Council efforts, discussed above, as well as two unfortunate mischaracterizations.
With respect to the arrest and detention of UDPS leader Tshisekedi, the report states that "his access to visitors frequently has been denied." This vastly understates his isolation. The Lawyers Committee is aware of only one visit to Mr. Tshisekedi by a non-family member since May 1989. This was a visit by Amnesty International in November. The Lawyers Committee itself was told on several occasions that a delegation would be permitted to visit Mr. Tshisekedi, but the necessary permission never materialized. In addition, the report states that General "Mukoba" is in self-exile in Europe. According to relatives and other human rights organizations, this information is incorrect. General Mukobo Mudende, a highly respected former Chef d'Etat Major for Zairian ground forces, has been under banishment order in Isangi, Zaire since 1987. At the end of 1989, he was still in forced internal exile.
With respect to political exiles, the report makes the claim that "[p]olitical opponents in exile probably could return safely to Zaire if they were prepared to keep their political views to themselves." There is little evidence to support this rather cynical observation. Those who have returned safely to Zaire have either renounced their political views and returned to the fold of the sole legal party, such as Nguz Karl-I-Bond, foreign minister during 1989, or have returned under close international scrutiny, such as Professor Museye who was forcibly repatriated from Switzerland.
In the past, the government has taken action against returning dissidents before they have had an opportunity to demonstrate whether or not they planned to keep their views to themselves. One well known example was the arrest of Professor Wamba dia Wamba in 1981. More recently, the government has gone even further and has abducted dissidents who are active in surrounding countries. There
263
Zaire
is no reason to believe that the policies underlying these attacks have changed.
With respect to personal communications, the report repeats but does not confirm the claims by Zairians that "the security services sporadically open mail and tap telephone conversations." The Lawyers Committee is aware of several occasions in which personal mail has been seized by security forces. Two UDPS activists, Kadima Muntuntu and Mukendi Mpaya, were arrested at the post office of Limete on November 23. Security forces seized the mail from their mailboxes and later questioned them on the contents.
In another case, which the report refers to obliquely, Kabongo Ntambue, a Zairian dissident with refugee status in France, was abducted from neighboring Burundi in April. After five months of detention in a prison cell in Kinshasa, Mr. Ntambue was transferred to a hotel in Kinshasa where he was still being held at the end of 1989. Mr. Kabongo wrote a letter to President Mitterrand of France seeking the President's intervention on his behalf. Soon afterwards, security forces entered the hotel with a copy of the letter and ordered Kabongo to cease writing such appeals.
Finally, this year's report states that the attitude of the Zairian government towards external investigations has been "inconsistent, as with the 1989 visits from the Lawyers Committee. . . ." While it is true that the government allowed the Lawyers Committee into the country, the arrests and reported physical abuse of at least six of the people who met with the Lawyers Committee delegation negates any "inconsistency" in the government's attitude towards genuinely independent investigations.
264
