COLOMBIA
The 1989 report on Colombia appropriately states that "[djespite Colombia's strong democratic traditions, it has suffered from social unrest and an extraordinary level of violence for most of the past 40 years." However, the report fails to set forth the economic and political context in which countless human rights abuses occurred in 1989. It does not include enough detailed accounts of specific cases and is therefore an incomplete record of the human rights situation.
This year's report is nonetheless more balanced than last year's because it acknowledges that members of the armed forces and police were involved in human rights violations during 1989. It appropriately notes that punishment for these crimes in the military judicial system seldom extends beyond dismissal from service. However, the State Department's analysis of the armed forces' involvement in and responsibility for human rights violations does not devote sufficient attention to paramilitary activity.
As a general matter, the State Department correctly distinguishes between rights and freedoms theoretically guaranteed by law and the actual observance of such rights and freedoms, but again fails to provide a comprehensive view, especially regarding the president's use of state of siege powers which severely restricted individual rights in the latter part of 1989.
A description of abuses which occurred in Colombia's northern region of Urabá is conspicuously missing from the report. Throughout 1989, banana plantation workers' demands for increased wages were met with paramilitary violence. In March 1989 members of the Voltigeros Battalion in Carepá arrested 19 banana plantation workers and union leaders. Although 12 workers were released the same day, four others were detained for several days. Upon their release, at least some claimed that they were interrogated under torture. The remains of two other workers arrested on March 29 were later found on April 4. Amnesty International reports that they had been killed "by having charges of dynamite attached to their bodies and exploded."
The report fails to mention other attacks against labor leaders in Urabá that occurred throughout the year. On September 9, Sebastián Mosquera, an attorney for the union Sinlrainagro (National Union of Agricultural Workers), was shot dead by two armed men as
40
Colombia
he travelled from the town of Apartado to Nueva Colonia. Also in September another leader of Sintrainagro, Euclides Gómez, was killed by gunmen and a third, Carlos Martinez, disappeared. Fiheen other union leaders were threatened with death during the same month. Nine banana workers were reportedly killed during a month-long strike in November by workers affiliated with Sintrainagro. On December 15, Heriberto Espinoza, a trade union leader who played an advisory role in negotiations involving Sintrainagro on behalf of workers in the region, was killed in Medellin.
While the report notes that "labor suffers a disproportionately high rate of violence," it fails to mention any speciHc incident occurring in Urabá. Instead, it asserts without providing supporting evidence that trade unions in the region "are controlled by guerrilla groups," thereby dismissing the nature of human rights violations which occurred in the region amidst constant military presence.
The Colombian government designated the region of Urabá a military emergency zone in 1988, and appointed an army general as regional military chief with authorization to control meetings and demonstrations in public places, regulate the sale and consumption of alcohol, impose curfews and dismiss or request the dismissal of local officials, including elected mayors, who fail to comply with military measures. According to reports, registering workers in military headquarters, searches of peasants and illegal raids of political headquarters, homes and businesses were common during 1989. The report also fails to mention similar violence directed against workers and peasants which plagued the departments of Magdalena Medio, Meta and Caquetá.
Serious human rights abuses were also reported in the municipality of El Carmen de Atrato in Colombia's Chocó Department and the nearby municipality of Ciudad Bolívar in the Department of Antioquia, a remote jungle area of the country. It is widely believed that the killings, "disappearances" and arbitrary detentions in 1989 were related to growth in activity of peasant and Indian organizations which have made economic and political demands on local and national authorities since 1987. For example, Pedro Nel Osorno Ospina and Dora Bolivar Bolivar "disappeared" on May 13, 1989. They were last seen in Ciudad Bolivar. Ms. Bolivar's body was found the next day and showed signs of torture. Pedro Nel Osorno is still missing. He is a former member of the directorate of the National Association of Colombian Peasants (Asociación Nacional de Usuarios Campesinos de Colombia, ANUC). According to reports.
41
Colombia
he was collecting reports of human rights violations attributed to military and paramilitary forces. The zone is heavily militarized, yet incidents like these are altogether omitted from the report.
The report's analysis of army involvement in and responsibility for human rights abuses is confusing and contradictory. It first alleges that "there is no evidence that the Government or senior military officers have ordered [human rights abuses]," but later asserts that "soldiers and policemen have been involved in assassinations and massacres of suspected leftists, and rural-based local military commanders have sometimes assisted right-wing groups . . . ." In fact, the report later mentions the case of Lieutenant Colonel Luis Bohórquez Montoya, top military commander of the Bárbula Battalion in Puerto Boyacá in Colombia's Magdalena Medio region, who was removed and retired because he supported "armed right-wing groups." According to Amnesty International, Department of Administrative Security investigations established that he allowed the battalion to be used as a communications and training center for paramilitary groups in the region that he commanded; 1,300 soldiers under his command accompanied paramilitary patrols and provided refuge to paramilitary leaders when civilian investigators arrived. The report's distinction between "ordering" human rights abuses and "participation" in them is a distinction without a difference and tends to exonerate the army and police as institutions from responsibility for human rights abuses.
The State Department correctly notes that convictions are rare within the military judicial system and punishment generally is dismissal from service. Unlike prior reports, the State Department unambiguously concludes that "violations continue" and recognizes that there are reliable accounts about police beatings and torture of detained persons. These reports have existed for years and it is a positive step in the 1989 report to call attention to and identify those responsible for these abuses.
The report's consideration of paramilitary activity is, however, inadequate and understates the problem. While it does note that these groups "assassinate, torture, and massacre people believed to have links with leftist political figures or the guerrillas," the report's coverage is limited and the few examples it does provide are dispersed throughout the text. In addition, the State Department fails to adhere consistently to its own terminology: it refers to paramilitary groups as vigilante squads, right-wing groups, and extreme rightists composed of "disparate elements" and "a number of self-defense
42
Colombia
groups." The reader is left with no coherent view of these groups or the seriousness of the problem. Furthermore, this description wrongly suggests that organized violence has been carried out by private groups without military involvement.
Paramilitary activity was highly publicized in Colombia during 1989, both by human rights organizations and the mainstream press. Reports frequently appeared concerning the involvement, knowledge, and acquiescence of army and police members in these groups. Details of the activities, names, and whereabouts of many paramilitary groups have been well documented. One weekly magazine published the names and locations of schools for assassins along with a map. The results of an investigation by the Public Ministry into claims made by the Unión Patriótica (UP) party of involvement of high-ranking army officers with paramilitary groups in Magdalena Medio were partially reproduced by Colombian newspapers in April. The report does mention that the government undertook some efforts to investigate paramilitary activity and achieved some limited results. Nevertheless, over 150 paramilitary groups were active in Colombia in 1989 and are believed to be responsible for the vast majority of political killings and massacres during that year, including dozens of members of the UP party. The report mentioned, but should have underscored, that paramilitary groups do not operate as independent forces but as hired guns under the direction of drug traffickers and powerful rural business interests, and in many cases with tolerance and cooperation of the armed and security forces.
The State Department describes President Barco's reliance on state of siege powers during 1989, but fails to explain how these powers affect the incidence of mistreatment and arbitrary detention, or permit harsh prison conditions in general. Decree 1859 allows suspects to be detained incommunicado for seven working days, which can lead to pre-arraignment detention of up to two weeks. The report does not mention that prison terms for the crimes of sedition and rebellion were increased; military judges were granted power to issue search warrants under Decree 2103 (eventually restricted by the Supreme Court to drug trafficking cases); and detention without judicial order by state security forces was authorized. In short, Colombia's legal procedures and the protections they provide concerning arrest and detention described in the report were without practical effect during the latter part of 1989.
43
Colombia
The report should have noted that ten days after the state of siege decrees were issued in August 1989, nearly 11,000 persons were detained, almost all of whom were later released due to lack of evidence. Peasants, agricultural workers and human rights advocates complained of increased repression by state security forces. For example, on September 8, Pablo Emilio Angarita Cañas, lawyer and director of the Instituto Popular de Capacitación, a non-profit institute dedicated to education and legal services, was taken into custody along with Luz Aurelia Puyo Basto, a law student, and two others. The arrests were carried out after a six-hour search of the institute by Colombian security forces. All were transported to the army's Bomboná Battalion and were charged with violating Anti-Terrorist Decree 180 of 1988, and at least some of them were reportedly subjected to physical and psychological abuse. On October 11, the four were unconditionally released by the Fourth Public Order Judge in Medellin on the grounds that there was no evidence against them. According to the Andean Commission of Jurists, in Medellin alone 70 activists and civic leaders were arrested and later released due to lack of evidence.
Increased harassment of peasants and indigenous leaders was also reported. On September 3, in the town of Puente Sogamosco and El Pedral, Santander, members of the Nueva Granada Battalion and the Department of Administrative Security, an intelligence body, ransacked the homes of peasants. Forty laborers were arrested and held in Barrancabermeja. Finally, on September 10, the National Organization of Indigenous People announced that hired gunmen killed three of its members and on September 6 an unidentified person destroyed the office the Regional Indigenous Council of Cauca. The State Department should have mentioned these cases and analyzed the abuse of state of siege decrees.
The assertion that "many" magistrates, judges, jurors, and attorneys have been threatened with death because of their professional activities is an understatement. A Lawyers Committee report on attacks on lawyers and judges in 48 countries during 1989 documented over 55 such cases in Colombia alone, far more than any other country in the report. ASONAL-Judicial, the National Association of Judicial Employees, states that one in every five of Colombia's 4,379 judges has received a death threat and 90% of all judges were threatened in 1989. The report does, however, provide an accurate overview of Colombia's overburdened judicial system and properly recognizes that most prisoners incarcerated for common crimes never come to trial, but are simply released after serving the
44
Colombia
minimum sentence applicable to the crimes with which they are charged.
The report also usefully calls attention to the fact that women's rights have not been enforced in Colombia and protection of women from domestic violence was not treated as a serious goal of the government during 1989.
45
