CUBA
This year's report on Cuba, as did last year's, presents a fairer evaluation of the Cuban government's human rights practices than had earlier reports and is less tendentious and politicized — the report for 1987 having been especially egregious in its unsubstantiated allegations and propagandistic tone. The 1989 report accurately states that significant restrictions on the exercise of fundamental civil liberties, such as freedom of the press and freedom of speech, continue to be harshly enforced. It also reports a serious crackdown on human rights activists. It does so, however, with a greater view to accuracy and dispassionate analysis than had been true of earlier reports. Unfortunately, despite this improvement, it remains haunted by some of the unfounded allegations of past reports and by the Department of State's unwillingness to recognize them. The 1987 report, for example, had spoken of as many as 15,000 political prisoners in Cuban jails. This year's report says several hundred have been released over the last two years and that estimates of how many are still behind bars range from several hundred to the "Cuban human rights activists' claims of many more."
With the latter statement in mind, it should be remembered that it was the Department of State's acceptance of the baseless claims of certain of those activists that resulted in the gross inaccuracies of the 1987 report. Unfortunately, the report seems unwilling even now to acknowledge that they were baseless; rather, it continues to allude to them. The question as to what happened to all the thousands of political prisoners reported to have been behind bars in 1987 is left hanging. Rather than simply acknowledging that it was then in gross error, the report now tries to avoid the issue by saying that for a variety of factors, it is difficult to determine the number of political prisoners in Cuba -- one of the principal factors being the Cuban government's "traditional secrecy about the prison population."
Granted, given a constantly fluctuating prison population, it is difficult to determine precisely how many are behind bars on any given day. Coming up with a rough estimate is not difficult, however, and it is misleading to suggest that it is. In March 1988, for example, the Cuban government reported that it held 455 persons convicted of crimes against state security, plus (as it reported to Amnesty International) some 140 persons convicted of attempted illegal departure (a category not recognized by the Cuban government as part of the political prisoner population). If one then factors in the handful of persons held on grounds of religious belief (usually
46
Cuba
conscientious objection) and "disrespect" (usually related to graffiti), a good ballpark estimate would have been about 630 persons who were, by international definitions, political prisoners as of March 1988. Several hundred of the first category (crimes against state security) were released prior to the visit of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) in September 1988. It found only 121 held for crimes against state security. A reasonable estimate at that point, therefore, would have been around 300 political prisoners all told, taking into account illegal departees and those held for "disrespect."
This estimate was borne out in May of the following year by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), the organization with the most accurate numbers on political prisoners in Cuba. The ICRC now annually visits most political prisoners save military offenders. In May 1989, the ICRC reported that it had visited 257 prisoners, including a number convicted of illegal departure. Thus, a reasonable estimate at that point would still have been around 300 political prisoners all told. Aryeh Neier of Americas Watch reached a similar estimate when he stated in a June 1989 article that the number of political prisoners in Cuba was just under 300, an all-inclusive figure taking in those jailed for religious beliefs, attempted illegal departures and "disrespect."
This year's report, as suggested above, does not repeat the 1987 assertion regarding a political prisoner population of as many as 15,000. On the other hand, it cannot bring itself to put forward so low an estimate as 300 (presumably since to do so would raise embarrassing questions about the 1987 report). It does not even mention the figure of 121 political prisoners reported by the UNCHR; rather, it continues to mention the higher figure (455) dating back to March 1988. And, as noted above, it prefers to sum up with the ambiguous statement that estimates range from a few hundred to "many more." A more accurate, and useful, statement would have been that: "Based on the best available evidence, the number of political prisoners still in Cuban jails can be placed at approximately 300."
There are other instances in which this year's report appears to be reaching to make a case -- perhaps so that the scene it paints does not differ too glaringly from that depicted by the 1987 report. For example, it mentions charges that political prisoners have been confined in psychiatric hospitals, but it can cite only one case in which the circumstances were indeed suspicious: that of the human
47
Cuba
rights activist, Jesus Leyva Guerra, who was forced to undergo psychiatric "treatment" and then subjected to electroshock after he began a hunger strike.
The report mentions four other cases of political prisoners sent to psychiatric hospitals for observation and evaluation for periods ranging from a few days to several weeks. None reported mistreatment during their confinement. The appropriateness of raising their cases at all is therefore questionable. Among the some 300 political prisoners in Cuba, inevitably there will be a few who truly need psychiatric assistance. Their chances of receiving it will not be enhanced if every time one of them is sent to a clinic for evaluation or legitimate treatment it is mentioned in a human rights report. A more useful statement might have been that: "with the exception of one case [that of Jesus Leyva], there were no reports that the former practice of confining political prisoners in psychiatric hospitals had continued this year."
The report also complains of the centralized nature of the Cuban economy and says that the government's abandonment of an earlier liberalization program "has played a major role in the Cuban economy's recent stagnation," and caused conflicts with Cuba's reform-minded socialist trading partners.
Precisely what that has to do with Cuba's human rights practices is not clear. It would, moreover, be difficult at best to prove any causal relationship between the move away from liberalizing reforms and current economic problems. Some U.S. economists profess to see such a relationship; others reject it entirely, concluding instead that it was because the troubled economy could no longer afford to offer material incentives that it had to suspend the reform program -- in other words, that abandonment of the reforms was already a symptom of the economy's ills, not their cause.
But all that aside, one must wonder why this paragraph is included in the report at all. There is no place in the format for socio-economic questions, apparently because the Reagan Administration feared that to raise them might play to the advantage of governments we do not like, such as Cuba's, whose records on providing for the material needs of their people are better than those of neighboring countries we do like. Despite economic problems and shortages, for example, Cuba tends to house, feed, educate and provide medical attention to its populations more adequately than do such neighboring governments as El Salvador, Honduras, Guatemala
48
Cuba
and Panama. If the report wished to raise socio-economic matters, it owed it to objectivity to present both sides of the issue. By not doing so, it has given the impression of stretching to make a negative comment.
In another example of skewed reporting, the Department of State criticizes the Cuban government for restricting the travel of its citizens abroad and placing impediments on the travel of persons between Cuba and the United States, but neglects to say that the United States government is also guilty of such practices. Cuba restricts nonofficial travel abroad on the part of its citizens; the United States restricts the travel of all save a few categories of its citizens to Cuba. Cuba has denied entry, or made entry difficult, to many members of the Cuban-American community. The Department of State, on the other hand, frequently refuses entry to Cuban academics, artists, writers, scientists, and various other groups who normally travel on official passports. Cuban authorities control emigration. Any Cuban wishing to emigrate must go through a lengthy exit procedure. But the fact is that even at that, the Cuban government gives far more exit permits than the United States will give immigrant visas. It is difficult to say, therefore, which side is more responsible for impeding the egress of Cuban citizens bound for the United States.
The Department of State bases most denials of visas to Cubans on the Presidential Proclamation of 1985, which stated that in view of the Cuban government's suspension of the 1984 migration agreement, the United States would severely restrict visas to Cubans travelling on official passports. State Department officers suggested that if the Cuban suspension of the migration agreement were lifted, so would be the Presidential Proclamation. Yet, when in 1987 Cuba did indeed resume operation of the migration agreement, the proclamation was not raised. To their credit. State Department officers are showing greater flexibility in issuing visas to Cuban academics and artists. The Presidential Proclamation, nonetheless, remains on the books even today, and visas are frequently, if not always, denied.
In the same vein as the issue discussed above, perhaps the report's most glaring deficiency is that a number of its key statements are at odds with major U.S. policy pronouncements and directions. For example, the report quite appropriately points to the Cuban government's "stepped-up crackdown on Cuba's human rights movement" as "the most significant development in the country's human rights situation in 1989." In doing so, it acknowledges that the
49
Cuba
situation had improved prior to the crackdown. The latter, it says, stands in "marked contrast to the limited relaxation effected in 1988."
This was not, however, the position on which U.S. policy was based. Rather, in a memorandum distributed to diplomatic missions in March 1989, Secretary of State James Baker insisted that there had been no change in Cuban conduct and, therefore, that there would be no improvement in U.S.-Cuban relations. And in a speech in Miami on August 16, President Bush lamented the fact that the U.S. had seen no signs of any change in Cuban polices, either domestic or international, and again reiterated that there would therefore be no change in U.S. policy toward Cuba.
Thus, while the State Department's report on the Cuban government's human rights practices acknowledges that Cuba's conduct improved in 1988, senior officials of the U.S. government have suggested that was not the case. U.S. policy toward Cuba is pegged to the latter assertion, not to the former.
This is unfortunate and goes to the heart of the question of why the human rights situation worsened in Cuba during 1989. In part, the crackdown was doubtless meant as a warning to the Cuban people that whatever Mikhail Gorbachev might be doing in the Soviet Union, glasnost would not be tolerated in Cuba. In part also, it reflected an increased insouciance in the wake of the visit of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in September 1988 -- a feeling that now that the inspection was over, the government need not concern itself so much with respecting international norms. But behind the crackdown also was the failure of the U.S. government to respond to the improvements registered in 1988. Cuba had clearly wanted to improve relations with the United States and had thought that addressing its human rights performance would help pave the way for such an improvement. The statements of senior U.S. representatives, such as those quoted above, quickly made it clear to the Cubans that this was not to be the case. Thus, a major incentive for the Cuban government to continue to ameliorate the human rights situation was removed. As the Chief of the Cuban Interests Section in Washington was quoted as saying earlier this year: "It would seem that no matter what we do, the reaction of the Bush Administration will be the same, always negative, never positive."
It is a conclusion shared by many human rights leaders in Cuba itself. Leaders of the Cuban Commission on Human Rights and National Reconciliation (those who had not already been imprisoned)
50
Cuba
told a visiting U.S. delegation in October, for example, that in their judgment the Bush Administration's early rejection of improved relations had been one of the key factors leading to the Cuban government's crackdown. Certainly, they said, the Bush Administration's hard line had not served the cause of human rights.
51
