EGYPT
This report represents an improvement over its predecessor. In contrast to the 1988 report, the State Department makes a more straightforward assertion about the political constraints on Egyptian citizens by stating that "as a practical matter citizens do not have the ability to change the government by democratic means." The report better reflects Egypt's human rights situation during 1989; it does not shy away from reporting gross violations of human rights, finding, for example, "reliable evidence" that torture of detainees occurs.
Nevertheless, the report is flawed. It omits mention of some major human rights problems in 1989, including deaths in custody, continuing restrictions on freedom of association, and specific incidents of mass arrests by the security forces, including the arrest and detention in August of 80 children between 6 and 10 years old. The report is equivocal about some human rights violations, where a clear assessment can, and should, be made. In certain sections of the report the analysis and language tends to be generous to the government, obscuring pertinent facts or omitting mention of cases that illustrate human rights problems. The report generally avoids comparative analysis with prior years; one exception is the observation that the number of political detainees in 1989 was higher than the number in 1988. Careful monitoring of the state of human rights in Egypt over the last few years indicates a pronounced deterioration in 1989, yet the report simply notes that "human rights remained significantly restricted in 1989."
The report's opening paragraph should have noted that the National Democratic Party (NDP) is not a truly popular political party, but is rather akin to a large interest group. While the report notes correctly that the NDP "has a dominant role in most party-based institutions in the country," it neglects to explain that this means that the NDP controls local and national legislatures. (Under the system of absolute majority lists instituted in 1983 for local elections, the NDP wins council seats to the exclusion of smaller opposition parties.) The report does not mention that three major factors ensure the NDP's hold over Egyptian political life: the unlimited powers of the President, who is also the head of the party; the control of government by party loyalists; and rigged elections. On this last point, the report should be commended for noting, later on, that "opposition parties continue to make credible complaints about electoral fraud by the Government and about the method of calculating election results used by the Ministry of Interior." It is
52
Egypt
disappointing that the State Department, in the end, is reluctant to offer its own assessment of the dominance of the NDP and the Mubarak government. On this key issue, the report merely states: "Some regime critics argue that the political system is designed to ensure that the NDP and the Government retain control of all state institutions. Government supporters argue, however, that President Mubarak has firmly established at least an elementary multiparty system in order to create checks and balances and give expression to a broad range of political views." Regrettably, no analysis in the State Department's own voice is provided.
The report states that there were "no confirmed reports of unlawful government-instigated killings for political reasons" in 1989. The report does not take note of public comments made by Interior Minister Zaki Badr, who was dismissed from his post in January 1990, about the use of force by the security forces. In a statement to Al-Ahram published on June 8, General Badr said: "My clear instructions order policemen to use their weapons to defend themselves and the security of the society in cases that necessitate it. I punish and take to account the policeman who fails to use his weapon when confronting a criminal who deserves to be killed in the interest of society and in accordance with the law." The former Interior Minister's statement is relevant, in that the security forces used fatal force in several incidents during 1989. The report should have noted the shooting death, in February, of Magid Al'oteifi, an alleged Gihad member. He was shot dead by the security forces after leaving his lawyer's office where he was discussing a torture compensation claim. According to the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights (EOHR), it was falsely claimed by the government that Al'oteifi was on the run. In June, Mohamad Farouk Alaswani, a student, was killed when the security forces raided a mosque in Assiut, firing live ammunition. Six other persons were injured in this incident. In August, Egyptian worker Sayd Abed-el Hai was kilted during a security-force raid on the Egyptian Iron and Steel Company factory in Helwan. Live ammunition was used to break up a sit-in demonstration by the workers at the complex, after which hundreds of workers were arrested, held in detention and eventually released.
Regarding "disappearances," the report states that there were no "confirmed reports" in 1989. It should have noted the "disappearance" of an army soldier, Zakaria Sayd Bakr, since December 28, 1988. Bakr was known to have been politically active and a member of the Tajama Party. The EOHR adopted the case and publicized it in one of its bulletins. Neither EOHR nor Bakr's family
53
Egypt
— which also undertook several efforts to locate him — received information about his whereabouts; EOHR continues to monitor the case and study the circumstances of Bakr's "disappearance."
The State Department correctly notes that the torture of detainees continued to be one of the "primary" human rights problems in Egypt in 1989 and that reports of torture and other forms of mistreatment are "convincing." However, neither in the introduction nor in the section of the report that discusses torture in detail, does the State Department assess the frequency of the use of torture by the Egyptian security forces in 1989, in comparison to previous years. This is a key omission in the report's analysis, particularly because Egyptian human rights monitors found that the use of torture greatly increased in 1989. In its discussion of the well-publicized January 1990 EOHR report on torture, the State Department notes that EOHR found "that torture and sexual abuse of prisoners has become so widespread that it appeared to be a matter of policy by security forces." What the State Department report does not mention, however, is that EOHR found that there was a "marked increase" in the use of torture in 1989, that the practice had become "much more widespread," and that in EOHR's view this represented "a significant step backwards in terms of Egypt's human rights record."
In the 1988 report, the State Department wrote that Egyptian human rights activists found that "most torture allegations involve members of the Islamic Gamaat, while other political detainees usually are not subjected to similar treatment." To the 1989 report's discredit, this same sentence is repeated, ignoring one of the key findings of the EOHR report cited by the State Department. EOHR stated in the introduction to its report: "In 1989 there was a marked increase in the use of torture not only of members of political trends and groups suspected of opposing the government, but of ordinary citizens with no political affiliation or interest."
The report should have noted cases of detainees who died in police custody in 1989. On January 2, Makhlouf Abed Al-'All, a 22-year-old minerals worker, was arrested by the head of the Al-Daher police station Bureau of Investigations. On January 6, he was transferred to Al-Qubty Coptic Hospital, where he died several hours later. The death certificate reported brain hemorrhage as a result of beating by a hard object as a cause of death. On November 29, Khalid Saber Ibrahim, a law student at Alexandria University, was beaten by university guards, according to eyewitnesses. He was first brought to Bab Sharq Police Station, where it is believed he was again
54
Egypt
beaten, and from there he was transferred to Al-Amiri Hospital in Alexandria, where he died from his injuries on December 1.
The report omits discussion of the in-custody mistreatment of some of the 80 children between the ages of 6 and 10 years old who were arrested by the security forces on the morning of August 29 in a recreational camp in Alexandria. According to EOHR, the children were taken, along with their 13 adult supervisors, to Montazah Police Station in Alexandria. From there they were moved to the security department in Alexandria for interrogation, next transferred to Cairo's security department, and from there to police stations in Giza and Menoufia. The children spent two nights in detention before being returned to their parents by the state security forces. Some of the children testified that they were beaten with hands, kicked, subjected to verbal abuse, held in crowded rooms without facilities, and not provided with blankets.
Although the State Department acknowledges that punishment of members of the Egyptian security forces for torturing detainees is "rare," the report creates a misleading impression when it states that: "Detainees and prisoners who claim to have been tortured can and do appeal for redress to the courts and public prosecutor." It should have stated that the number of individuals who lodge complaints with the public prosecutor's office is a small fraction of the victims of torture. It should also have noted that despite the accumulation of a large number of torture cases documented in court judgments, prosecution investigations and forensic medicine reports, as well as legal provisions to punish those who commit torture, torture victims cannot directly initiate legal action. Claims of torture have to be first investigated by the Prosecutor General. The initial report of Egypt to the (UN) Committee Against Torture stated that in the last five years, 450 complaints of torture had been received by the Office of Public Prosecutions and that, of these, 44 officers had been prosecuted before the criminal courts and other complaints were still under investigation. Because of the apparent reluctance of the Prosecutor General's office to investigate, and present those accused for trial, torture victims are discouraged from initiating complaints.
The State Department notes that the 1989 report of the Arab Organization for Human Rights (AOHR) states that cases of torture were submitted to the prosecutor's office with requests for investigations, but then points out that the AOHR report "does not say whether the Government has responded to these submissions." The report neglects to mention, however, that EOHR's complaints to the
55
Egypt
Egyptian authorities have gone unanswered. EOHR stated in its report that it had never received a response to letters it has written to the Egyptian Minister of Interior and to the Prosecutor General concerning incidents of torture at police stations. This information should have been incorporated into the report.
The report's discussion of arrest and detention is misleading because it fails to point out that arbitrary arrest and detention is possible under Egyptian criminal law procedures as well as under emergency law. The report notes: "The ordinary law states that a detained suspect must be brought before a magistrate and formally charged within 48 hours of his arrest or be released." The report should have said that under the state of emergency, the "magistrate" in security cases is the State Security Prosecutor, who can use the Criminal Procedure Code and Law 105 of 1980 to hold a suspect for 15 days before presenting the person to a judicial authority. The State Security Prosecutor can also act as an investigating judge and detain a suspect for an additional 45 days before presenting the person to another judicial authority. This use of so-called "normal" criminal procedure allows the State Security Prosecutor to hold suspects longer than under Article 6 of the emergency law (which obligates the courts to decide on detainees' petitions against detention within 30 days) before permitting a challenge to the legality of the detention before a court of law. The report should have noted that Amnesty Internationa! reported that since early 1987, the State Security Prosecutor has used the criminal procedure code more frequently than the emergency law to detain security suspects.
In its discussion of detention without charge under Article 3 of Egypt's emergency law, the State Department is correct in observing that the law was used in 1989 to detain striking trade unionists, student demonstrators. Islamic student activists and the relatives of individuals wanted for questioning by the authorities. Yet the report provides no information about the magnitude of the use of administrative detention by the Minister of Interior. The office of the Prosecutor General reported in 1989 that the number of administrative detainees reached 12,472 in three years. Out of these, 12,447 were acquitted by the Supreme State Security Court after appealing their detention, a clear indication of the fragility of charges brought against detainees. Nevertheless, the Minister of Interior objected to the release of 9,243 of these detainees, indicating that preventive detention is practiced extensively.
56
Egypt
Concerning incidents of mass arrests that occurred throughout 1989, the report provides the most details, including the number of people arrested, in cases involving "Islamic fundamentalists," "members of the Muslim Brotherhood," "alleged Shi'ite Muslims," and "fundamentalist students." Regarding the arrest of an estimated 500 to 700 striking workers after the violent dispersal of a sit-in demonstration at the Egyptian Iron and Steel Company factory in Helwan in August, the State Department simply writes: "Police also detained striking iron and steel workers", with no mention of the number detained, although this was widely reported in the press. The arrest and detention of 80 young children in August, discussed above, was completely, and inexcusably, omitted.
In the section of the report that discusses fair public trial, the State Department points out that the provisions of the emergency law can be used in security cases, which are heard by the State Security Court and, on appeal, by the Supreme State Security Court. The report also states: "Under the emergency law, only the President may amend, commute, or cancel a sentence or order a retrial. The law also grants the President [as martial ruler] the authority to approve or reject all rulings of the State Security Court system."
The report does not elaborate on the impact of the President's powers to order a retrial. For example, it should have noted that railroad workers, acquitted in April 1987 of charges related to a strike, are under continuous threat because the President refused to ratify the judgment and ordered a retrial, although a date has not yet been set. A retrial has also been ordered in the case of the "Armed Nasserite Organization," despite a judgment acquitting the defendants in 1988.
In another case in 1986, the Supreme State Security Court, or Emergency Court, issued orders to imprison 22 persons charged with producing, possessing or distributing alleged anti-government publications, a case which was first heard by the State Security Court in 1981. In 1987, an appellate court ruled that the publications were not illegal in a separate case involving 12 defendants who were initially charged in 1979. The appellate court ruling did not apply to the 1981 case, since it was heard under emergency law procedures. The decision of the Supreme State Security Court in the 1981 case was affirmed by the deputy martial ruler in September 1989 and the defendants were ordered arrested and imprisoned. They include Mubarak 'Abdu Fadhl, a prominent Marxist intellectual and journalist, 61 years old, who is in ill health; Mohamed Essam Fawzy,
57
Egypt
a researcher at the Center for Arab Studies, who is also in poor health; Eryan Nassif Washed, a lawyer, EOHR member and a member of the general secretariat of the National Progressive Unionist Party; poet Taher al-Brinbaly; and journalist Hasan Badawy. The case should have been noted in the report. (In April 1990, all the defendants were released pursuant to an amnesty proclamation by the deputy martial ruler, after protests from international human rights organizations.)
The report correctly states that the police must secure a warrant from the Public Prosecutor to undertake searches and that "[o]n occasion the courts have dismissed cases when they determined warrants were issued without sufficient cause." What the report neglects to mention is that while police officials who conduct searches without proper warrants are legally subject to criminal penalties, this provision is almost never enforced.
The report's section on freedom of assembly and association is poor. First, there is no discussion about restrictions on freedom of association in Egypt. The report should have mentioned Law No. 32 of 1964, which governs — and severely restricts — the formation of societies and private foundations in Egypt, and provides the Minister of Social Affairs with broad powers to control or terminate their activities. Under this law, the government continues to deny legal status to the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights and the regionwide, Cairo-based Arab Organization for Human Rights.
The report states that President Mubarak "has liberalized the political atmosphere by expanding the range of legal opposition activities" and notes that there are now five legal opposition parties. The report should have mentioned that the freedom to form political parties is severely restricted by law, and that significant political movements of different orientations have been denied the right to organize as political parties.
The discussion of freedom of peaceful assembly is extremely uneven. The State Department omits crucial details in its description of the seizure of 30 persons, including five doctors, outside the Physicians' Syndicate headquarters in Cairo on September 23. The report states: "[S]ecurity forces arrested several Islamic activists who participated in a press conference sponsored by the Physicians' Syndicate to denounce arrests and alleged torture ordered by the Interior Ministry." The State Department avoids mention of the most pertinent facts about this incident, which were publicized by both
58
Egypt
EOHR and the U.S.-based Physicians for Human Rights. The press conference was organized after the Physicians' Syndicate received complaints from parents about the mistreatment of their children, aged 6 to 10, who were arrested by the authorities on August 29 and detained for two nights. Some of the children's parents were professors of medicine and members of the Syndicate. At the end of the press conference, 30 people were seized by the security forces and taken to Kasr El-Nil police center, where some were released early the next morning and at least six were issued detention orders. EOHR and Physicians for Human Rights believe that the arrests appeared intended to intimidate the Physicians' Syndicate and punish those who participated in the press conference and were exercising their right to assembly.
In October, the security forces prevented the convening of a seminar at the Engineers' Syndicate under the theme "For Egypt . . . Against Torture." The report uses inexplicably oblique language in discussing the ban on the seminar, stating that the Ministry of Interior "is reported to have acted to prevent the holding of a seminar, sponsored by the Islamist-dominated Engineers' Syndicate, intended to promote a campaign against torture." The State Department certainly could have confirmed the ban with the Egyptian authorities and given its own assessment of the incident.
There were other examples of curbs on freedom of assembly in 1989, which the State Department neglected to mention. In February, the security forces prevented Salah Abou'ismail, a member of the parliament, from delivering a lecture at the Technical Commercial Institute, and exerted pressure, including the detention of five students, in order to cancel a student conference at the Faculty of Law at Ain Shams University in celebration of International Student Day. In March and April, the security forces forcibly disbanded peaceful demonstrations protesting the rise in the price of bread in Sohag and Ilminya governorates, and the detention of Dr. Omar Abdelrahman in Fayoum. According to EOHR, scores of persons were detained in conjunction with these events and some government employees were transferred to distant locations. Additional transfers occurred in October and November, when three engineers and two other workers who participated in the August 1989 sit-in demonstration at the Helwan Iron and Steel factory were transferred by the factory's administrators to outlying areas. In November, two conferences scheduled to be held on the anniversary of the Balfour Declaration, one at Ain Shams University and the other
59
Egypt
at the Faculty Club of Alexandria University, were cancelled due to police interference.
There was an increase in violations of freedom of expression in 1989, which is not reflected in the report. The State Department's discussion of freedom of speech and the press struggles to present an analysis generous to the government. The report states that there is "no overt censorship" but then goes on to say that the government "occasionally exercises influence on the national dailies and magazines" and that press bans are "occasionally imposed" by the State Security Prosecutor on news about cases under investigation. This presents a misleading picture. According to the EOHR, in the last few years there has been an expansion of bans on publication by the order of the Prosecutor General. The bans covered major cases of wide public interest, including the rebellion of the Central Security Forces, political assassinations, the Egypt's Revolution case, and cases involving charges of corruption against high-level officials and political figures. The State Department also does not mention that the Egyptian Penal Code includes a section for press crimes, consisting of 31 articles, viewed by human rights advocates as constraining the freedom of expression of journalists.
The report notes that new periodical publications require the approval of the Higher Press Council in order to function, and states that "[n]o applications to publish independently owned journals were approved in 1989." The report omits mention of an important case from 1989 which illustrates what this means in practice. The Arab Women's Solidarity Association (AWSA), headed by Dr. Nawal El Saadawi, a feminist writer, is a legal organization in Egypt, with consultative status at the United Nations Economic and Social Council. AWSA's magazine. Noun, partially funded by UNESCO, reports on legal and social issues relevant to Egyptian women and promotes equality between the sexes. In January, AWSA applied to the Higher Press Council for a license to publish Noun. The request was denied on the ground that the magazine, which is a quarterly, needed to deposit funds in a national bank, which is required for all dailies and weeklies printed in Egypt. AWSA lacked the resources for the deposit, and the first edition of Noun, published in May, was issued only to members of the organization, depriving AWSA of income from public sales and advertising. AWSA submitted a second application to the Higher Press Council in October.
The report neglects to mention that in 1987 the Higher Press Council extended its supervision to non-periodical publications.
60
Egypt
thereby closing a loop hole for publications not requiring government approval and licensing. It also did not note that the Ministry of Information has a press office which regularly contacts all periodical publications to convey government policy on specific issues.
In the wake of the announcement of the Egyptian novelist Nagib Mahfouz winning the Nobel prize for Literature for 1988, a campaign was waged to release one of his works. The Children of Geblawi, banned in Egypt since 1959. When Al-Ms'a, a government newspaper, started serializing the novel in 1989, it was forced to discontinue the series under pressure from Islamic groups and al-Azhar.
In October, the University Council of al-Azhar University initiated disciplinary proceedings against Dr. Hamed Abu Ahman, a professor of languages at the University, for translating Who Killed Molero?^ a Peruvian novel published by the government-run General Authority for Books, for what was considered pornographic passages in it. The book Student Elections in Egyptian Universities was confiscated at the 1989 Cairo International Book Fair. According to EOHR, a publishing house was pressured to cancel plans for publication of a translation of Veil: The Secret Wars of the CÍA by Carl Bernstein, even though the translation had been completed.
The report states that in the Egyptian media and theater there is "a lively debate of national issues and criticism of government officials is evident." The report, however, neglects to note that films and plays are subject to censorship twice -- once in manuscript form, and again as finished products. In October, the Department of Censorship in the Ministry of Culture refused to grant permission for the presentation of a play, "Peace on Us," although it had been approved in manuscript form in April 1987. Written by Nabil Badran, the play presents a critical point of view of the Camp David accords. The Department also stopped public showing of the play "King of Beggars" by Nagib Serour, and requested a change in the title of another play, "The Day the Leader was Killed," adapted from a short story of the same title by Nagib Mahfouz, which describes the state of the country prior to the assassination of President Sadat. Sometimes the Department of Censorship refers films and plays to the Ministry of Interior or the Ministry of Defense before issuing permits for public showing. In the cases of two films, "The Wife of an Important Man" and "The Innocent," scenes had to be cut and the endings changed before permits were granted.
61
Egypt
The State Department mentions that "radio and television are state owned and all broadcasts are closely supervised by the government." It should have stated, clearly, that the government monopolizes radio and television, and that censorship of radio and television is much more stringent than that of films and plays. There is a list of films and plays, shown publicly, that are banned from television. Further, national television does not provide the political opposition, or individuals critical of the government, a fair chance to air their views.
Regarding the freedom of Egyptians to travel abroad, the State Department notes that under Egypt's state of emergency the Prime Minister can restrict foreign or domestic travel, but that the number of Egyptians prohibited from foreign travel is "relatively small." The report should have provided examples of cases of banned foreign travel in 1989, such as the lawyers acquitted in the Nasserite Organization case who were prevented from travelling to the Arab Lawyers Union conference in Damascus in June, and the more than 20 persons barred from travelling to the International Youth Festival in North Korea in July.
62
