UNITED KINGDOM
The report on the United Kingdom once again tends to favor the government, while ignoring, distorting or underplaying the significance of some key human rights issues. The inclusion of Hong Kong is perplexing, considering that it is only one of the UK's several dependent territories (which also include Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Falklands, Gibraltar and others). We address the report's treatment of Hong Kong at the end of this critique.
The introduction to the report establishes a misleading context for what follows. It makes no attempt to portray the social and political climate prevailing during 1989, when issues of racial discrimination, worker rights, freedom of expression and civil liberties generally have been the focus of intense internal debate within the UK.
The State Department notes that the UK has no written constitution or Bill of Rights, without discussing what this means in practice. In the absence of domestic machinery to enforce their rights, UK citizens have been obliged to seek recourse from the European Commission on Human Rights and its Court in Strasbourg, France, to which access is slow and expensive. The UK is a party to the European Convention on Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), though not to its Optional Protocol (which would provide a further forum in which individual complaints might be heard), the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the international and regional conventions against torture. None, however, gives individuals enforceable rights in the UK courts.
The introduction emphasizes the context of violence in Northern Ireland carried out by "illegal paramilitary groups on both sides of the conflict." It ascribes terrorist bombings and killings in Northern Ireland and Britain to the Provisional Irish Republican Army (PIRA), yet refers to other acts as being committed by similar groups "claiming" to represent parts of the Protestant community.
The report mentions a "controversy" in late 1989 over "revelations that security force documents identifying alleged PIRA suspects and others were allowed to come into the possession of Protestant terrorists who used them to identify targets for attacks." The issue is far more serious than is reflected here. Following the killing of Loughlin Maginn in August 1989 by the loyalist
246
United Kingdom
paramilitary Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF), it emerged that security intelligence files on republican suspects had in fact been handed over by members of the security forces to loyalist armed groups like the UVF. Consequently, several meetings of the Anglo-Irish Intergovernmental Conference in September and October were devoted specifically to the question of security policy and the behavior of the security forces. The Irish and British governments agreed that "any collusion between members of the security forces and paramilitaries is an issue of the utmost gravity . . . and requires urgent action to allay public concern and to demonstrate that no departure from the rule of law by any member of the security forces will be tolerated." A senior police officer, John Stevens, was appointed in September to investigate the source of the security leaks, but concern was expressed at the time that a far more wide-ranging investigation was required.
The report addresses political and other extrajudicial killings in a surprisingly cursory manner, avoiding discussion of critical issues. As it did last year, it baldly states, "[t]he British Government does not practice or condone killing for political motives." However, unlike last year's report, it makes no reference at all to the ongoing controversy over an alleged "shoot to kill" policy of the Northern Ireland security forces. The extensive discussion of last year is simply not there anymore.
Among relevant events in 1989, the investigation into the 1982 killings of six unarmed Irish suspects by members of the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) -- mentioned in last year's report -- ended in March, after a closed disciplinary hearing, with minor reprimands for 18 policemen implicated. Four members of the constabulary had originally been charged with murder, but were acquitted. During the trial it became clear they had deliberately misled investigators in pretrial proceedings on orders from their superiors. In 1984, John Stalker, Deputy Chief Constable of Manchester, was appointed to lead the investigation into whether the police had killed the six men under "shoot to kill" orders and had lied to cover up the crime. In 1986, when he was seeking to obtain a crucial police tape of one of the shootings, Stalker was suspended among rumors of misconduct and allegations of links with known criminals. Allegations against him were later dismissed; he was reinstated in the police force but not to the inquiry and subsequently resigned from the police force. In 1988 two senior officers retired from the RUC without facing charges. The UK Attorney-General acknowledged there had been attempts to "pervert the course of justice," but said the government would not
247
United Kingdom
prosecute anyone for reasons of national security. Stalker continued to maintain he could present "a great deal of extra evidence that would indicate the five men shot dead in their cars were unlawfully killed" by members of the RUC and that the sixth might also have been killed in a similar manner. The minor reprimands finally handed down were felt by many to be an inadequate response in the circumstances. While last year the Department of State discussed this and other issues, this year's report makes no mention of it.
The introduction is misleading in saying that the case of the "Guildford Four" "underlined skepticism among Catholics in Northern Ireland about equality of justice there." This case involved incidents occurring in England and was investigated and tried under the regular criminal justice system of England and Wales. It has caused widespread concern throughout the UK. -- not just among Catholics in Northern Ireland — about the justice system and about police conduct.
Limitations on the right to fair trial and police conduct were perhaps the most significant issues of concern during the year. The report cites the release of the "Guildford Four" because of information received "contrary to evidence used in prosecution." Yet the impact of this and related events on how the British justice system is perceived by its citizens is not accurately reflected in the report. The impression given is that new evidence was presented, the wheels of justice turned and the government abandoned its charges against the four. In reality, the release of the four, 15 years after their wrongful conviction and sentence to life imprisonment, was a dramatic event that followed an intensive public campaign which finally forced the Home Secretary to order a new police investigation and refer the case back to the Court of Appeal. The report mentions that the government ordered another police investigation of police officers involved in taking the case to court, but does not mention allegations that detectives had falsified records of interviews and lied in court and that this crucial evidence was not discovered until late in the preparation of the appeal.
Another case prompting public concern warrants only passing mention in the report. During the year, the Regional Serious Crimes Squad of the West Midlands police force was disbanded following serious persistent reports of corruption when it became clear that a number of detectives had falsified evidence over a period of years to obtain convictions. Some officers who took part in the original police investigation of the "Birmingham Six" case (alluded to in last year's
248
United Kingdom
report) subsequently served in this unit and have come under suspicion. In December, the lawyer for the "Birmingham Six" submitted a dossier of new evidence concerning the case to the Home Secretary.
In this case and that of the "Guildford Four," prisoners claimed they had been ill-treated and threatened into making confessions which became the main basis for their convictions. In November 1989, one of the 14 prison officers acquitted in 1976 of beating up the "Birmingham Six" admitted to his guilt and repeated that the six were transferred to the prison from police custody already suffering "a multitude of injuries." The officer's admission casts fresh doubt on the convictions of the six. The report mentions only that a new review of this case appears likely, without stating why.
Under the section on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, the report gives the impression that "an official investigation" into convictions in connection with the 1985 Broadwater Farm housing estate incident had taken place, but its results not made public as of February 1989. (Amnesty International has continued to question the fairness of the trials which followed the 1985 incident -- violent clashes between civilians and police during which one police officer was killed). There was in fact no "official investigation" as such. The government has consistently refused to order an investigation into police behavior during and following the disturbances. The very limited investigation that was conducted by the Police Complaints Authority into a few individual complaints was in the view of a number of informed observers seriously flawed by delays and did not include many serious cases. Its results have never been published.
These cases and the Stalker Affair have raised serious misgivings about the police's ability to investigate its own conduct. According to a November 5, 1989 article in the Manchester Guardian Weekly, "More and more solicitors now advise clients to sue in the civil courts rather than protesting to the Police Complaints Authority [the supervisory body cited by the State Department report.]" These concerns are not addressed in the State Department's report.
A judicial inquiry into issues arising from the Guildford case and others as well as wider policy issues began in December 1989. However, fears have been expressed that the inquiry will not be able to discover the truth because it will have no power to compel anyone to give evidence or to subpoena documents, no immunity will be
249
United Kingdom
offered to potential witnesses and any examination of the trial and Appeal Court judges will be in private. The report fails to mention these significant constraints.
In the section on arbitrary arrest, detention, or exile the report mentions the November 1988 European Court of Human Rights finding in the case of Brogan that detainees under the Prevention of Terrorism Act were not brought promptly to court, in breach of Article 5(3) and 5(5) of the European Convention. The 1989 report corrects last year's omission of the government's stated intention to derogate from Article 5 of the European Convention and Article 14 of the ICCPR, albeit temporarily. In reality, not only has a seven-day detention power been re-enacted in the Prevention of Terrorism Act 1989, as is stated, but in November 1989 it was announced by the Home Secretary that derogations under the European Convention and the ICCPR "must and will . . . remain in place for so long as circumstances require."
The State Department report cites the 1988 report of a delegation to the Association of the Bar of the City of New York to counter criticism voiced by human rights groups against the use of the Diplock Courts (single judge/no jury) in Northern Ireland. In doing so, it takes and quotes statements from that report out of context. For example, it cites the delegation's finding that the Diplock courts "conform to the requirements of the international standards of fair trial." It fails to mention that the bar report had gone on to state: "Nonetheless, we believe that there is a compelling need for much more significant modification of existing practices . . and recommended that the single-judge court system be replaced by collegial courts so that "[t]he Catholic minorities do not feel they are excluded from the institutions of their own government," "the perceived evils of which are exacerbated by a decisional process whose very fairness they suspect."
On a more general note, the analysis of the State Department's treatment of Diplock courts and exclusion orders that was contained in last year's Critique continues to apply. Some defendants, for instance those accused of armed robbery, are processed through the Diplock system though their offenses are unconnected with paramilitary activity, while others are arrested, questioned and held as terrorist suspects but are eventually tried by a jury when their offenses are "certified out." The government rejected a parliamentary proposal during the consideration of the Prevention of Terrorism Act 1989 that exclusion orders be subject to the scrutiny of an
250
United Kingdom
independent Exclusion Review Board with statutory powers to make decisions on whether a suspect should be excluded.
While the report states that the government's ability to provide trials by multiple judges or with juries is limited in Northern Ireland because of PIRA violence against the judiciary, it fails to mention the intimidation of lawyers in Northern Ireland and its effect on the administration of justice. In February 1989, Patrick Finucane, a 38-year-old Belfast solicitor active in criminal defense cases, was shot dead in his home by three men; the Ulster Freedom Fighters (a loyalist paramilitary group) later claimed responsibility. One month earlier. Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Home Department, Douglas Hogg, MP, in a debate on the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Bill -- legislation which puts solicitors at risk of breaking the criminal law if they fail to incriminate their client -- had said repeatedly, "I have to state as a fact, but with great regret, that there are in Northern Ireland a number of solicitors who are unduly sympathetic to the cause of the IRA." A subsequent report issued by a delegation of lawyers from England, Belgium and France found a "climate of intimidation" of solicitors in Northern Ireland, which reduces defendants' chances of receiving skilled advice and representation. They called for a judicial inquiry into Mr. Hogg's statement, independent monitoring of threats against lawyers, panels to deal with intimidation and the tape-recording of RUC interrogations. In restricting itself to "PIRA terrorism against the judiciary" and failing to include other, well-documented threats and attacks, the State Department report undermines its objectivity.
The report deals only briefly with freedom of expression, a topic which attracted a great deal of attention in 1989. It does not mention that the Official Secrets Act 1989, which became law on May 11, imposes criminal penalties for the disclosure of government information. The Act has been severely criticized for failing to include a public interest defense and for including a conclusive presumption that damage has been done by the disclosure of certain types of information, whether or not this is in fact the case. While restrictions on the right are permitted under both Article 19(3) of the ICCPR and Article 10(2) of the European Convention, many observers believe that the 1989 Act goes far beyond these. A product of the Spycatcher litigation (a book by a former British intelligence officer which was banned in the UK) was the extension of prior restraint under the Act through the doctrine, upheld in May 1989, that a court injunction against one publication binds all who know or
251
United Kingdom
should know of it. A number of court cases in which successful litigants were awarded large sums of money in damages for defamation against newspapers, raised other concerns, including the fear that these decisions would have a chilling effect on independent journalism.
The State Department states that the right of privacy is well respected in both law and custom, ignoring intense discussions in 1989 as to whether personal privacy should be protected by law. The debate was prompted by a perceived decline in the standards of journalism and intrusive behavior by photographers and journalists at the scene of major disasters. The government set up a committee to examine these questions.
The report makes no mention of the conditions in UK prisons, which fall far below the standard to be expected of a modern industrialized nation. Many prisons are grossly overcrowded and prisoners can be confined in their cells for up to 23 hours per day. Cells lack proper sanitation and in July 1989, the Chief Inspector of Prisons, Judge Tumim, stated in his annual report that it was "almost inconceivable that in many prisons cell windows and outside cell walls are smeared with excrement." In addition, Judge Tumim questioned the immunity from civil suits for health risks enjoyed by prisons and raised serious concern about a number of prison procedures and conditions.
The report's discussion of freedom of movement within the country, foreign travel, emigration and repatriation fails to reflect the evidence that the attitude of the UK towards its obligations to genuine refugees under the UN Convention and Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees has become increasingly restrictive in recent years. Not all persons claiming to be refugees are referred for help, as required by law, to the United Kingdom Immigration Advisory Service when early removal from the UK is considered essential. New guidelines in January 1989 restricted the ability of Members of Parliament to place a "stop" on a removal from the UK in exceptional and compelling circumstances. As the Carriers Liability Act 1987 imposes fines on airlines and shipping companies bringing into the UK persons without proper documentation, a refugee's claim to asylum in the UK is therefore likely, for practical purposes, to be determined by an employee of an airline or shipping operator at the port of embarkation.
252
United Kingdom
The UK government has been reluctant to adopt remedial measures in response to criticism from the International Labour Organisation (ILO) in the field of worker rights. The State Department appears to accept that worker rights are adequately protected in the UK. While it mentions the critical observations of the ILO Committee of Experts on UK trade union law in 1989, it fails to put them into context or to set out in detail the Committee's specific concerns, including its general remarks on the volume and complexity of legislation passed since 1980 which it was felt could constitute a limitation on the rights of free association guaranteed by ILO Convention 87.
