GUATEMALA
The State Department's 1989 report on human rights practices in Guatemala is a positive departure from earlier years' analyses, but at bottom is still colored by geopolitical concerns. As the report correctly points out, during 1989 Guatemala experienced a "resurgence of violence and terrorism, much of it politically inspired." The State Department mentions many of the hundreds of egregious violations that occurred over the last year, but fails to clarify that both quantitatively and qualitatively this violence reached levels unknown since the 1986 return to civilian rule. The report also admits, apparently for the first time, to "credible reports of security forces personnel and political extremists engaging in extrajudicial killings, disappearances, and other serious abuses." Yet through its choice of language, selective reporting of the facts in various cases, attempts to downplay certain themes, and an unwillingness to hold the civilian government of Vinicio Cerezo Arévalo responsible, the report does not accurately reflect the gravity of Guatemala's human rights situation.
For example, the State Department asserts that the "military continues to have a reputation for human rights violations.. . ." The behavior of the Guatemalan military, among the most brutal in the Americas, has been well documented in numerous human rights reports, as has been the inability of the military justice system to ensure accountability. In a study published in December 1989, the Washington Office on Latin America (WOLA) reported that no member of the armed forces has been convicted for a human rights crime. WOLA documented nine recent cases in which the military was clearly implicated, among them the June 5 murder of Joaquin López Chavez on the San Juan plantation in the municipality of San Pablo. López was abducted by heavily armed men in civilian clothes who forced him into a green pick-up with no license plates. According to eyewitnesses, the same men were seen in army uniforms before and after the kidnapping. López was found dead on June 15. The case remains open, but has not progressed.
In October the Lawyers Committee visited the border province of San Marcos, where according to the Los Angeles Times, 27 persons had been brutally murdered since July, most of them in the first three weeks of September. Two cases investigated by the Committee during that visit strongly suggest military responsibility in the killings. In the early morning hours of September 12, four men collecting rocks near the village of Tejutla were kidnapped by men in a red Toyota
75
Guatemala
jeep with polarized windows. Family members later saw the red Toyota parked inside the local military base; its license plate had been removed. The men's bodies were found in two different locations. One family member who saw the body of Gustavo Robles de León, 22, said his eyes had been gouged out, and his lips and part of his cheek cut off; he had been killed with a bullet to the head. In another San Marcos case, an eyewitness to the kidnapping of Eulalio Ambrosio, 42, secretary general of the local affiliate of a social democratic party, saw the car in which the victim was placed turn down a service road which leads into the local military base.
While the State Department is technically correct in noting that the National Police and Treasury Police report to civilian authorities, in reality the police are still dominated by the armed forces. It is precisely for this reason — and what the report terms their "poor human rights record" — that U.S. policymakers have conditioned U.S. assistance to Guatemalan police on the appointment of civilian police chiefs. Since August 1988, the three police forces -- two "civilian" and one "military" — have in fact been operating jointly under the System of Civilian Protection (SIPROCI). SIPROCI has been criticized by the president of the Supreme Court, among others, for its controversial use of warrantless searches. Another issue that is not treated fully in the report is the brief mention of "drug-related crime and corruption," a problem which took on sharply increased importance in 1989. While the report mentions without elaboration growing evidence of "guerrilla involvement in the cultivation and trafficking of opium," no mention is made of longstanding allegations of involvement by the military in drug activities. U.S. Embassy officials assert that the armed forces are not involved in drug-related activities as an institution, but some officers have engaged in cultivating and trafficking.
While the report's discussion of political and other extrajudicial killing contains notable admissions, such as the fact that "Army personnel in rural areas were credibly reported to have engaged in extrajudicial killings of persons suspected of guerrilla sympathies or drug smuggling," the reader is not left with an accurate picture of the scope of these killings. The State Department offers, for example, that "most killings appeared to result from personal vendettas or other criminal activities, an unknown but probably relatively small number were politically motivated." While the report correctly concludes that it is "impossible ... to determine the exact number," it should have noted that Guatemalans who attempt to
76
Guatemala
systematically monitor human rights are regularly subjected to harassment and violence.
The report asserts that "there is no evidence that extrajudicial killings were part of the Government's counterinsurgency or anticrime actions . . . ." Yet given the numbers of such killings, credible evidence of responsibility by the military and police, and lack of prosecutions, another inference that the report should have made is that military bodies do not answer to civilian authority.
The cases mentioned in the section on political killings are inadequately presented, leaving an inaccurate impression. For example, in the murder case of Christian Democrat Danilo Barillas, the report suggests that "popular suspicions focused variously on enemies within his own party, on leftwing extremists out to disrupt the electoral process, and even on drug traffickers." Yet it is equally likely that the politician's killers could be found among Guatemala's violent radical right, a possibility not included. Mr. Barillas, a founder of the Christian Democratic party, was in the party's left wing and as ambassador to Spain in 1987 represented the government in negotiations with guerrillas. That attempt to find a peaceful solution to Guatemala's 30-year-old civil war is considered one motivating factor behind the May 11, 1988 coup attempt by sectors of the Guatemalan military. President Cerezo blamed the "antidemocratic extreme right" for Mr. Barrilla's killing; he said this group was "trying to provoke a crisis which justifies the imposition of an authoritarian government."
In another case, the report observes that "it is not clear that [José Rolando Pantaleón's] death was labor-related, or why he was singled out." Neither Mr. Pantaleón's widow, whom the Lawyers Committee interviewed in October 1989, nor his fellow trade unionists doubt that Mr. Pantaleón, long active in the coke workers union and a member of its theater troop, was murdered for his organizing activities. According to his widow, he had received numerous death threats and his brother, also a union member, was shot on February 25 as he left a performance. Two other members of the theater group fled the country following threats and harassment. Amnesty International reported in August that several members had been warned to leave the troop. Further, according to a recent Americas Watch interview with a union leader, the February 25 performance was filmed by the Army's Channel 5. The film was later aired with commentary suggesting that the performance proved that such groups aimed to destabilize the government. Mr. Pantaleón was
77
Guatemala
killed with four shots to the head. Badly bruised from beatings, the skin had also been stripped off the top of his back, his wife told the Lawyers Committee.
Also discussed in this section is one of the several mysterious multiple killings which occurred during 1989 and the State Department is correct in suggesting that the killers' motives remain shrouded. Yet the report goes out of its way to dismiss possible military culpability, while observing that it is "not uncommon" for "insurgent groups in the area" to wear the kind of military uniform described by witnesses.
The treatment of disappearances is among the most candid in the Guatemala report, with a couple of notable exceptions. While most cases are accurately portrayed, the April kidnappings of four members of the Quiché-based Runujel Junam Council for Ethnic Communities (CERJ) -- a human rights group launched in 1988 which has campaigned against the forced conscription of indigenous highlanders into civil defense patrols — are discussed in a dismissive fashion. The report says that "a witness to one incident reported that the kidnappers wore olive green uniforms; he assumed they were soldiers." A more complete and accurate description of this incident would have noted that the men were taken by uniformed soldiers as they slept in their bunkhouse on the Trinidad Miramar plantation in coastal Suchitepéquez. Numerous eyewitnesses have publicly stated that the CERJ activists were taken by soldiers, who had been patrolling the farm for days. Despite habeas corpus petitions and numerous meetings between CERJ and government officials, including President Cerezo, the men have still not been located.
Lamentably, the section ends with a gratuitous paragraph which seems to buttress the Cerezo government's assertion that most disappearances can be attributed to "family problems, accidents caused by alcoholism, mental disorders, traffic and people who have lost their way." The report states that two individuals reported missing by the Mutual Support Group (GAM), later turned up alive, thereby casting doubt on the credibility of GAM, the oldest Guatemalan human rights group functioning inside the country.
The government of Guatemala is to be commended for acceding on January 5, 1990 to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. It should be noted, however, that while Guatemala is already a party to the Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture,
78
Guatemala
Guatemalans are still likely to be subjected to torture. In its discussion of torture, the State Department does not do the subject justice, explaining that "[c]redible, verifiable reports of inhuman or cruel treatment of detainees in official custody remained rare" and that "[rjeports of brutality by the military were more frequent, but generally uncorroborated."
The Guatemalan military and police are notoriously sophisticated in their torture methods, and equally adept at covering their tracks. The repetition of torture testimonies recorded by human rights monitors over the years suggests that at some level in the Guatemalan military and police, torture is official policy. Guatemalan newspapers regularly report that unidentified bodies are found along the road, often showing signs of torture. Americas Watch reported the case of a Mormon elder, mistaken for a university student, who was burned on his thorax, arms, hands, and temples and forced to swallow an unknown liquid and a pill which made him lose consciousness. Americas Watch concluded that the "circumstances strongly suggest that the security forces carried out the atrocity."
The State Department report continues its skeptical posture toward the torture testimony of Sister Diana Ortiz, a U.S. Ursuline nun kidnapped in Antigua on November 2. Sister Ortiz, who had been working in Huehuetenango since 1987, had received repeated threats; she was abducted from the garden of an Antigua retreat center and was transported in a marked police car by three men, one of whom was in the uniform of the National Police. She states that she was abused sexually and burned with cigarettes. Sister Ortiz was subsequently examined in the United States by a physician, who counted 111 burn marks on her back. Traumatized by what had happened, Sister Ortiz did not tell her story to U.S. officials in Guatemala, and remained in the custody of the Papal Nuncio until she left the country. The report's statement that at "year's end Sister Ortiz had not acceded to the [Guatemalan government's] request" for information seems to reinforce skepticism U.S. diplomats had earlier expressed concerning the case. (In early January Sister Ortiz submitted an affidavit on her experience.)
The section on denial of fair public trial does not accurately portray the sorry state of Guatemala's justice system. While the judiciary has not actively participated in the repression, it has not taken serious steps to provide redress. Curiously absent from the report's discussion is any direct mention of the U.S.-funded Administration of Justice Program, which, in a sad commentary on
79
Guatemala
Guatemala's political realities, makes no pretense of helping the justice system prosecute political crimes.
The mention of the Eleodoro Sal Siquinajay case — who was captured and reportedly pressured into confessing to involvement in the September 1988 El Aguacate massacre — is oddly placed in this section. Worthy of mention is that Sal told Newsweek that his confession was "a lie" and that he had been beaten into submission. He later told human rights monitors that he had been drugged, confirming reports by those who attended the press conference that his behavior was aberrant. The report should have pointed out that with the proper will, Guatemalan courts are capable of acting with speed and vigor since Sal was convicted just three months after his capture. Again, this case illustrates that it is not a failure of knowledge or resources that handicaps the Guatemalan judiciary, but rather a failure of political will.
Guatemala's notorious civil patrols, long criticized by human rights groups, are addressed in the report's section on arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, in apparent admission that these officially voluntary, but in practice obligatory, patrols do interfere with the rights of Guatemalan men. The State Department has waffled on this question in the past, admitting in 1986 that "there exists evidence that in conflictive zones of the country, service is required," while in 1988 asserting that Embassy officials "have found that service on the patrols is viewed as an obligation to community service and a sign of social status." That Guatemalan men, mostly Indian, are obliged to serve in civil patrols -- in violation of Guatemala's constitution -- is by now well documented. Further, the harassment and violence to which CERJ has been subjected because of its attempts to resist forced participation is testimony in its own right to their obligatory nature. This year's treatment of the issue is more direct and accurate, noting that "in the conflictive areas . . . the degree of voluntarism was open to serious question." It should also be said that in some extremely polarized communities some patrollers do support the practice and cooperate with the military.
In its section on excessive force, the State Department correctly points out that while "little information exists on treatment given captured guerrillas, there are unconfirmed reports that they have suffered physical abuse and even death at the hands of their military captors." The Guatemalan military has long prided itself that there are no political prisoners in the country, despite a 30-year
80
Guatemala
guerrilla insurgency. Successive Guatemalan governments have refused to recognize the applicability of Geneva Convention provisions on non-international armed conflicts and the protections they afford to political prisoners, and until September 1989, had not signed an agreement with the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
In its section on freedom of peaceful assembly and association, the State Department fails to mention a notable exception during 1989 to Guatemalans' right to peaceably assemble. During the bitter 11-month teachers' strike, violence broke out during several demonstrations. Several teachers were badly beaten by police during a demonstration in Antigua, and others were hurt during strike-related actions in the Petén.
Further, in labeling the process to obtain personería jurídica -- legal status as an nongovernmental organization — "a cumbersome procedure," the report does not accurately reflect the legal impediments to organizing faced by Guatemalan nongovernmental organizations. An attorney who works with rural organizations attempting to achieve legal status described to the Lawyers Committee in an interview last autumn the roadblocks that impede legal organizing. The process often takes one and a half years, he said, and "once you've convinced the civil servants, you have to convince the Army, because in their view, to legalize these organizations would be to legalize the guerrillas."
The report's observations on Freedom of Movement Within the Country portrays Guatemala as "a refuge for thousands of Central Americans," suggesting an image of peace and tranquility that is not supported by the facts. Guatemala remains an extremely violent society where the vast majority live under conditions of dire poverty. Some 40,000 Guatemalan refugees remain encamped in Mexico, awaiting conditions hospitable to their return. Further, the State Department mentions "alleged death threats" against the United Representation of the Guatemalan Opposition (RUOG), a group of political exiles who have on occasion returned to Guatemala. Threats against the RUOG during its 1989 visit to Guatemala were well reported in the press. In an interview with the Lawyers Committee last year, U.S. Embassy staff suggested that the RUOG had fabricated these threats, which included a car bomb which was defused in front of their residence, which the report mentions.
Guatemala
While it is true that Amnesty International, WOLA, Americas Watch, and the Lawyers Committee have all conducted investigations without incident in Guatemala during the last year, it is also relevant to point out that through threats, intimidation and actual violence, Guatemala has ensured that a strong local human rights community -- a reality elsewhere in Central America -- cannot flourish. The report correctly notes that during 1989, attacks against human rights monitors extended to foreign nationals. On the same day in August, both GAM and the offices of U.S-based Peace Brigades International were attacked with grenades. In December, three Peace Brigade volunteers, who accompany Guatemalans who have been threatened, were stabbed by two men, who made no attempt at theft. One of the victims was a U.S. citizen. Also in December, the office of the ICRC was damaged by a grenade, just two months after signing an agreement with the Guatemalan government. Finally, in early April, one week after two representatives of Americas Watch visited Chontalá accompanied by CERJ leader Amilcar Méndez, soldiers and civil patrollers chastised villagers for not capturing the three human rights workers.
The report's discussion of worker rights restricts itself for the most part to a sterile discussion of the legal constraints on trade unions in Guatemala. Given that unionists are among those most targeted for abuse by the armed forces and employers, and several labor activists were murdered during 1989, the State Department's approach seems particularly inadequate. The report observes that labor leaders are often identified by human rights groups as the victims of threats, "disappearances" and murder. Many were lower level labor activists, and there is not a clear explanation why they have suffered most of the violence.
Attempts at organizing in Guatemala by popular organizations and other nongovernmental groups are regularly suppressed, often in a brutal fashion. The labor movement has especially suffered. In January 1989 Amnesty International reported that Rubén Martínez Fuentes, secretary general of the union on the El Perú finca where he worked, was arbitrarily detained, threatened and beaten by members of the National Police in El Tumbador, San Marcos, apparently because of his union activities. Two other 1989 cases investigated by Americas Watch illustrate the kind of harassment to which unionists are subjected. In January armed men in civilian clothing kidnapped a member of the Esquintla local of STINDE, the electrical workers union, beat him and demanded he tell them where a union leader lived. The man was later released with a warning to discontinue his
82
Guatemala
union activities. In February a STINDE lawyer survived an attack on his life only to be attacked and beaten one month later by men who told him to stop representing the union.
83
