HONG KONG
As noted above, the State Department's report on the United Kingdom includes some references to Hong Kong, one of the UK's dependent territories. While it shares some of the general problems discussed in the report, its many unique problems are necessarily addressed in a superficial way.
In the section on freedom of movement, the State Department observes that "UK citizens enjoy freedom of movement within the country, and in foreign travel, emigration and repatriation." By failing to note explicitly that "UK citizens" does not include citizens of Hong Kong, the report leaves a misimpression. Hong Kong citizens do not have the right to free entry into the United Kingdom. While this is a complex issue, it is of the utmost importance to the citizens of Hong Kong and a thorough report would have discussed it.
The report's discussion of the issues surrounding Hong Kong's treatment of Vietnamese refugees is superficial and understates the severity of the problem. The screening process instituted in June 1988 by the Hong Kong government (which was not materially changed by the June 1989 agreement referenced by the State Department) allegedly to distinguish between true "refugees" and economic migrants is applied in a manner which is unfair, unreliable and improperly restrictive. Among the procedural deficiencies are: inadequate access to legal advice and representation, inadequate translation, adjudicator prejudgment, no opportunity to correct alleged discrepancies, inadequate statements of reasons for denials, inability to be present during an appeal and absence of a public hearing on appeal.
253
United Kingdom
These procedures fail to comply with the U.N. Convention and Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees because they do not accurately identify who among the refugees satisfies international refugee law criteria which the Hong Kong authorities have agreed to apply. None of these issues is mentioned by the State Department.
While the State Department report describes the forcible return to Vietnam of 51 Vietnamese in December, beyond describing in a conclusory fashion the competing views in the ensuing "debate," the report does not adequately address the patent deficiencies in the screening process. Current litigation in Hong Kong challenges the Hong Kong government's adjudication procedures and detention policy.
The State Department's report briefly notes the existence of international complaints about living conditions in some camps without comment on whether there is any basis to these complaints. As part of a government policy of "humane deterrence," those immigrants not recognized as refugees are subject to arbitrary and indefinite detention under deliberately harsh conditions. Those recognized as refugees are likewise incarcerated in different facilities under sometimes difficult conditions, facts which the State Department does not note.
In the section on freedom of speech and press, the State Department notes the availability of these freedoms to Hong Kong residents, stating that the media are free to air all views and opinions. This statement is largely but not entirely correct. Section 10(2) of the Film Censorship Ordinance allows the authorities to censor any film which may "seriously damage the good relations with a neighboring territory." This provision has been consistently used to suppress films which may be an embarrassment to China. For example, in December censors deleted a segment from a documentary film about events in China during 1989.
The section on freedom of peaceful assembly and association states categorically that these rights "are permitted and regularly practiced in Hong Kong." While such freedoms are undeniably substantial, in 1989 concern arose that the British government would bow to Chinese pressure. One incident cited in support of this concern is the arrest on charges of unlawful assembly of a group of demonstrators in front of the New China News Agency (the equivalent of the Chinese embassy in Hong Kong) on September 31, China's National Day. A subsequent government letter to the New
254
United Kingdom
China News Agency cited the arrests as evidence that the government would not allow Hong Kong to be used as "a base for subversive activities." This led many to believe that the arrests were politically motivated. As one observer stated, "[w]hen police actions are presented to China as reassurances that its [political] interests and concerns would be respected, this is dangerous."
The section of the report dealing with arbitrary arrest, detention or exile does not mention Hong Kong, yet the loitering law (Section 160 of the Crimes Ordinance), the broad police power to arrest (Section 54 of the Police Force Ordinance which permits the lawful arrest of any person in public on the basis of a police officer's subjective suspicion of having committed or being about to commit any offense), and the extraordinary powers of the Independent Commission Against Corruption have not only been criticized locally but also were the subject of concern in 1988 for the (UN) Human Rights Committee, the body that monitors compliance with the ICCPR. These are serious issues which the State Department should have addressed.
255
