HONDURAS
The State Department report on Honduras for 1989 represents an improvement over previous years, and provides a generally accurate description of the overall human rights situation. Unfortunately the report returns to an old habit in its treatment of nongovernmental human rights monitoring groups. The State Department again attacks and singles out members of the Honduran Committee for the Defense of Human Rights (CODEH) and gives scant mention to a series of threats, harassments and acts of intimidation against opposition leaders.
The report correctly points out the chronic failure of the judiciary to uphold the law by bringing to justice members of the police and military whose actions abridge the rights of citizens. In the opening paragraph, the report accurately concludes that the "institutionalization of democratic reforms is still incomplete . . . [because] the civilian government has yet to demonstrate that it can ensure the disciplining of those members of the military who commit human rights abuses."
By continuing to focus on this theme, the report underscores the structural deficiencies in the administration of justice in Honduras. As the report concludes, the most grievous human rights violations are the "political and extrajudicial killings by political extremists and members of the security forces." The report also correctly notes that the most chronic and systematic violations of human rights by the militarized Public Security Force (FUSEP) "continue to be physical abuse of detainees, prisoners and incommunicado detention. Individual members of the security forces also were involved in killings arising from use of excessive force, sometimes for personal motives."
While recognizing that the armed forces "enjoy a good deal of institutional autonomy," the report fails to underscore the permanent danger to human rights represented by a militarized police. FUSEP is under the authority of the military, effectively precluding any civilian supervision of law enforcement officials. State security thus becomes the rubric under which many routine violations of citizens' rights occur. The report states that the "Armed Forces are constitutionally responsible to the President of the Republic," when in fact the military's charter grants it de jure autonomy. The civilian president does carry the title of Commander-in-Chief of the military.
89
Honduras
but in practice he does not exercise any control over the military command structure. The Congress does "elect" the military's supreme chief, but must choose a candidate among three possible choices submitted by the High Command.
Political killings increased in 1989, and the report describes the events surrounding these murders. While the report accurately notes that with one exception "no identification was made of any of the people involved in the murders," it fails to underscore the chronic abdication of responsibility by law enforcement authorities for investigating these crimes.
In the description of the killing of Adan Rugama, a military commander of the Nicaraguan contras, no group claimed responsibility, and the three persons whom the police charged asserted that they had been tortured in order to secure their "confessions." The State Department mentions speculation that the leftist Cinchonero guerrillas were responsible, while admitting that such charges have never been confirmed.
In the murder of former Commander-in-Chief Gustavo Alvarez and his driver, the report attributes responsibility to the Cinchonero guerrillas, who claimed responsibility for the act. According to published reports, however, an expert in criminology linked the murder of Alvarez to the Ruguma killing, declaring that "there are people, including military officials, who are interested in covering things up . . . executions will always be attributed to leftist guerrilla groups . . . whether they did it or not."
In ascribing the murder of Pablo Flores García to the Cinchoneros (his body was draped with the group's flag), the report points out that the victim had been a former member of the Cinchoneros, who provided information on his guerrilla colleagues to the armed forces. Omitted from the report was the fact that Flores had also deserted the Honduran military and that his mother said he disliked the army and feared that army officials wanted to kill him.
In commenting on the continuing investigations into the murders of two prominent human rights activists in January 1988, the State Department makes an unsubstantiated attack on the credibility of Fausto Reyes Caballero, a defector from armed forces' Battalion 3-16. According to Reyes Caballero, Battalion 3-16 members not only carried out the murders of Miguel Angel Pavón and Alfredo Landaverde, but have been responsible for other unsolved human
90
Honduras
rights cases. According to the State Department, Reyes Caballero was dishonorably discharged from the Honduran police in March 1984, and his testimony is fabricated. In testimony to Americas Watch, he has denied the charge, insisting that he was on a special undercover -mission for the Battalion until his defection in 1988. No effort has been made by the authorities to examine the charges made by Reyes Caballero or pursue an independent investigation of the double murders.
In a significant oversight, the report categorically asserts that no politically motivated "disappearances" occurred in 1989. On November 3, Silvino Argueta Luna and David Martinez, both 16-year-old Salvadorans, disappeared from the Colomoncagua refugee camp in western Honduras. According to the refugees, they had left the camp to go swimming and have not been seen again. The refugees have told international relief workers that they are convinced that they were taken by the military. In March 1989, Argueta Luna had gone to the same swimming hole where he was picked up by the military, taken to the Marcala Territorial Headquarters and tortured before being returned to the camp.
The report correctly points out that torture is practiced on a routine basis in Honduras. Omitted, however, is the military's attitude toward expressions of international concern about torture. In early September, Peter Kooijmans, the UN Commission on Human Rights Special Rapporteur on Torture, visited Honduras to investigate allegations of torture. He was told by Colonel Lázaro Avila Solano, the FUSEP commander, that the "police has eliminated all methods of torture."
The report also fails to mention the case of a minor who was subjected to punishing physical abuse by FUSEP's investigation unit, the DNI. According to CODEH, Faustino Felipe Funez Alvarado, 15, was captured by the DNI in connection with a robbery. At the time of his arrest and subsequent interrogation he was badly beaten. The boy was then thrown into a DNI cell with 10 other men. The next day his interrogators grabbed his hair and repeatedly hit him in the stomach, causing spasms. He was held incommunicado for another 13 days before finally being released in response to a writ of habeas corpus filed by CODEH.
In past critiques we have criticized the State Department for politically motivated criticism of the leaders of nongovernmental human rights monitoring groups. Such criticism can jeopardize the
91
Honduras
safety and lives of those individuals. The dangers are well known. In January 1988, two prominent human rights activists were murdered. One of the victims was a leader of CODEH, which has been subjected to the U.S. Embassy's unremitting hostility. Such attacks against nongovernmental human rights organizations which operate in highly volatile political settings inevitably exacerbate the risks inherent in human rights reporting.
Although this year's report tones down criticism of CODEH, it once again challenges CODEH's legitimacy when it repeats last year's accusation that "many observers in Honduras consider ICODEH] to be highly politicized and partisan." To quarrel with CODEH's findings is not sufficient reason to assail the group's integrity as a human rights monitor.
Completely omitted from the report is a discussion of serious instances of harassment, threats and illegal detentions of human rights workers. Only a passing reference is made to actions carried out against such workers by the Anticommunist Action Alliance (AAA), a clandestine group generally perceived to be operating in concert with the military. Documented cases during 1989, which were overlooked by the State Department include:
•	January 2: Shots were fired into the parked automobile owned by Maria Elena de Custodio, wife of Dr. Ramón Custodio, Honduras' most well known human rights advocate and CODEH's president.
•	January 25: On the day that Gustavo Alvarez, a prominent former Commander-in-Chief, was killed, the AAA issued a communiqué "sentencing" five prominent government critics to death. Included on the list were Ramón Custodio; CODEH Vice President Oscar Anibal Puerto; political leader Jorge Arturo Reina; former university rector Juan Almendares Bonilla; and union leader Héctor Hernández.
•	January 25: Also following the murder of Alvarez, Milton Jiménez, a labor lawyer who had been a prosecution witness before the Inter-American Court of Human Rights in a trial which condemned Honduras for the criminal disappearance of two citizens, was illegally detained by the DNI. He was released after 24 hours of harsh interrogation.
92
Honduras
•	January 31: Dr. Custodio's medical office was fired upon by three unknown men driving a white car with no license plates. Unmarked cars are often used by the military for undercover operations and by the death squads.
•	February-March: A group named the Honduran Anticommunist Youth circulated posters accusing Dr. Custodio of "political killings, terrorist attacks, communism and subversion." Under a photo of Custodio were written the words "The Only Good Communist is a Dead Communist."
•	March 31: CODEH Vice President Aníbal Puerto was warned in a telephone call to his house that unless he left the country within 24 hours he would be killed.
•	September 8: The armed forces issued a declaration accusing CODEH of "using the false shield of honesty to slander the government of the Republic and the institution of the Armed Forces . . . and with a smoke screen to disguise the crisis of confrontation within the organized left."
•	November 13: An anonymous caller phoned Gladys Lanza, a trade union activist, and said that she, three other trade union leaders and three human rights advocates were "going to die." In the early morning hours of November 15, a powerful bomb exploded in Gladys Lanza's house in Tegucigalpa, causing extensive damage to the building and slightly injuring Lanza.
While it is true that Hondurans enjoy a freedom of the press unmatched in Central America, with the notable exception of Costa Rica, the report understates the impact of official harassment of the press, and fails to mention that the authorities can and often do exercise undue influence over the exercise of free speech. In late 1988, Attorney General Rubén Zepeda threatened to invoke a provision of the Penal Code against Dr. Custodio. In a letter to Americas Watch, Mr. Zepeda stated that if he wanted to. Dr. Custodio could be prosecuted under an article in the code which calls for a six-month to two-year jail sentence for anyone who "threatens, insults, or in any other way offends the dignity of a public official acting in an official capacity. If the offended party is the President or another high official of the state, the sentence will be one to three years."
The report mentions the creation of CODEH-A, a new human rights organization, quoting allegations that threats against the life of
93
Honduras
its founder, Héctor Orlando Vásquez, spring from a public dispute with CODEH president Ramón Custodio. Omitted from the report is that CODEH-A has devoted itself almost exclusively to attacking the credibility of CODEH, accusing Ramón Custodio of the Pavón and Landaverde murders, and that Mr. Vásquez is a retired army sergeant.
While mentioning legal action initiated against Manuel Gamero, the editor-in-chief of one of the country's leading newspapers, the report fails to communicate the gravity of such state-inspired harassment. On January 12, Attorney General Zepeda began proceedings in a libel suit on behalf of the armed forces against Gamero for a December 31, 1988 editorial which "had the purpose of provoking hatred and scorn for the Armed Forces of Honduras. . . ." The editorial had accused the military of insubordination for criticizing President Azcona's effort to negotiate a "dry canal" linking Honduras with El Salvador. The military's motivation, according to Gamero, was that they would be excluded from financial gain, having been cut out of the deal. The indictment is still pending. He also asserts that the unwillingness of the judge to close the case probably has the desired intention of representing a permanent "sword of Damocles" over his head.
Other incidents involving journalists are not mentioned in the report. On November 8, a criminal court judge issued an arrest warrant against several citizens for the "crime" of practicing journalism without mandatory licencing from the authorities. Also on November 8, Radio America journalist José Elán Reyes was shot dead in Tegucigalpa by an unknown gunman. Reyes was a specialist on Central American affairs and Nicaragua. In a flagrant abuse of authority, the Director of Honduran National Telecommunications, Lieutenant Colonel Mario Lionel Fonseca, sent a telegram to all media (print and electronic) threatening to close their operations if they transmitted messages from subversive groups, or if, in his judgment, news reports threatened the integrity or security of the government. It appears clear that such threats were intended to intimidate journalists and should have been mentioned in the report.
Not discussed in the Honduras report, although it is briefly mentioned in the Nicaragua report, are allegations of kidnapping and involuntary conscription of Nicaraguans by Nicaraguan contras who hold these men and boys in camps located in Honduras. Since the early 1980s, the Nicaraguan contras have operated bases located in El Paraíso province in southern Honduras. For years the contras have been accused of kidnapping Nicaraguans and pressing them into
94
Honduras
service. In 1989, two U.S. doctors who had been working to improve the health conditions in northern Nicaragua became concerned about the kidnapping of young people by the contras. The victims were often "barefoot doctors" trained by the doctors, Tim Takaro and Susan Cookson, in public health techniques. In March, Takaro and Cookson traveled to the contras camp in Honduras to meet with some of the alleged victims.
While in the camp they were able to locate several of the people whose families had reported their abduction. Among those Takaro and Cookson located were Felipe Artola, 43, and his son Raphael Artola, 15. According to testimony from Felipe's nephew, Ronald, a lay health worker, the contras had come to Felipe's house on January 28, 1989. They stole money, food, and a radio and kidnapped Felipe, Raphael, and Ronald's 55-year-old father, whom they later released.
Felipe and Raphael Artola were on a list of 10 submitted to the contras by Takaro and Cookson. Of this list of 10, the doctors were told that eight were in the armed camps. After lengthy negotiations, the doctors were given permission to interview four persons. After a debriefing from the doctors, three signed affidavits stating that they wanted to return to Nicaragua. Later they admitted that they had been kidnapped as their families had previously stated. Moreover, Felipe and Raphael were identified as being in the camps. But after the three signed affidavits, the contra commanders abruptly denied the existence of the other four on the list, including Raphael and Felipe.
Of those whom the doctors interviewed, two were eventually released under pressure from the U.S. Congress. Two others from the list of four whom the contras denied having were also released to the UN High Commissioner for Refugees. Those released included: Gema Beverly Velasquez, José Gabriel López, Diego Manuel Centeno, and Rosalio. Raphael and Felipe are still held in the armed camps.
In an interview'with José Gabriel López after he returned to Nicaragua, he said that "our case was special because there was a petition regarding us. For all the others, they would return to Nicaragua if they could do it. If you simply tell a comandante that you want to return to Nicaragua, the path will be blocked. There have to be efforts from Nicaragua by their families, by organizations like the ones that worked for us (Project Libertad)."
95
