HAITI
The State Department's 1989 report on Haiti is markedly better than its 1988 effort. The report is more comprehensive and extensively documented, exhibiting a greater commitment to accurately portray developments in the country. Unfortunately, the improved reporting of human rights violations has not been matched by a corresponding improvement in the analysis of those violations.
The theme of the 1989 report is of progress and improved respect for human rights in Haiti. One would not guess after reading it that popular demonstrations would force Lieutenant General Prosper Avril from office in March — less than two months after the report was issued. For example, the report compares the Avril government favorably to other post-Duvalier regimes:
The Avril Government avoided the egregious violations . . . generally did not target political or human rights activists nor repress basic civil liberties . . . continued in 1989 an extensive housecleaning of the military and police . . . announced disciplinary actions against several dozen soldiers and Section Chiefs charged with abuses.
Developments in 1989 led other foreign observers of the human rights situation in Haiti, however, to more ominous and prescient assessments. On January 23, 1990 — a month before the State Department report was released — the UN Special Expert for Haiti reported to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights that:
The obstacles hindering the process of real improvement in the human rights situation in Haiti have not been removed. . . . The improvement in [respect for human rights] that followed in the first few months after 17 September 1988 seems to have come to a halt and the extremely negative factors which remain lead me to take a pessimistic view of the situation, which cannot change without a more positive and consistent will to ensure respect for the minimum standards of the rule of law.
While the State Department's 1989 report documents numerous human rights abuses in Haiti, the analysis appears designed to
84
Haiti
distance the Avril government from them. To its credit, the report includes accounts from human rights groups and acknowledges that they are "well-documented." Unfortunately, it refuses to draw the evident conclusion from these examples: military violations of human rights remain widespread, systematic, and unpunished.
One way the State Department attempts to distance the Avril government from human rights violations is by attributing abuses to isolated soldiers acting on their own initiative. According to the report, the persistence of extrajudicial executions results from "individual soldiers and rural Section Chiefs" acting "for personal reasons, at the behest of private patrons, or in clear abuse of their official powers," as if the first two stated motives were not clear abuses of power. While the report states unambiguously that torture "remain[s] common, despite official admonitions to soldiers and Section Chiefs," it fails to note that there has been no serious effort to enforce such warnings.
Despite the straightforward acknowledgement that none of the perpetrators of the abuses listed -- or of past heinous crimes -- has been disciplined, the State Department refuses to criticize the Avril government for its lack of vigilance. The Department's improved, but still incomplete, reporting is illustrated by its account of the arrest of three prominent Haitian opposition figures, Jean-Auguste Mesyeux, Evans Paul and Etienne Marineau in November. While the report acknowledges the arrest and correctly recounts that the three appeared "battered . . . when they were paraded on a government broadcast," it fails to mention that the men were arrested illegally, that they were beaten and tortured by members of Avril's personal militia, the Presidential Guard, or that the torture occurred in the basement of the National Palace.
Similarly, the report does not criticize the lack of a government response to this demonstration of contempt for the rule of law. Despite the televised evidence of torture, the Avril government took no action against the soldiers responsible for the illegal arrest and torture, including Major Clerjeune, the head of the Port-au-Prince Investigation and Anti-Gang Service, the security police, who also served as "moderator" of the nationally televised broadcast. The State Department chose to repeat the Avril government's allegations against the detainees of plotting a coup — thereby lending credibility to these charges — without mentioning the widespread belief that the charges were unfounded.
85
Haiti
The State Department's internal guidelines for the preparation of the country reports include the instruction that "prison conditions which constitute a threat to life or health or under which the general standard of care is grossly disparate from the average standard in that society should be reported." The report fails, however, to identify and discuss the atrocious conditions of detention, which in themselves constitute a form of cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. Conditions at the prison in St. Marc are representative. A visitor to the prison in September stated that approximately 70 male detainees were held there, all of whom had been arrested and were being held without charge. None had a trial date set. Many said their families did not know their whereabouts, often because prison records did not include their names. According to the observer, many of the detainees appeared severely malnourished, weak and in obvious need of medical care. During the day, they were kept in an open courtyard, without shade from the Haitian sun. At night, they were forced to sleep on the floor of an unventilated room, one against another "closer than animals [are] kept."
The report also tries to distance the Avril government from human rights abuses by blaming the "inefficient and corrupt judicial system" -- not the Avril government which supervised it or the military which intimidates it — for the ongoing violations. Such analysis fundamentally misrepresents the balance of power in Haiti. The State Department attributes the failure to arrest suspects with a warrant or to present them before a judge within 48 hours after arrest to "[a] poorly organized and sometimes corrupt legal system." Denial of the right to a fair trial is similarly linked to "chronic weaknesses in the judicial system, and sometimes interference of elements of the executive branch." The State Department notes approvingly that the "Minister of Justice has been instructed to prepare an in-depth reform of the judicial system" and that he "signed a contract with a private organization to provide education for" judicial officials.
Unfortunately, the report confuses the distinction between announcements of legal reforms and real changes in actual practice. Here again, the illegal arrests of Mesyeux, Paul and Marineau offer a representative illustration of the dominant influence of the military over the justice system. Fewer than three months after a government decree placed control of the nation's prisons under the Ministry of Justice, the Haitian military refused to obey judicial orders granting the detainees access to medical or legal attention. After viewing the televised broadcast of the three prisoners. Dr. Louis Roy, a physician and former president of the Haitian Red Cross, and two other doctors
86
Haiti
obtained written permission to examine the detainees from the investigating judge in charge of the case. Despite the court order, the military authorities of the prison refused to let them enter. The doctors were told that they could not meet with the detainees without a permit issued by Major Clerjeune (the man who had supervised the parading of the detainees on television).
Soldiers also refused to permit lawyers seeking to advise the detainees from seeing their clients on at least two separate occasions. Attorneys Joseph Maxi and Jean Claude Nord were first denied entrance to the National Penitentiary on November 3. They were again prohibited from seeing their clients on November 6 — despite presenting an order signed by the judge in charge of the investigation. They were told that only Major Clerjeune could authorize a visit to the prison. In the meantime, the military had harassed one of the attorneys, Joseph Maxi, into withdrawing from the case. He was forced into hiding after soldiers from the Presidential Guard illegally entered his home, verbally threatened him and beat a young boy who was at the house.
Finally, the report seeks to distance the Avril government from human rights abuses by minimizing their pervasive scope. Warrantless arrests are not simply "numerous" as the State Department suggests; they are regularly reported in every region of the country. In the vast majority of "arrests" by the military in Haiti, those apprehended simply remain in detention until the military decides to release them. Officials at all levels of the Ministry of Justice openly acknowledge the extent of this breakdown of justice.
The military's domination of the justice system is central to human rights conditions in Haiti. The military is virtually unaccountable to civilian authorities. While the report correctly notes that Lieutenant General Avril restored 262 of the 298 articles of the Constitution in March, it does not state that one of the articles not restored establishes the jurisdiction of civilian courts over military personnel for crimes against civilians. That the Avril government would continue the suspension of this article supports the view that it intended to circumscribe the much maligned judiciary's ability to enforce the law.
While the report commendably includes a representative sampling of arbitrary arrests reported by major Haitian human rights organizations, the State Department should also analyze, where possible, the background surrounding these incidents. For example.
87
Haiti
in one case the report implies a legitimate basis for the government's illegal arrests by failing to set the context. The report asserts that the Section Chief of Jean Rabel, Arnovil St. Vil, arrested four members of a peasant group and "incarcerated them . .. allegedly for planning violence aimed at avenging the victims of a massacre at Jean Rabel in 1987." In fact, eight peasants were arrested for planning a ceremony commemorating the anniversary of the Jean Rabel massacre. None had been arrested with a warrant and none were brought before a judge within the time prescribed by the Constitution. Observers reported that one of the women prisoners, Inalia Anelion, had been "beaten to the point of bleeding by Arnovil St. Vil."
When a delegation of Haitian human rights activists and attorneys asked the military commander of the prison the reason for these illegal arrests, he attempted to justify what was obviously an attempt to intimidate and stifle dissent as "preventive detention." The officer stated that "[t]hese people were arrested for wearing shirts that had printed slogans concerning the massacre two years ago. Fearing a revenge attack, the army proceeded to arrest them and to put them in prison as a means of 'preventive detention'." Not surprisingly, incarceration of the potential victim of a crime as "preventive detention" is not permitted under Haitian law.
The State Department has taken a significant step by acknowledging that members of the military committed serious human rights abuses in Haiti throughout 1989, although the report underestimates the scope of the violations. The next step requires acknowledging that protection of human rights in Haiti depends more on military respect for the rule of law than on a more efficient — or even a less corrupt — judicial system. An efficient and scrupulous justice system can do little to protect the human rights of citizens if the military refuses to obtain warrants, detains people illegally and fails to present them at judicial hearings or refuses to respect judicial independence. Haiti's human rights conditions will improve only when those charged with enforcing the rule of law begin to respect it themselves.
88
