HUNGARY
The report on Hungary is an admirably thorough account of a watershed year in the country's history, a year that left Hungary with a new name (the Hungarian People's Republic has become the Republic of Hungary) and with the (now-consummated) prospect of free parliamentary elections on March 25, 1990. The report's tone is cautious and understated, but its workmanlike recital of details demonstrating improvement in the human rights situation, with particular emphasis on political rights, nevertheless manages to convey the magnitude and fundamental nature of change in Hungary.
The report's shortcomings, such as they are, are in part a function of its "chronicle-of-events" approach. The report hesitates to criticize or draw even relatively obvious conclusions (although it repeats verbatim unsupported assertions from previous reports). This said, there is much to recommend in the report's modest and objective approach, especially given the pace of change in Hungary.
The report's cursory and, in part, misleading discussion of the several leading opposition political parties, would have benefitted from elaboration, because the interaction of these parties with each other and with the ruling party (by year's end known as the Hungarian Socialist Party) illuminates the political crossroads Hungary faces. The identification of the moderate Hungarian Democratic Forum as the "most influential opposition party" -- as opposed to, say, the "most popular" --is hardly objective fact, even by the report's own account. The report acknowledges that it was on the initiative of the Alliance of Free Democrats and another opposition party, the Young Democrats, that a referendum was held on November 26, 1989, which resulted in the delay of presidential elections until after the March parliamentary elections. Some observers considered this procedural victory a blow to the presidential aspirations of Mr. Imre Pozsgay, the leading Socialist presidential candidate, on the theory that with the additional time opposition candidates may have the opportunity to gain recognition and political momentum notwithstanding continuing complaints concerning limited access to the broadcast media. Curiously, the report — while noting that the Free Democrats and the Young Democrats "neither signed nor vetoed" an accord on the elections between the government and eight opposition parties — fails to mention that the Democratic Forum organized a boycott of the November referendum, a boycott which may account in part for what the report calls the "razor-thin majority" in favor of delaying the presidential election.
96
Hungary
The Free Democrats also had a role in proving that the report's pessimistic evaluation of the State's commitment to the integrity of private communications, reprinted essentially verbatim from the previous report, was correct in at least some respects. The report presented its assessment twice, and the variation in language and tone is noteworthy: (1) "The amended Constitution provides for personal freedom, the protection of privacy, and the inviolability of domicile, but these provisions continued to be violated when the State believed that it was in its interest to do so." (2) "It is widely assumed, however, that the authorities tap private phone lines and open correspondence when they wish to do so." Even aside from the first statement's anthropomorphic attribution of beliefs to "the State" and both statements' superfluous limitations that such violations occur only when the authorities "wish to do so," the attribution of the second to widespread assumptions (as opposed to the omniscient tone of the first) is surely the better choice, particularly given the pace of change.
The report was proven substantively correct when the Free Democrats published information in early 1990, showing that the Internal Security Department had continued its surveillance of opposition parties through 1989. The ensuing scandal resulted in the resignation of Interior Minister Istvan Horvath, the reassignment of intelligence-gathering responsibilities to the Parliament, and a further blow to the presidential aspirations of Imre Pozsgay, an associate of Horvath's.
A final reason the report might have touched upon the tensions between the leading opposition parties is that the resurgent nationalist sentiments voiced by some parties, notably the Democratic Forum, contain an undercurrent of what some perceive to be anti-Semitism. Democratic Forum leaders deny the charge. While the report correctly notes that Communist leaders denounced "[mjanifestations of anti-Semitic sentiments," it fails to discuss the sources of these manifestations.
The report might also have discussed the abolition on June 1, 1989 by the Hungarian parliament of the death penalty for crimes against the State, although the report does discuss the legislative revision of the definition of such crimes. Similarly, the odd statement in the section on freedom of movement within the country that "[a]ll adult citizens are issued an identity booklet which they should carry at all times" might have, given the nature of this widely-disliked
97
Hungary
document, been phrased without the sense of endorsement or approval.
Finally, although the report touches on Hungary's difficult economic situation and the inroads being made by foreign investment, it fails to mention that the transition to private ownership has itself resulted in dissatisfaction and scandal. The Smallholders Party has taken the position that all nationalized property should be returned to its original owners, a move that would result in massive redistribution of wealth. The former Communist party retains significant, nominally private, property which several of the opposition parties have demanded be returned to the State. And some foreign investment appears to have taken place at fire-sale prices, although whether this is due to incompetence or corruption is unclear. Although these issues are not strictly ones of human rights, if the report is to address economic issues it would benefit from a discussion of their broader context.
These criticisms of emphasis and tone should not detract from the acknowledgment at the outset that the report is for the most part reliable and solidly grounded in observed fact.
98
