INTRODUCTION

It was, of course, a momentous year for human rights. Perhaps more than ever previously, great events of world history were shaped during 1989 by public demands for such rights as freedom of expression, freedom of movement and freedom of assembly. Demands for human rights brought down the Berlin Wall; overturned dictatorships; helped bring the Cold War to an end; aroused hopes for peaceful change in southern Africa; elicited the crackdown in China.

The last of these brought to a sudden and painful halt one of the most exhilarating freedom movements of the century. Yet the momentum that the cause of human rights developed worldwide during the year was so great that few can doubt that the movement for democracy and human rights will soon re-emerge in China. Given events elsewhere during 1989, the crackdown has come to seem like the last cruel spasm of a dying system rather than as the beginning of a new era of tyranny. That the days of the elderly rulers of China are numbered does not prevent them from causing great suffering; but it appears unlikely that they can long perpetuate their own repressive ways.

Unfortunately, though 1989 may be recorded in the histories of this century as the year of human rights, it was not a year in which the misery caused by repression worldwide was discernibly reduced. In many parts of the world, civil wars continued in which great numbers of civilians were massacred or subjected to indiscriminate attacks; and in many countries, governments continued to murder, "disappear," torture and forcibly displace great numbers of their citizens. Political imprisonment, as such, seemed to go out of style in some countries (not including China, of course) perhaps because it is a form of abuse that can be readily measured and that invites continuing protest. But many other abuses were as pervasive as ever. The region of the world that probably was most devastated by human rights abuses during 1989 was the Horn of Africa. The internal wars that have torn apart Ethiopia, Somalia and Sudan were marked by the killings of tens of thousands of noncombatants during the year; and by the starvation and forced displacement of hundreds of thousands more. In addition the peoples of those countries were victimized by virtually every imaginable abuse of human rights. Comparable abuses also took place in several countries of Asia where wars are underway, among them Afghanistan, Burma, Cambodia and Sri Lanka.

By and large, in the past, these African and Asian countries have not been the main focus of international efforts to promote human rights. Recently, however, efforts to document repression in these regions, to embarras the governments and the guerrilla forces responsible and to generate pressure to curb abuses, have been given attention by Human Rights Watch comparable to that we have devoted to the Soviet Union, to Eastern and Central Europe and to Latin America -- the parts of the world which had been the main targets previously of our efforts, and other efforts in the United States, to promote human rights internationally. The broader focus of Human Rights Watch's work in 1989 reflects several factors in addition to the severity of abuses.

The creation of Africa Watch in 1988 was an important step. In1989, its first full year, Africa Watch established itself as an authoritative voice on human rights in the continent. Though the staff and budget of Africa Watch are far too meager to permit it to cope with all the serious human rights abuses that are prevalent in all but a handful of the countries in its region, it was able in 1989 to deal in varying degree with Angola, Djibouti, Kenya, Liberia, Malawi, Mauritania, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Tanzania and Zimbabwe. Though major improvements in human rights practices in these countries will only come about through sustained effort over a long period, in a few instances the impact of Africa Watch's efforts is already apparent. Indeed, it is a source of some pride to Human Rights Watch that Africa Watch has made a mark in its region far more rapidly than any of the longer established Watch Committees at a comparable stage of development.

Middle East Watch was organized even more recently. It began in 1989 and its first full year of operation will be 1990. In many respects, it faces the most difficult task of all: the highly charged politics of the region; the unwillingness of some governments in the Middle East even to acknowledge that they are bound by international human rights standards; the difficulties and dangers of conducting human rights investigations in some countries; and the absence of local human rights groups with which we can work except in Israel, the Israeli-Occupied Territories, Egypt, Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia. Even so, by the end of 1989, Middle East Watch had conducted investigations of human rights abuses in several countries and reports were being readied for publication early in 1990. Our hope is that Middle East Watch will reach a stage of development by the end of 1990 that is comparable to Africa Watch at the end of 1989.

Asia Watch was established in 1985. Its mandate covers a region that is more populous than those of all the other Watch Committees combined; and the difficulties of its task reflect also the fact that historically, culturally, linguistically and politically, the countries of its region are more diverse than any other part of the globe.

Inevitably, much of Asia Watch's work during the year was dominated by China. Asia Watch set itself the task of keeping the record of those who were imprisoned in the wake of the June 4 crackdown and of serving as their advocate to be sure that their plight was not forgotten in the inevitable period of "normalization" that would ensue. This effort was consciously patterned on the role assumed by Helsinki Watch a decade earlier which helped to make releases of political prisoners in the Soviet Union, Poland and other countries a crucial index of change. Though China was the main focus in 1989, Asia Watch also undertook significant efforts on about another dozen countries in the region.

Over the years, Americas Watch has been most intensely involved in Central Ameria, reflecting the prominence of this region in shaping United States policy on human rights worldwide and the prevalence of gross abuses in the 1980s. In addition, Americas Watch was deeply involved in 1989 in many other countries in the Western Hemisphere, among them Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Haiti, Peru and Uruguay. Also, Americas Watch launched its first investigations of human rights in two countriesto which it had not attended previously, Venezuela and Mexico. Unfortunately, though all the countries monitored by Americas Watch (with the exceptions of Cuba and Haiti, and Chile which is in the last stages of transition as this report is being published) are usually considered "democracies," many violent abuses persist and, in the case of such countries as Brazil, Colombia, El Salvador, Peru and Guatemala, the severity of these seemed to increase during 1989.

As might be expected, the work of Helsinki Watch was most dramatically reshaped by the events of 1989. The oldest of the Watch Committees, over the years it had conducted most of its investigations by sending representatives to the Soviet Union and to Central and Eastern Europe without disclosing the purposes of their visits in advance; by attempting to elude surveillance by security officials; and by publishing reports that focused on imprisonment and extra-legal harassment. In 1989, in contrast, most Helsinki Watch missions were conducted openly; our representatives met frequently with high officials; and our reports focused on such questions as legal reform and the development of civil society.

Though the nature of Helsinki Watch's work changed, it did not diminish in significance. Rather, because of the prestige acquired by Helsinki Watch in the previous decade, it was able to play a unique role in fostering the development of institutions, laws and practices that could help to protect human rights in future years. Also, in those countries in the region in which the persecution of ethnic minorities has been a major issue -- among them Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey, Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union -- it seemed plain at year's end that the kind of human rights monitoring that Helsinki Watch previously engaged in will be required for a long time to come.

Though the suffering inflicted by human rights abuses worldwide may not have abated during 1989 if a global reckoning were possible, there were nevertheless some stunning advances. To cite just two: there was Chile, where the cruel dictatorship of General Augusto Pinochet was coming to its end after sixteen years; and Czechoslovakia, where the "Velvet Revolution" turned the country upside down in the span of two weeks. It has been the source of special pleasure to Human Rights Watch to see some of our "clients" in these countries -- those we defended when they were being persecuted -- assuming high posts in the new governments. Our own part in the transformation in these countries is a source of great pride; and gives us reason to hope for transformations in some of the countries which contributed significantly to the suffering quotient in 1989.

Aryeh Neier

Executive Director
SEEKING ACCOUNTABILITY FOR PAST ABUSES

"Transitions to democracy" in many countries in recent years have raised important questions about what to do about the gross abuses of the past: by military dictatorships in Latin America and East Asia and by communist regimes in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. The question has been complicated by the retention of varying measures of power by the former rulers, enabling them in some instances to block efforts to hold them accountable for their crimes.

In previous years, Human Rights Watch focused on this question primarily in such Latin American countries as Argentina, El Salvador and Guatemala. The fast pace of developments in 1989 brought the issue to the fore in several additional countries. Accordingly, the boards of the Watch Committees, meeting jointly, adopted a formal policy statement to guide our efforts. In cases where there has been a practice of gross abuses (genocide, extrajudicial executions, disappearances, torture or prolonged arbitrary imprisonment), Human Rights Watch: calls on governments themselves to acknowledge these and make known as much as possible about past abuses; opposes amnesties for such abuses; seeks prosecution particularly of those with the highest degree of responsibility for the most severe abuses; opposes subjecting decisions about accountability to popular referendum because it is not the prerogative of the many to forgive the crimes against the few; opposes amnesties to members of anti-government forces who have practiced gross abuses; considers obedience to orders (in circumstances other than duress) not a valid defense to charges of responsibility for gross abuses; insists that the means used in making known gross abuses and prosecuting those responsible must respect due process.

By and large, Human Rights Watch's efforts to promote these standards were not successful during 1989. In Uruguay, on which Americas Watch published a report early in the year on accountability, an amnesty law was endorsed in an April plebiscite. In Argentina, President Carlos Saul Menem began his term as President by pardoning all but six of the military officers responsible for more than 9,000 disappearances during the years of military rule from 1976 to 1983. On the other hand, in El Salvador, Americas Watch was instrumental in securing the prosecution of a number of soldiers for a massacre of peasants the previous year; and, in November 1989, when six Jesuit priests and two employees were murdered, Americas Watch documented military culpability, helping to generate the pressure for prosecution of a number of soldiers, including a Colonel, in early 1990. (At this writing, no headway has been made in either prosecution, but Americas Watch is maintaining the pressure.) In Nicaragua, Americas Watch published a report on extrajudicial executions of suspected contras and contra collaborators. In a few of the cases documented by Americas Watch, prosecutions and punishment took place, largely due to our pressure.

Helsinki Watch also became involved in the question of accountability in 1989. The issue loomed large in the Soviet Union, where an organization named "Memorial" had been launched late in 1988 to document the crimes of Stalinism; and in Romania, whereHelsinki Watch condemned the virtual lynching of Nicolai and Elena Ceausescu on Christmas Day and called instead for the establishment of a commission to compile a careful and full account of the crimes of the Ceausescu era and for prosecutions of those responsible for gross abuses to be conducted in accordance with due process.

Accountability was also an important issue in the work of Africa Watch. Indeed, a governmental commission that is investigating the abuses of the past in Uganda has become something of a model for such inquiries. Africa Watch also pressed the question of accountability in Zimbabwe; and, in 1990 as information about the killings by a government sponsored death squad becomes available, it is certain to be an important issue in South Africa.

Although all the Watch Committees have become involved in the accountability question in varying degrees, in the period immediately ahead, it seems likely that the issue will continue to be particularly important in the work of Americas Watch. In the case of the amnesties in Argentina and Uruguay, Americas Watch is litigating their validity before the Organization of American States Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. Previously, Americas Watch was instrumental in securing a decision by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights which established the responsibility of the government of Honduras for disappearances carried out by its armed forces from 1981 to 1984. In 1989, the Honduran government was ordered to pay monetary damages to the families of two of the victims. The issue will also confront Americas Watch in Chile when a civilian government succeeds General Pinochet in March 1990 and will probably make known soon after it takes office how it will deal with the accountability issue.
INTRODUCTION

With the extraordinary changes in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union in 1989, human rights should have emerged as a central element of U.S. foreign policy. Easing East-West tensions created an unprecedented opportunity for the Bush administration to work for a post-cold war order founded on respect for the rights of the individual.

Unfortunately, our review of the public positions taken by the Bush administration during its first year reveals a widespread disregard for human rights. While the administration supported change in Eastern Europe and occasionally elsewhere -- most notably in South Africa and Burma (Myanmar) -- it failed to seize the opportunity to embrace human rights throughout the world. Its insistence on seeing the world in geopolitical terms, and other priorities, gave rise to a striking silence on abuses in many countries, and a frequent refusal to adjust U.S. policy in light of those abuses. The result has been a failure to take the lead in making respect for human rights the basis of the world order of the 1990's.

The administration's policy toward China is the most visible example of this failure. Although China's importance as a strategic asset diminished as U.S. relations with the Soviet Union improved, the administration consistently opposed taking a stand on human rights that might offend China's leaders. In February, when uniformed Chinese police barred one of China's leading human rights advocates, Fang Lizhi, from attending a dinner hosted by visiting President Bush, the President acquiesced and the administration blamed its embassy for inviting Fang. In May, when Chinese authorities met mass demonstrations for democracy with a declaration of martial law, the administration said nothing. And in June, when Chinese authorities crushed the democracy movement and killed hundreds, the administration imposed the minimum sanctions that an outraged U.S. public would tolerate, and lobbied hard against legislation to impose further sanctions. It also stopped short of announcing the steps that Chinese authorities would have to take for sanctions to be lifted -- crucial for making sanctions meaningful -- such as, at minimum, freeing all members of the democracy movement who did not use or advocate violence.

Instead, within a month and without receiving any human rights concessions, the administration breached the sanctions restricting loans (by renewing processing of Export-Import Bank loans), the sanctions halting military sales (by delivering three Boeing jets with sensitive navigational systems), and the sanctions barring high-level contacts (by secretly sending National Security Advisor Brent Scowcroft and Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger to Beijing). The administration thus made clear that the killing and imprisonment of pro-democracy demonstrators would have no material impact on its dealings with the Chinese leadership.

The administration's policy toward El Salvador has shown a similar disregard for human rights. Despite reduced fears that leftist advances in Central America would provide a beachhead for Soviet expansionism, the administration persisted in acting as apologist for abuses committed by the Salvadoran military in its war with leftist rebels. Shortly after the Salvadoran guerrillas began a November offensive, six Jesuit priests and two of their employees were murdered under circumstances implicating the Salvadoran army. The murder gave rise to pressure in Congress to reduce military aid to El Salvador until those responsible for this atrocity were brought to justice. The administration, instead of using this pressure to insist that the Salvadoran armed forces respect human rights, sought actively to discredit evidence of army responsibility. When a witness stepped forward to testify that she had seen soldiers at the crime scene, U.S. embassy officials and FBI investigators in Miami put her through a grueling four-day interrogation -- in an unfamiliar environment, without a lawyer, in the presence of a Salvadoran military officer, and under reported threats of deportation to El Salvador and almost certain death -- in an effort that could not plausibly have been designed to get at the truth. This attempt to discredit an inconvenient witness made a mockery of U.S. demands that the Salvadoran government identify the murderers, as well as of the U.S. commitment to promote due process and the rule of law.

With regard to the Soviet Union, the Bush administration has all but stopped public comment on human rights issues. President Reagan gave human rights a prominent place on the agenda of every U.S.-Soviet summit, but President Bush barely mentioned human rights at Malta. The administration's silence seems to be based in large part on new geopolitical considerations -- the fear that pressing for human rights might weaken Gorbachev. But the failure to take any public notice of continuing abuses has deprived Soviet liberals of pressure they might have harnessed to promote reforms.

The State Department's principal human rights officer has argued that public statements on human rights are unnecessary because Soviet reformers "recognize their problems" and thus the U.S. need not "lord it over them" but should "work with" the Soviets in refashioning repressive institutions. While the changed circumstances in the Soviet Union certainly warrant a change in tone, they do not justify the abandonment of public human rights commentary. Such abandonment might be appropriate for a nation that had ceased violating the rights of its citizens and needed only to dismantle a few anachronistic institutions of repression. But rights violations continue in the Soviet Union, in the form of psychiatric abuse, widespread disrespect for due process, restrictions on freedom of assembly and travel, new arrests and short-term detentions on political grounds, a refusal to tolerate a multi-party system, and continued imprisonment for some previously convicted of treason for attempting to contact U.S. diplomats in an effort to emigrate or send manuscripts abroad. Silence in the face of these abuses can only slow their end.

The Bush administration made little change in U.S. support of abusive rebel troops in regional conflicts, despite the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan and Vietnamese troops from Cambodia, and the continuing phased withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola.

In Afghanistan, the administration firmly protested abuses by the Soviet-backed government but was sparing in its criticism of the U.S.-funded resistance, even when those forces committed summary executions and indiscriminately shelled civilian areas. The administration may have taken a positive step by reportedly cutting off aid to the most abusive resistance force, Hezb-e Islami headed by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, but then undercut the gesture by refusing to state that a serious effort to curb abuses was a precondition for receiving U.S. aid, or to call on Saudi Arabia, the largest resistance funder, to stop financing Hekmatyar's group.

In Cambodia, despite increased public recognition toward the end of the Reagan administration of the importance of preventing the return to power of Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge, the Bush administration refused to break with China and the administration's Southeast Asian friends by opposing a coalition government that would include the Khmer Rouge.

In Angola, the Bush administration continued to deliver funds to UNITA despite widespread reports that UNITA has kidnapped civilians, burned opponents at the stake, and used mines indiscriminately.

A positive development in the Bush administration's approach to regional conflicts is that it did not seek to renew military funding for the contras -- a force that has consistently engaged in summary executions, kidnappings and indiscriminate attacks on civilians. The administration did, however, keep the contras alive as a fighting force by continuing to provide so-called "humanitarian" aid. And the administration continued past policy of refusing to condemn contra abuses which, though reduced in light of the reduced contra presence in Nicaragua, continue nonetheless.

Like the Reagan administration, the Bush administration generally closed its eyes to -- and often defended -- abuses committed by militaries under the nominal control of elected civilian governments. The administration's apologies for military abuses in El Salvador, referred to earlier, are an example of this policy. Other examples included:

The Bush administration strengthened ties with the Guatemalan military although political killings increased dramatically and President Vinicio Cerezo showed less inclination than ever to control the armed and security forces, let alone to investigate and prosecute their abuses. The administration deplored the mounting political violence but refused to assign responsibility, despite substantial evidence implicating the military.

In the Philippines, the presidency of Corazon Aquino --as well as a strong leftist insurgency and the U.S. interest in continued use of the Subic naval base and Clark air force base -- yielded a hands-off approach to ongoing abuses. While the administration intervened militarily to help foil a coup attempt by right-wing army factions, it refrained from criticizing widespread killings, including beheadings, by paramilitary and vigilante groups tied to the military.

The Bush administration continued the Reagan administration's refusal, after transitions from military dictatorships to elected governments, to press for prosecution of those in the military and security forces who were responsible for past human rights abuses. In Argentina, the Bush administration said nothing when President Menem pardoned most of the military officers responsible for torture and disappearances during the "dirty war." In Uruguay, administration officials quietly opposed an effort by referendum to repeal an amnesty for such abuses.

The Bush administration also continued its predecessor's policy of largely ignoring abuses in areas of the world that do not attract much public attention in the United States:

In Sudan, where government forces have been responsible for executing civilians and using starvation as a weapon in the southern part of the country, the administration sought a waiver of a U.S. law requiring the cutoff of aid after a coup overthrew the elected civilian government in June. The stated purpose of the waiver was to provide C-130 transport planes for relief efforts, but Sudan had never used the planes for relief, only to transport troops.

In Mauritania, the administration made no public comment on the mass expulsion, often after severe beating, of tens of thousands of black Mauritanians, following a border dispute with Senegal. Nor did it address the massacre of hundreds of blacks by government-organized bands.

In Malawi, the administration said nothing publicly in the face of a purge of government opponents that included the widespread use of detention without trial, reports of torture, and the death of two in custody.

In Kenya, the administration issued no public comment on the severe mistreatment and forced expulsion of ethnic Somalis in the northern part of the country.

In the case of several countries, the strongest U.S. criticisms of their human rights practices made in 1989 were contained in the Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in 1988. While issued in February 1989, during the first days of the Bush administration, the Country Reports were prepared entirely by the Reagan administration. The reports on Israel, Morocco and Turkey, for example, described serious abuses, but the Bush administration generally refused to repeat these criticisms publicly, while continuing to pump aid to those responsible for the abuses. With regard to Israel, despite a report of unprecedented candor, the administration used its efforts for a regional peace settlement as a pretext to avoid speaking out further on abuses in the occupied territories, where approximately 300 Palestinians were killed by Israeli forces and thousands more were detained for months without charge or trial during the second year of the intifada.

In similar fashion in Somalia, a specially commissioned State Department report described large-scale atrocities committed by government troops against the Isaak clan in the northern part of the country. But the administration sought $21 million in emergency aid for the Somali government, at a moment when abuses by government troops were at their height. Congress, to its credit, rejected the request, but the State Department's chief human rights officer, while acknowledging the abuses, publicly defended the appeal for emergency aid.

The administration's declared war on drug-trafficking has been waged with virtual indifference to human rights. In Colombia, the administration funneled millions of dollars to the military without making any visible attempt to undo the alliance between drug traffickers and military elements which has led to the killing of thousands of leftist politicians, union leaders, grass-roots organizers, journalists and human rights monitors. In Peru, the administration's drug-interdiction program in the Upper Huallaga valley led to increasing U.S. involvement in a counterinsurgency effort that has been marked by massacres and other violent abuses. In both countries as well as Bolivia, the administration successfully sought reversal of a ban in place since the 1970's against aiding police forces -- a ban which had worked well in keeping the United States from supporting police practices of torture, disappearance and execution.

There have been bright spots in the Bush administration's human rights policy. In Eastern Europe, the Bush administration modified the Reagan administration's policy of "differentiation" among Eastern European states according to which trade benefits were awarded primarily on the basis of foreign-policy distance from the Soviet Union rather than respect for human rights. The Reagan administration's policy toward Romania exemplified this approach: the Ceausescu government's maverick foreign policy earned it Most Favored Nation ("MFN") trade benefits while its ruthless human rights practices continued largely without interruption. That situation prevailed until 1988, when Romania renounced MFN benefits under Congressional human rights pressure. The Bush administration articulated a new policy of "differentiation" according to which economic and trade incentives are allocated not on the basis of foreign-policy differences with the Soviet Union but on the basis of political and economic reforms. Hungary and Poland are now major recipients of U.S. economic aid, and by the time of the overthrow of the Ceausescu regime in late December, Romania had become a virtual pariah state. The new "differentiation" thus provided an important incentive to reform in Eastern Europe.

Our main difference with this vastly improved approach toward Eastern Europe is that the Bush administration has been so preoccupied with promoting the emergence of elected governments that it has neglected the legal developments needed to secure and institutionalize basic freedoms. In an area of the world with little democratic tradition and often serious ethnic tensions, it is far from clear that the emergence of elected governments will in itself secure fundamental rights. The Bush administration should remain vigilant to the need for legislation to secure rights that today are still exercised only as a matter of governmental grace.

In South Africa, the Bush administration has begun a welcome break from the policies of its predecessor. It has called for an end to the state of emergency, the freeing of political prisoners and the abolition of various legislative pillars of apartheid -- and has backed these demands with a specific timetable for change. It has also been a less strident advocate of "constructive engagement" and a less vocal opponent of anti-apartheid sanctions. In an important symbolic act of support for the anti-apartheid movement, President Bush met with Albertina Sisulu, co-president of the restricted United Democratic Front.

In Burma (Myanmar), in the aftermath of the September 1988 crackdown on a pro-democracy movement, the administration played a constructive role in maintaining strong public pressure on the government. It protested the house arrest of leading opposition figures and noted that elections without their participation could not be free and fair. It confirmed reports of torture and resulting deaths, as well as the practice of forced portering of arms and ammunition for Burmese troops. And it suspended trade benefits under the Generalized System of Preferences and cautioned Japan not to renew aid.

Vice President Quayle contributed to human rights at the beginning of the term, although his support soon foundered. In a February visit to El Salvador, he urged top military commanders to bring to justice those responsible for the highly publicized army massacre of ten peasants in San Sebastián in September 1988 -- a move which led to a breakthrough in the case, the revelation of a prior cover-up, and the arrest of several soldiers, including two officers, for the murders. The visit called to mind the December 1983 visit to El Salvador by then Vice President Bush, in which he demanded that the Salvadoran armed forces put an end to the death squads.

That the Salvador visit did not signal a broad commitment by the Vice President to uphold human rights became clear during his Asia tour in May. In Indonesia, he praised the human rights practices of the repressive Suharto government. In South Korea, he vowed support for human rights in general terms without even mentioning the serious deterioration of Korean rights practices at the time of his visit. In Singapore, he left unrebutted the government's charge that he had no right to raise human rights violations. Even in El Salvador, on a return trip in June, the Vice President broke long-standing U.S. policy to meet with Roberto D'Aubuisson, the death-squad leader and mastermind of the 1980 murder of Archbishop Oscar Romero.

One notable and unfortunate development in 1989 was the Bush administration's downgrading of the State Department's Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs. Apart from its production of the generally more accurate Country Reports, the Bureau has increasingly assumed a role of public irrelevance. Richard Schifter, the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs held over from the Reagan administration, appears to have directed most of his energies toward the Soviet Union. Through January 1989 he had some important success in securing the release of political prisoners. Since then, however, with the concluding of the Vienna phase of the Helsinki review process, Assistant Secretary Schifter has adopted the policy of accommodation cited above, with the result that public commentary on rights violations in the Soviet Union has been drastically cut back and watered down. The Bureau made occasional public forays -- an attack on the obvious target of Cuba, the above-noted acknowledgment of abuses and defense of military aid in Somalia -- but in most of the world, it played no public role at all. While the Bureau may be more significant behind the scenes, it is unfortunate that the Bush administration has allowed this important post for publicly criticizing abusive governments to fall into such disuse.

The Bush administration's use of the United Nations to promote human rights has been as selective as that of the Reagan administration. The current administration continued its predecessor's single-minded preoccupation with Cuba before the U.N. Commission on Human Rights. While that focus brought a momentary and needed scrutiny of Cuban rights practices in 1988, it also helped undermine U.S. credibility before the Commission and, in the end, led in 1989 to the termination of U.N. pressure for an end to abuses in Cuba. In contrast to these efforts on Cuba, the Bush administration refused to join its European allies in sponsoring a critical resolution on Iraq, even though the Country Reports described Iraq's use of chemical weapons during 1988 against its civilian Kurdish population, as well as the government's practice of murder, extra-legal detention, torture and disappearance of political opponents. The administration ultimately voted against an Iraqi move to block the resolution, but the administration's failure to sponsor the resolution or support it actively helped contribute to its defeat. Nor did the administration give needed support to efforts to secure more rigorous U.N. scrutiny of Guatemala, despite serious abuses.

The Bush administration is formally reconsidering thirteen damaging reservations attached to the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment when President Reagan signed it in April 1988 and sent it to the Senate for consent to ratification. These reservations substantially eviscerate the Torture Convention by, among other things, redefining torture, introducing certain defenses for torturers and refusing to recognize the competence of the Committee Against Torture which monitors compliance with the Convention. We welcome the review and urge the administration to endorse the Convention without qualification.

In addition to the Torture Convention, five other key international human rights treaties have been signed by previous presidents and are awaiting consent to ratification by the Senate. These are: the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; the American Convention on Human Rights; the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women; and the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. Reservations attached to several of these are as damaging as those placed on the Torture Convention. We urge the Bush administration to reexamine these reservations as well and to urge the Senate to consider these important human rights instruments expeditiously and without qualification.

It is still early in the Bush term, so final judgments on the administration's human rights record would be premature. However, despite instances of forceful human rights advocacy by administration officials, it is discouraging that a worldwide review of the Bush administration's foreign policy in 1989 reveals such widespread indifference to human rights. It is all the more disappointing that such indifference came when a dramatic realignment of the world order created the opportunity for firmer positions on human rights. We urge President Bush to take steps to ensure a far more prominent role for human rights in the administration's foreign policy of 1990.

TAB = <T><T><T><T>January 2, 1990
INTRODUCTION TO THE WORK OF AFRICA WATCH

1989 was a year of dramatic political developments in Africa which were reflected, in a more modest way, in the work of Africa Watch.

This was Africa Watch's first full year of operation. In 1988, we had chosen southern Africa and the Horn of Africa as our two areas of priority, a choice which was vindicated by events in each region.

In southern Africa there were serious moves towards regional peace, culminating in early 1990 in concessions by the South African Government - the unbanning of nationalist organizations and the release of Nelson Mandela - which held out the prospect of genuine political change. Other regional developments received less attention in international circles but were equally significant. In November Namibia successfully held elections for a constituent assembly under United Nations supervision and seemed set to become independent in early 1990. Peace negotiations between the parties to the Angolan civil war did not proceed as fast as some had hoped when rebel leader Jonas Savimbi met President Jose Eduardo dos Santos in Gbadolite, Zaire, in June. But by the end of the year there were again hopes of an end to the conflict in the wake of the Namibian settlement.

Even more unexpectedly, there were serious hopes of an end to the armed conflict in Mozambique. Peace talks under the sponsorship of Presidents Moi of Kenya and Mugabe of Zimbabwe progressed slowly. However, political changes in South Africa raised the possiblility that it would finally withdraw support for the right-wing RENAMO rebels. The government of President Joaquim Chissano introduced constitutional changes which improved protection of human rights and appeared to make a political settlement more likely.

However, the generally optimistic picture in Africa's southern cone is offset by further deterioration in the Horn and East Africa. During 1989 the Somali Government's brutal war in the north extended throughout most of the country. In July government troops engaged in a campaign of political killings in the capital, Mogadishu. The Ethiopian Government clung desperately to power in the face of internal opposition and advances by rebel nationalist movements. An attempted coup in May was followed by widespread political detentions. The government continued to use control of food supplies as a means of exerting political control over large areas of the country.

Hopes of an end to the civil war in Sudan were dashed when the army seized power in June. The new government detained hundreds of critics in Khartoum, including members of the overthrown elected government, suppressed public criticism and reintroduced draconian Islamic punishments administered by summary military tribunals. In Kenya the release of political detainees in June was welcomed. However, the general pattern of autocratic rule continued unchanged. In April the government banned a critical news magazine and the press continued to be kept under tight control. Towards the end of the year the government launched a discriminatory screening exercise against citizens of ethnic Somali origin.

Detailed coverage of these and other developments was provided in three major Africa Watch reports on Angola, South Africa and Zimbabwe, followed by another in early 1990 on Somalia. However,the principal means of publishing rapid information on human rights developments was the News from Africa Watch newsletter, of which 28 were published between March and the end of the year. In some countries, such as Somalia, Sudan and Malawi, these newsletters became the principal source of information on human rights developments, and were widely quoted in the international press.

The flexibility of the newsletter format also enabled Africa Watch to report on developments in countries where it had not yet undertaken sustained work, including Mauritania, Liberia, Ghana and Tanzania.

The collapse of Communist rule in Eastern Europe will have potentially important consequences in Africa. The reform of the Mozambican constitution and, to a lesser extent, the new openness of the Angolan Government owe much to changes in the Communist world. In Zimbabwe, where the government proposes to move towards a one-party state, Africa Watch has published a report and engaged in a dialogue with the government on human rights protection. The increased mood of East-West cooperation is already bearing fruit in southern Africa. Similar progress is possible in the Horn, particularly in light of the dramatic scaling down of U.S. assistance to Somalia on human rights grounds and the fact that the Soviet Union appears to be pressing Ethiopia to adopt political solutions to the national conflicts which have wracked the country for 30 years.

Africa Watch testified before congressional committees on Somalia, Sudan, Liberia and Kenya, all of them important US allies in Africa, as well as Angola. Africa Watch urged an end to US aid to the Angolan rebel group UNITA, which was shown to have engaged in systematic abuses against the civilian population.

In 1989 much effort had to be devoted to consolidating the organization of Africa Watch. The London office was opened and a governing committee was formed. Africa Watch was granted observer status with the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights, which was established under the Organization of African Unity's African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights to investigate allegations of abuse. Aside from its work on individual countries, Africa Watch also attempted to stimulate debate in academic, legal and government circles on such issues as the appropriate means for government investigations of human rights violations and the punishment of human rights offenders.

The weakness of domestic human rights monitoring organizations in Africa increases the importance of a continent-wide human rights monitor. However, the need to defend individual human rights monitors faced with persecution has never been greater. This was a central focus of Africa Watch's work in 1989. In Sudan the author of a report on human rights abuses was arrested in July and still detained at the end of the year. An exiled Malawian journalist who had reported on human rights abuses was assassinated in a firebomb attack on his home in Zambia. In Ghana two senior Bar Association officials were detained when they tried to organize a seminar marking the seventh anniversary of the government-sponsored murder of three High Court judges. Later in the year the Ghanaian government banned an African Bar Association conference in Accra on human rights. These cases exemplify the problems faced byAfrican human rights monitors; all were the subject of Africa Watch action. Africa Watch's August report on South Africa documented the role of the churches in human rights monitoring and the repression they suffer as a result. A series of newsletters throught the year drew attention to the little-reported persecution of human rights monitors in the South African "homelands."

In its first year of operation Africa Watch won wide praise for the accuracy and timeliness of its reporting. However, the greatest credit must go to Africa's beleaguered and unsung human rights monitors. They are in the front line.

Rakiya Omaar

Executive Director

Africa Watch

MALAWI

In 1989 Malawi celebrated 25 years of independence. For all but the first few weeks of its independent existence, Malawi has been under the untrammelled and autocratic rule of Life-President Dr. Hastings Kamuzu Banda. Banda's regime has been marked by widespread political imprisonment, killings of political opponents and the suppression of free expression and intellectual life. Malawi has remained an extremely closed society - a sort of Central African Romania - about which little is known in the outside world. In April, President Banda initiated a wide-ranging purge of the government service to eliminate high-ranking officials from the north of the country. Banda, Cecilia Kadzamira, Banda's "hostess" and her uncle, John Tembo, the ruling triumvirate, are all Chewa-speakers from the Central Region and their rule has been characterized by periodic attacks on the Tumbuka-speakers from the northern region. A number of northerners who criticized these measures were arrested and detained without charge throughout the year. In April, we issued a News from Africa Watch documenting anti-northern discrimination, detentions and deaths of prisoners in custody. In May, Richard Carver published an article in the New Statesman and Society which highlighted the lack of political freedom and the price of Malawi's much-vaunted "stability": torture, imprisonment and ethnic discrimination. Also in May, Africa Watch wrote to the Pope urging him to raise human rights concerns during his forthcoming visit to Malawi.

September 1989 marked the second anniversary of the imprisonment of Jack Mapanje, Malawi's foremost poet. He was apparently detained because of the increasingly critical tone of his poetry, although he is not aligned with any of the exiled opposition groups. He remains imprisoned without charge at Mikuyu Prison. A News from Africa Watch in September reported his case in detail and sought to bring his case to international attention. The Congressional Friends of Human Rights Monitors protested his arrest and continued detention.

In October an exiled Malawian journalist in Zambia, Mkwapatira Mhango, was assassinated in a firebomb attack, along with several members of his family, including small children. It was widely believed that the Malawian Government was responsible. Mhango wrote critically on Malawi's human rights record for foreign publications and was a member of an exiled opposition party. Another News from Africa Watch was published to discuss the case.

In August Africa Watch approached the Malawian Government for its agreement to a mission visiting the country. The government eventually responded in December to say that Africa Watch could only visit if it was prepared to name the sources of its reports of human rights violations; Africa Watch replied that it would not breach that confidence under any circumstances. Earlier, President Banda denounced Africa Watch for "malicious reports" on Malawi.

SOMALIA

Somalia's deplorable human rights situation was a primary target of Africa Watch's effort in 1989. Widespread abuses by the government in the northern part of the country, which had been going on for years and increased dramatically when civil war broke out in May 1988, continued and spread to southern regions. Government forces committed a number of massacres of unarmed civilians in both the north and south, including an incident on July 14 in Mogadishu in which at least 450 were killed.

The Somali government, confronting a severe decline in foreign aid as a result of growing concern over its human rights record, launched a concerted campaign to improve its public image. The Prime Minister visited Washington in January. During a meeting with Aryeh Neier and Holly Burkhalter, he promised that the Somali government would grant permission for an Africa Watch mission; this promise was later rescinded. Shortly after this public relations blitz, the government announced a "reform" package, the only concrete measure of which has been the release of some 300 political prisoners between February and June. News From Africa Watch began publication with a discussion of the release of the first 21 prisoners. Additional editions of News From Africa Watch discussed such matters as women in prison; the findings of a report by the General Accounting Office, a Congressional watchdog on human rights in Somalia; the July massacre in Mogadishu; and a substantial update on human rights issues in September, through which Africa Watch was able to generate extensive international press coverage.

Holly Burkhalter testified on Somalia before Congress on three occasions; on Febrary 7, before the House Subcommittee on Foreign Operations; on March 9 before the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Africa; and on June 20 she testified before the House Banking Subcommittee on International Development Institutions and Finance. In August, Burkhalter published an op-ed in The New York Times criticizing the Administration's request for funds in the wake of the July massacre.

In August, Rakiya Omaar visited Djibouti to interview refugees for a lengthy report on the war in the North. It was published in January 1990, detailing government atrocities as well as abuses by the rebel forces. She also conducted numerous interviews within the large refugee community in England and Wales.

Because the wars raging in Somalia have forced hundreds of thousands to flee the country and seek refuge elsewhere, the ill-treatment of Somali refugees in neighboring countries was of major concern to us throughout the year. Some 30-40,000 northern Somalis have gone to Djibouti since May 1988, but the Djibouti government does not consider them "refugees," thereby denying them international protection. Ms. Omaar visited Djibouti in August andinterviewed scores of refugees. We issued a lengthy newsletter protesting the harassment, detention under harsh conditions, deportation and expulsion of refugees. Somalis fleeing into Kenya from the south have been detained or forcibly returned to Somalia. Africa Watch published two newsletters condemning the abuses they have suffered at the hands of Kenyan authorities.

SOUTH AFRICA

Given the extent of international attention to South Africa compared to black Africa, we decided in 1988 to limit ourselves to areas that we felt needed more attention, principally the situation in the "independent" homelands and the protection of human rights monitors. In August, Africa Watch published a 145 page report about the human rights work of the activist churches in South Africa and the resulting confrontation with the state. The report documented the cases of more than 100 clergy and church workers who have been detained since 1980, some for more than two years, and some of them severely tortured. It also detailed attacks against outspoken churches; and it brought to light the wide range of services offered to the victims. Following the assassination of human rights activist David Webster, Africa Watch published a newsletter both about the killing and the death squads in South Africa, the subject David Webster had been researching at the time of his killing.

Repression in South Africa is most intense in the nominally "independent" homelands which are isolated and under the autocratic rule of leaders dependent on and accountable to South African authorities. Their remote location, and the intense hostilities against human rights monitors has made it difficult even for the strong network of human rights groups in South Africa to document abuses and to support the victims. The only institution which has been able to play this role has been the church. To bring to international attention the gravity of the situation, Africa Watch issued a number of comprehensive newsletters. In August, Africa Watch published a newsletter about mass arrests of church activists in Venda; and in September an issue was devoted to the crackdown against communities resisting incorporation in Bophuthatswana. Africa Watch worked closely with Congressional staff in an effort to protect church and other groups active in the homelands.

SUDAN

Civil war has been raging in southern Sudan since 1983, killing hundreds of thousands of innocent victims by slaughter or starvation as both sides to the conflict pursue their political objectives without regard for the welfare of civilians. Millions of others have been forced to flee their homes and live as displaced persons under harsh conditions. Holly Burkhalter testified in Congress three times in an effort to highlight the conduct of the war and to urge Congress to intensify the pressure on the Administration to change its policy of supporting the government. Africa Watch also emphasized the need for the United States to use its influence in the international development banks to encourage human rights improvements in Sudan.

Democratic political forces rallied to promote the cause of peace; by the time of the June coup, a cease-fire was in place and peace negotiations were underway. A coup on June 30 brought an abrupt end to the peace process. The Revolutionary Command Council forNational Salvation (RCC), headed by Lt.-Gen. Omar Hassan Ahmad al Bashir, purged the judiciary, the army and the civil service, banned trade unions and any form of protest, silenced the press and detained several hundred political prisoners, including lawyers, academics, doctors, politicians, journalists and trade unionists. Special courts characterized by the complete absence of due process were formed to try civilians. These developments aroused massive popular protest against the military government which in turn provoked severe government reprisals.

The June coup happened just as Africa Watch embarked on a major report on Sudan, greatly impeding the gathering of information. The government denied our request to visit. That has not deterred us from making every effort to collect information and to defend those in Sudan who are taking enormous risks to record abuses. Since August, Africa Watch has published eleven issues of News From Africa Watch devoted to the escalating crisis in Sudan. The newsletters have covered such topics as the crackdown on press freedom, the dissolution of the secular independent judiciary, the arrest and continued detention of political prisoners, the abuses committed by pro-government militias, the use of starvation as a weapon of war and the massacre in Jebelin. Africa Watch's comprehensive report on Sudan will be published in March 1990.

ZIMBABWE

In December 1989, the two principal political parties - the ruling Zimbabwe African National Union (Patriotic Front) and the Zimbabwe African People's Union - held a joint congress, thus concluding a process of unification which had begun two years earlier. The unity agreement had led to the release of political detainees and an end to instability in Matabeleland, which had been the scene of serious abuses by both security forces and rebels. However, a number of members of the security forces imprisoned for human rights abuse were released under a presidential amnesty in 1988. In a comprehensive report published in October, Africa Watch criticized the government's failure to bring human rights violators to justice.

Richard Carver, visited Zimbabwe in April. He traveled to Matabeleland as well as to the eastern border area with Mozambique, where there have also been abuses by the Mozambique rebel group, RENAMO. He gathered evidence of illegal detention of Mozambicans by the Zimbabwean army. Carver met the Minister of Justice, Emerson Mnangagwa in Harare to express our concerns about the ill-treatment of Mozambican refugees. Later, Africa Watch engaged in correspondence with Home Affairs Minister Moven Mahachi about a number of security detainees; all but two had been released by year's end.

There was ferment of political debate in Zimbabwe in 1989, leading up to the party congress and general elections expected in early 1990. In April a new political party, the Zimbabwe Unity Movement (ZUM), was formed, although its freedom of action was severely circumscribed. Party members were detained and public meetings banned, and the government-owned newspapers, radio and television gave ZUM neither news coverage nor space for advertising. It appeared that President Mugabe intended to use the 1990 general elections as an effective referendum on the introduction of a one-party state. Africa Watch was concerned that if government muzzling of the opposition continued, there would not be a free election.

Throughout the year the government attempted to limit freedom of speech, including detaining a number of critics, breaking up a seminar at the university on government corruption and arresting student leaders. The leader of the national trade union federation was detained for six weeks after he issued a statement protesting the university closure. Africa Watch issued a series of newsletters throughout the year documenting and calling international attention to these developments.


INTRODUCTION TO THE WORK OF AMERICAS WATCH

In 1989 Americas Watch made an effort to monitor human rights in those countries that had not previously been the subject of our study in our nine years of operation. For the first time we sent fact-finding missions to investigate human rights in Mexico and Venezuela, and reports on those missions will be published in 1990. We also sent a separate mission to Mexico to look at prison conditions as part of the Prison Project of Human Rights Watch. We also sent two missions to the Dominican Republic, to monitor forced labor by Haitian cane cutters in the batey system, and we published a report on the subject jointly with the National Coalition for Haitian Refugees and Caribbean Rights. At the same time, we maintained our efforts in all the Central American, South American and Caribbean countries on which we had focused in previous years.

In 1989, Americas Watch continued to look into "endemic" abuses of human rights. We have investigated prison conditions and abusive police violence in several countries, and we have begun to look at the way rural violence takes place in different settings. In all cases, our focus is on the "institutional response" to each incident: tolerance of such abuses by the government (as by failure to prosecute), or active encouragement of violence, are often crucial factors.

Another concern of Americas Watch has been the proliferation of "private armies" or paramilitary groups. These have long played an important role in political violence in Central America. In Colombia, paramilitary groups directed by the drug cartels, but enjoying support from well-placed members of the military, have become by far the most important factor in the political violence, which in recent years has produced more deaths than in any other Latin American nation. This development has forced Americas Watch to take a closer look at the implications of the drug trade -- and of drug interdiction policies -- for human rights. The drug policy announced by President George Bush in September 1989, which relies largely on military solutions to the problem in four or five Latin American countries, has a potential for severe violations that may not have been adequately considered.

In connection with the offensive by the insurgents in El Salvador in November and December, Americas Watch again commented critically about the way American officials dealt with serious abuses committed by the Salvadoran government. We investigated the killings of the Jesuit priests at the scene within hours of the murders, gathered compelling circumstantial evidence implicating the Army, denounced efforts to exculpate the armed forces and were gratified when the pressure we helped to generate made it impossible for the Cristiani government to continue to deny the obvious. We are maintaining the pressure to try to see that all those responsible for these killings are prosecuted and punished.

We have continued to use international mechanisms as a means to seek redress for individuals, and as a forum. In 1989 the Inter-American Court of Human Rights issued a second decision against Honduras for disappearances. As in the previous case, we took part in representing the family of the victim. As a result of this case, we have been besieged by requests to undertake additional litigation and we are providing counsel to aid Latin American humanrights groups in twenty-five cases before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. We have obtained assistance from law students with internships in our offices, and are enlisting law firms to work with us on a pro bono basis. All the cases we work on raise important and novel issues of international law and policy.

As Latin America continues to evolve from military dictatorships to elected democracies, we find ourselves fighting a trend to ignore human rights violations if they take place under a government generally considered democratic. We recognize, of course, the advantages of an open and pluralistic political system in which a free press publicizes human rights abuses and where human rights activists may join monitoring organizations. Yet we also insist on applying the same standards regardless of the nature of the government, and on demanding that democratic institutions (courts, prosecutors, legislators, the Executive Branch) fulfill their duties to protect human rights. We fear that in many Latin American countries a superficial form of democracy is taking root. In such countries as Guatemala (to cite an extreme case) the forms of electoral democracy are practiced, while military rule and military terror remain the reality for much of the population, especially its Indian majority.

Our own vision of democracy which includes development of the institutional mechanisms to establish the rule of law and to undergird the voluntary associations that make up civil society, guides us in investing much effort to strengthen our links to the growing human rights movement in the continent. In the long run, we believe, human rights will be enjoyed by all only when civil society produces pluralistic, professional, highly respected free associations for the promotion and protection of fundamental freedoms; and when the legal system is capable of protecting all; and when no individual or class is exempt from prosecution and punishment for the crimes they commit.

Juan E. Méndez

Executive Director

Americas Watch

ARGENTINA

In January 1989, a small leftist group attacked a military unit in La Tablada, a suburb of Buenos Aires. In April, Juan E. Méndez conducted an inquiry focusing on complaints that the attackers who survived were mistreated, and that four or five were murdered after surrendering. Méndez published an article in The Miami Herald on La Tablada and a report was published as a News From Americas Watch. In conversations with officials of the administration of President Raúl Alfonsín, we called for a full investigation of the deaths. In a subsequent visit to Buenos Aires in September, we expressed concern to the new government of President Carlos Menem that the post-surrender killings were not being investigated properly.

In contacts with the Argentine government in New York and Washington, we opposed the planned presidential pardon of military leaders for the crimes of the "dirty war." Also, Aryeh Neier published an op-ed article in The New York Times calling attention to the purge of judges and prosecutors who had conducted the trialsof military officers. In October, President Menem pardoned all but six of the high-ranking officers responsible for those crimes. Further pardons have been anticipated, but have not taken place at this writing, possibly because of the criticism they aroused. In December, Board member Robert K. Goldman met in Buenos Aires with Justice Secretary César Arias to oppose pardons for the remaining defendants. He also pressed the need to investigate the murder of La Tablada attackers, and complained about disciplinary proceedings against prosecutors in important human rights cases. Those three items continue to be our major concerns as Argentina enters a new decade in the midst of economic and political uncertainty.

BRAZIL

Among the most apalling abuses in 1989 in Brazil was the February killing by suffocation of 18 inmates in a punishment cell in a Sao Paulo jail. Americas Watch alerted the U.S. press to this event and Stephen Kass traveled to Sao Paulo within days of the tragedy. During his trip, which attracted wide media attention, he visited the scene and met officials. Americas Watch has pursued this issue within the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the OAS.

In April, we published "Prison Conditions in Brazil." This report was translated into Portuguese and published by four Sao Paulo-based human rights organizations in September. The release of that report coincided with a trip to Brazil by Juan Mendez and Joanna Weschler who participated in a press conference and gave media interviews to publicize it.

While the September trip included a follow-up to the prison investigation -- the delegation also visited a jail in Sao Paulo with particularly bad conditions and reported the findings in a News From Americas Watch -- the main focus was on rural violence that is tolerated by the authorities. Mendez and Weschler traveled to Goiania, Brasilia and Rio de Janeiro to lay the groundwork for a major fact-finding effort in 1990.

CHILE

Americas Watch continued its concentration on Chile, monitoring the year of transition between the presidential plebiscite on October 5, 1988, and the presidential and parliamentary election of December 14, 1989. Two missions were sent to Chile: the first mission in August-September to investigate conditions leading up to the election; the second, at the time of the elections, to discuss accountability for past abuses with future political leaders. In addition to a critical analysis of the electoral process designed by the military regime and its limitations, a report published in November included information on the legal complications of the transition and ongoing severe -- though less frequent -- human rights abuses including political homicide, torture, woundings, beatings by official personnel, threats, violent and illegal house searches, lack of respect for due process, the internal exile of two labor leaders, and suppression of peaceful gatherings, among other abuses. The report also noted areas of improvement including greater tolerance of expression and the negotiation of constitutional reforms which were approved in a plebiscite on July 30.

One central issue of the transition has been the possibility of seeking truth and justice regarding the gross human rightsviolations of the Pinochet regime; Chile's military has amnestied itself for crimes committed between the day it seized power --September 11, 1973 -- and March 10, 1978, when the armed forces considered that the "internal war" stage of their government had been completed. General Augusto Pinochet has promised that the day even one of his men goes to trial, "the state of law will come to an end." Americas Watch policy on accountability stresses the primary importance of exposing the truth, while urging also that trials and punishments be sought for the highest level officers in charge of policies of gross abuses.

COLOMBIA

In April, Americas Watch published a comprehensive report, "The Killings in Colombia." It documented the dominant role in political violence of paramilitary groups led, trained, armed, recruited and financed by the Medellín Cartel; and that the multiple murders perpetrated by these groups are only possible because well-placed officers of the Colombian military provide them with intelligence, select targets and ensure impunity. The report also criticized the actions of military leaders in hampering investigations by courageous judges and prosecutors. Towards the end of the year, the report was published in Spanish in Colombia with the cooperation of two prestigious academic centers.

In July we published a News From Americas Watch on bold measures by the government of President Virgilio Barco to crack down on these groups, praising those measures, though we noted the lack of progress in disciplining accomplices of these groups in the Armed Forces. We believe that the murders of Judge Carlos Valencia and Senator and Presidential candidate Luis Carlos Galán in August were reprisals by the Medellín Cartel against Barco's measures. These murders, in turn, sparked the bloody "war" on the drug traffickers that took place between August and December 1989. Though costly to Colombian society, that war apparently disrupted some networks of drug traffic and placed the paramilitary groups on the defensive.

The Bush Administration's plans for Colombia emphasize the military component of the "war on drugs" and involve considerable aid to the Colombian Army. No effort has been made to ensure that the Army is cleansed of high-ranking officers in the provinces allied to the cartels in the fight against left-wing guerrillas, and accomplices of the paramilitary groups in their many massacres of suspected leftists.

CUBA

The emerging human rights community in Cuba suffered greatly in 1989. After allowing human rights monitors and other independent activists to function without reprisals from 1987 through the first half of 1988 -- when international scrutiny of Cuban rights practices was at its height -- the Cuban government began again to imprison peaceful activists in September 1988, at the time of the investigation in Cuba by the United Nations Commission on Human Rights. In January 1989, Americas Watch published an 111-page report, "Human Rights in Cuba: The Need to Sustain the Pressure" timed to coincide with UNCHR consideration of Cuba at its annual meeting in Geneva. On June 15, 1989, The New York Review of Books published "Cuba: The Human Rights Show" by Aryeh Neier on the failure of the U.S. government and the UNCHR to address effectivelythe human rights situation in Cuba.

Americas Watch launched numerous campaigns on behalf of imprisoned human rights monitors including those arrested for attempting to meet with the U.N. delegation; members of the nascent Asociación Pro Arte Libre; Human Rights Party members arrested during the April visit of Mikhail Gorbachev; and the August arrests of three human rights leaders. In July, an Americas Watch newsletter, "Human Rights Activists Behind Bars in Cuba," was issued shortly before the 36th anniversary of the 26 July revolutionary movement.

In October, the Cuban government turned down Americas Watch's request to observe the trial of three leading human rights monitors. Juan Méndez published a letter about the denial in The New York Review of Books on December 7, 1989.

Kenneth Roth testified on Cuba before the House Subcommittees on Western Hemisphere Affairs and Human Rights and International Organizations. Mary Jane Camejo spoke on human rights at a conference on "Thirty Years of the Cuban Revolution," in Halifax, Nova Scotia in November. The Washington Post published an op-ed by Neier, "Cuba Follows China," on August 22, 1989.

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

In 1989, Americas Watch began to investigate forced labor by Haitian sugar cane cutters on Dominican state-run sugar plantations. Together with the National Coalition for Haitian Refugees and Caribbean Rights, in November we published a report on the "bateys": "Haitian Cane Cutters in the Dominican Republic."

The report is based on two fact-finding missions to the D.R. in April and June 1989 and two fact-finding missions to Haiti in June and October 1989. Participants in the missions to the D.R. included Maryse Fontus, Stephen Kass and Marina Kaufman for Americas Watch; Caleb Morales de León of Caribbean Rights (CR); and Jocelyn McCalla of the National Coalition for Haitian Refugees (NCHR). Participants in the missions to Haiti included Fontus, Kenneth Roth, Mary Jane Camejo, Anne Fuller of NCHR and Michael McCormack of CR.

In 1989, the U.S. Trade Representative accepted for review a petition filed by Americas Watch challenging abuses of labor rights by the Dominican government's State Sugar Council (CEA). Americas Watch seeks to pressure the U.S., the Dominican Republic's largest trading partner and consumer of sugar, to use its leverage to curb Dominican government abuses.

EL SALVADOR

1989 was a watershed year in El Salvador, as in much of the world. In June Alfredo Cristiani became president, thus giving the ARENA party, which has long been linked to paramilitary death squads, control of all three branches of government. In November, FMLN guerrillas launched their most powerful and sustained military attack of the decade. Americas Watch worked in El Salvador throughout the offensive to document the killing of civilian non-combatants and the marked deterioration of human rights conditions -- including the Army slaying of six Jesuit priests and two women on November 16.

Americas Watch produced two reports on the offensive, "Carnage Again" (November 24) and "Update on El Salvador" (December 16), which highlighted the collapse of political space and the worsening human rights climate. In 1989, Americas Watch also produced twonewsletters on El Salvador, "Human Rights on the Eve of the Elections" (March) and a September News From Americas Watch on the detention of soldiers involved in the 1988 massacre of ten peasants in San Sebastian.

In March Americas Watch filed another petition with the U.S. Trade Representative, asking that El Salvador's trade benefits be reviewed on labor rights grounds. Once again, the USTR refused to review the petition, which documented a pattern of killings, abductions and other abuses against workers in El Salvador.

A December op-ed article by Peter Bell in the Los Angeles Times focused attention on political developments in the aftermath of the battle for San Salvador. Testimony by Aryeh Neier in June before the Senate Subcommittee on Immigration and by Holly Burkhalter in July before the House Subcommittees on Western Hemisphere Affairs and Human Rights further spotlighted violations.

The information for the publications and testimony was based on day-to-day fact-finding in El Salvador conducted by the office Americas Watch has maintained there for the past five years. Jemera Rone, James Goldston and Robert Weiner conducted these investigations.

GUATEMALA

Americas Watch continued to monitor closely the worsening human rights situation during President Vinicio Cerezo's fourth year in office. Robert O. Weiner traveled to Guatemala in January to investigate the November 1988 massacre of 22 peasants in El Aguacate. Our findings were published in a February report which took issue with the government's story blaming guerrillas. Although not conclusive, our report described evidence suggesting army involvement.

Throughout the year, particular attention was paid to the increasing military campaign against the nation's independent human rights institutions, which were buffeted by a wave of killings, disappearances, threats, grenade attacks, and other persecution. A report about the nation's first rural human rights group, Persecuting Human Rights Monitors: The CERJ in Guatemala,1 was issued following a mission by Jean-Marie Simon and Kenneth Anderson.

Racquel Ackerman, Marina Kaufman, Anne Manuel and Ken Roth traveled to Guatemala in April to press our concerns with officials and to investigate continuing abuses. Other fact-finding visits were conducted by Weiner and by James A. Goldston. A comprehensive report is going to press at this writing. Other publications during 1989 included two issues of News From Americas Watch, "Guatemala: Labor Activist Murdered as Rights Abuses Deepen," and "Guatemala: Renewed Violence Against Students."

Throughout the year, Americas Watch conducted case work on behalf of victims of violent abuses in Guatemala. In February hearings before the House Subcommittee on Foreign Operations, Juan E. Méndez testified about human rights in Central America, with special emphasis on Guatemala.

HAITI

Americas Watch the National Coalition for Haitian Refugees (NCHR) and Caribbean Rights (CR), published a 126-report, "The More Things Change ... Human Rights in Haiti" in February 1989. The report covers abuses in 1988 under the successive governments of Gen. Henri Namphy, Leslie Manigat, and the current president Gen. Prosper Avril. It portrays increasingly open and brutal repression. Unfortunately, the situation deteriorated further later in the year.

In September, Americas Watch and NCHR issued a 15-page newsletter, "Human Rights in Haiti, One Year Under General Prosper Avril" which described recent attacks on opposition groups and political parties, the press, and the campaign of "insecurity."

In September/October, Americas Watch joined three other organizations in a mission to Haiti. Participants were Kenneth Roth and Mary Jane Camejo; Anne Fuller of NCHR; Michael McCormack of CR; and Adama Dieng of the International Commission of Jurists. The delegation met with Gen. Avril and other military and police officials; human rights monitors; opposition political leaders; and with popular organizations in the Artibonite Valley, the Jean Rabel region and Petit and Grand Goave. A follow-up mission took place in January 1990. A report based on the October and January missions was published in February 1990.

Kenneth Roth testified on Haiti before the House Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere Affairs in March 1989.

HONDURAS

The human rights situation remained troubling in Honduras, with perennial issues of torture, selective repression, and impunity dominating our concerns. In July 1989, we published an 83-page report, Honduras: Without the Will, which received wide publicity in Honduras.

Our efforts in support of families suing the government of Honduras in the Inter-American Court of Human Rights were rewarded with a January 1989 decision holding the government responsible for the 1982 disappearance of Saúl Godínez Cruz. The decision reiterated precedent-setting findings of the Court the year before, when Honduras was also held responsible for the disappearance of Angel Manfredo Velásquez Rodríguez.

In July, the Court awarded substantial damages to the families of the victims. When the October 1989 deadline for payment passed without compliance, Americas Watch wrote to the delegates to the General Assembly of the Organization of American States calling on them to press Honduras to pay. The government of Honduras responded that it had requested a special budget line to pay these damages but Congress adjourned in December without discussing it. In December 1989 and in February 1990, the Inter-American Commission of Human Rights, at our request, asked the Court to demand immediate payment. At this writing, the government has not paid.

MEXICO

In 1989, for the first time, Americas Watch directed sustained attention to Mexico. Research on Mexico is being coordinated through the Los Angeles office because of its proximity to Mexico and the close historic, ethnic and economic ties California has to its neighbor to the south.

In July, Ellen Lutz and Juan Méndez made a preliminary visit to Mexico City to identify key issues for future research. They met with numerous officials, representatives of Mexican human rights groups, lawyers and journalists. Concerns were raised about torture of detainees by police, rural violence and killings and other violence related to elections, and about the legacy of past violations, including some 500 unsolved disappearances.

In October, Ellen Lutz and Nan Aron participated in the first of two trips to visit prisons. With the cooperation of the Mexican government the team visited seven functioning prisons and one under construction. They uncovered a wealth of problems, which are worst in municipal and district jails, but pervade the entire prison system. A second visit is planned in early 1990.

NICARAGUA

The main concern of Americas Watch in 1989 was to document a pattern of killings by the security forces in remote areas of the countryside. After several fact-finding missions to the regions of Jinotega and Matagalpa by Jemera Rone we informed the government of our findings and, in April, we released a News from Americas Watch that discussed the cases we had documented. In May and June we reported several additional cases to the government. In August, the government reported to us on some investigations and, in a few cases, punishment that had taken place as a result of our inquiries. In October we published a full report, detailing the investigations that had taken place. We also noted that we had heard no new reports of such incidents after May or June 1989, though we cannot say whether the practice stopped.

In September, Stephen Kass, Juan Mendez and Maria Fonseca conducted a comprehensive visit of prisons, jails and detention centers throughout Nicaragua. Until then, visits to the security jails (DGSE) had been forbidden to us and to other human rights organizations, except on an occasional basis. We published a report that established the number of prisoners held for security reasons in Nicaragua, and that refuted the allegation by the U.S. State Department and others that prisoners are held in clandestine detention centers.

PANAMA

Americas Watch viewed the general elections planned for May 1989 in Panama as a crucial event in determining that country's future course. We sent two lawyers, David Nachman and Robert O. Weiner, to assess the human rights situation on the elections' eve. The results were published in a News From Americas Watch prior to the elections. We pointed out serious constraints on freedom of expression, intimidation of voters and activists, and opportunities for fraud. We also took issue with a U.S. covert operation to fund the opposition, stating that hidden funding in an electoral context is susceptible to misuse.

Following the December 20, 1989 U.S. invasion of Panama, Juan E. Méndez and Kenneth Anderson conducted a mission to examine violations of the laws of war by both sides during the conflict. Their findings will be published in 1990.

PARAGUAY

In February, General Andrés Rodríguez overthrew the 34-year-old dictatorship of General Alfredo Stroessner, promising full respectfor human rights and democracy. Given his past support for the despot and his reputation as a drug king, Rodríguez was eager to legitimize his rule, which he was able to do in a landslide victory in May elections. Americas Watch sent a March mission of Tom Farer, Paulo Sergio Pinheiro and Patricia Pittman to investigate pre-electoral conditions. The findings were published in English and Spanish a few days before the elections. The report applauded the new press freedoms, but expressed concern that the election date had given the opposition little time to prepare, that the electoral junta was controlled by the ruling Colorado Party and that an atmosphere of intimidation continued in the countryside.

Americas Watch continues to monitor continued abuse of peasant squatters by the military and police; interference with organizing and peaceful protest by labor unions; and death threats to witnesses and lawyers in trials involving human rights abuses by former police officials.

PERU

In 1989, disappearances in the emergency zone increased to almost double the average of the last several years. In addition, counter-insurgency campaigns have spread beyond the Southern Andes to the jungle and urban areas as well. An attempt by opposition congressmen to investigate the paramilitary group, "Comando Rodrigo Franco" (CRF), responsible for many murders and threats in 1988 and 1989, turned up information on connections with some top military leaders and civilian authorities, but in the absence of official cooperation failed to prove governmental involvement. Nonetheless, the scrutiny resulted in a marked decrease in the group's actions.

The guerrilla groups Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path) and Movimiento Revolucionario Tupac Amaru (MRTA) increased their activity considerably in 1989, and were responsible for the largest number of violations of the laws of war. Sendero resorted repeatedly to targeted killings of civilian authorities; MRTA only occasionally engaged in targeted murders, but frequently used explosives that endangered innocent lives.

The Bush Administration's drug interdiction policy caused concern because it includes military aid and advisors for the Peruvian armed forces and police in the jungle areas where the drug traffic coexists with Sendero Luminoso. Administration spokespersons have frequently acknowledged that this is, in effect, a counter-insurgency program; yet no effort has been made to disassociate American forces from the severe abuses against civilians committed by the Peruvian forces in the fight against Sendero since 1982.

URUGUAY

On April 16, 1989, Uruguayans went to the polls to vote yes or no on a law amnestying Uruguay's armed forces and police for their crimes of murder, torture and disappearance during the 1973-1985 military regime. The law was upheld, but with 47 percent of the population voting against it.

A few weeks before the plebiscite Americas Watch published "Challenging Impunity," which analyzed the law's history and the ways it violates Uruguay's international legal obligations. The report also recounted the story of the citizen's movement led by human rights activists and victims of abuse which had brought the challenge to the law. An article in The Nation by Robert K. Goldmanand Cynthia Brown offered a summary of the report's findings.

Subsequently, Americas Watch joined with a Uruguayan human rights group, Instituto de Estudios Legales y Sociales del Uruguay (IELSUR), in challenging the effects of the impunity law before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the OAS.

1 CERJ is the acronym, partly in Spanish and partly in Quiché, of the Council of Ethnic Communities "We Are All Equal."
INTRODUCTION TO THE WORK OF ASIA WATCH

Human rights in Asia suffered one setback after another in 1989. The peaceful Chinese democracy movement was crushed, leaving as many as 1000 dead and tens of thousands to be arrested throughout the year. Civilians in Afghanistan and Sri Lanka suffered appalling carnage as both governments and opposition groups violated the laws of war. With far fewer casualties than those countries but ongoing human rights violations by both sides, the conflict in the Philippines was no closer to resolution. The Khmer Rouge appeared to be growing stronger in Cambodia. The leaders of Burma (Myanmar) tortured pro-democracy detainees and arrested key leaders of the opposition. State repression of basic civil liberties continued to characterize Indonesia, Singapore and Nepal. The process of political liberalization in South Korea was cut short with a crackdown on alleged leftists and over 1000 arrests, including many peaceful advocates of reunification with the North. Around the region, with few exceptions, the human rights picture was unremittingly grim.

Asia Watch worked on more countries in Asia than ever before in 1989, with much of its efforts and resources devoted to China. Before June 4, we worked with Chinese human rights groups in this country to support the efforts of Professor Fang Lizhi to draw attention to political prisoners in China. After the crackdown, we issued regular updates on arrests and executions and undertook a major campaign to urge American trade unions, teachers' federations, bar associations and other groups to take up the cases of individual detainees. We took a strong stance in favor of economic sanctions and pressured the Bush administration to take a less conciliatory stance toward China. The combination of documentation, campaigning and lobbying became a model of what we would like to do on other countries in the region.

We put a high priority on building ties with human rights organizations in the region. Research associate Patricia Gossman travelled through India in March to assess the needs, priorities and concerns of local groups. Fact-finding missions to the Philippines and Indonesia and trial observations in Taiwan and Singapore reinforced ties with domestic human rights monitors, and communication with groups in Korea remained close.

We continued to produce reports and bulletins which received wide circulation throughout the United States, Europe and Asia. We published comprehensive reports on Indonesia, Singapore and Nepal, a short report on Khmer Rouge abuses along the Thai-Cambodian border, and 16 issues of News from Asia Watch on topics ranging from death marches in Burma to restrictions on civil liberties in Taiwan. Newspapers in Asia routinely picked up our press releases, helping serve notice to repressive governments in the region that their actions were being closely monitored in the United States.

The press was one means of alerting offending governments to the fact that they were under observation; we also held direct talks with government officials, through embassy visits and in the course of travel to the region. Following the trip to the Philippines where we raised several cases of human rights violations with the Deputy Chief of Staff for Civil-Military Relations, the latter fired off a letter to the relevant regional commanders saying,"Desire immediate investigation of the aforementioned cases. Asia Watch is one of three human rights monitors which commands credibility in the US bureaucracy, hence prompt action is necessary to preempt possible foreign media and human rights monitors action." This is precisely the reaction we hope to elicit from all governments.

The loss of Washington Director Eric Schwartz to the staff of Congressman Stephen Solarz was a major blow, but with the help of Holly Burkhalter, Washington Director of Human Rights Watch, we maintained a strong presence on Capitol Hill, especially with regard to China, Burma and South Asia.

The work of Asia Watch centered around several main themes during the year. Freedom of expression was a major focus throughout the region. Without taking any political position, we argued that people had the right under the Universal Declaration of Human Rights to espouse "bourgeois liberal" themes in China; to advocate independence in Tibet; to support independence for Taiwan; to urge reunification of the two Koreas; to challenge the state ideology, Pancasila, in Indonesia or the party-less panchayat system of government in Nepal; or to advocate political and social change in Singapore. In the Philippines, Cambodia and Afghanistan, we looked at violations of the laws of war and called on all parties to these conflicts to observe the Geneva Conventions. And in Burma, China, Sri Lanka, Korea, Indonesia, Singapore, Malaysia and Nepal, we called for the repeal of emergency or national laws permitting lengthy or indefinite detention on vaguely defined national security grounds.

Sidney Jones

Executive Director

Asia Watch

AFGHANISTAN

In February, Asia Watch published an update, "Policies of the Pakistani Military toward the Afghan Resistance: Human Rights Implications." The report described indiscriminate attacks on cities by resistance forces, and efforts by the Pakistani military, in conjunction with certain resistance parties, to exclude other Afghan groups from playing any part in the political process. In March, board member Barnett Rubin briefed Congressional staff and NGO representatives on human rights conditions following the Soviet withdrawal.

In June, an op-ed by Patricia Gossman on the role of the Pakistani military in Afghanistan was published in The Christian Science Monitor, to coincide with the visit to the U.S. of Pakistan's Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto.

In November Asia Watch released an update, "Human Rights Abuses by Elements of the Afghan Resistance." The report focused on politically-motivated killings of relief workers and refugee intellectuals, summary executions of prisoners, and indiscriminate attacks on civilian targets.

CAMBODIA

In February, Asia Watch produced its first report on the Cambodian conflict, "Khmer Rouge Abuses along the Thai-Cambodian Border," which documented the human rights violations by the Khmer Rouge in the camps they administer along the border areas. The reportdiscussed the forced removal of civilians, summary executions, forced labor and portering, cruel and inhuman treatment and the denial of basic medical care. In December a delegation went back to the border areas to document human rights violations by all the resistance factions. A report will be produced early in 1990.

CHINA AND TIBET

China was a major focus of Asia Watch's work even before the student-led democracy movement was crushed. In February, Asia Watch issued a news release criticizing President Bush's failure to raise human rights issues during his visit to Beijing, especially after Chinese authorities prevented Professor Fang Lizhi from attending a dinner to which Mr. Bush had invited him.

On March 8, another Asia Watch news release condemned the killings by Chinese police of at least 11 demonstrators in Lhasa, Tibet after demonstrations on March 5, 6, and 7. The demonstrations were followed by the imposition of martial law which was still in place by the end of the year.

Later the same month, the tenth anniversary of the arrest of the Democracy Wall activist Wei Jingsheng became the occasion for a public evening co-sponsored by Asia Watch, the American chapter of PEN, and Human Rights in China. A News From Asia Watch issued at the time endorsed the appeal of Chinese intellectuals including Professor Fang Lizhi for an amnesty for all political prisoners.

In early May Sidney Jones joined Orville Schell and Liu Baifang in going to Beijing to talk with many of those involved in the pro-democracy demonstrations, then at their height.

Asia Watch acted immediately to condemn the June 3-4 massacre of civilians in Beijing, issuing an open letter to President Bush on June 4 calling on him to impose severe diplomatic and economic sanctions against the Deng Xiaoping government for its actions.

Asia Watch China specialist Robin Munro was in Tiananmen Square as the tanks came in, and his eyewitness account of the assault was subsequently published in Human Rights Watch newsletter, providing a rare source of reliable information on the democracy movement's final hours.

From New York, Washington and Hong Kong, Asia Watch began intensive monitoring of the repression as it unfolded and of the U.S. government's response. We issued both regular updates on the arrests of pro-democracy activists throughout China and a series of more detailed prisoner profiles. One of the prisoners featured was Han Dongfang, leader of the Beijing Workers Autonomous Federation; Chinese and Polish versions of Han's profile were distributed worldwide, and Lech Walesa used the document to publicize the plight of China's independent labor movement at the annual Robert F. Kennedy Human Rights Award ceremony in Washington in November.

In an effort to familiarize Americans with the cases of those arrested, volunteers for Asia Watch wrote to every American sister city organization with a Chinese partner, every bar association in the country and more than 600 trade unions. In July, a concert to benefit work on human rights in China was co-sponsored by Asia Watch and the Foundation for Chinese Democracy. A full-page advertisement in the New York Times also drew attention to the arrests of prominent dissidents. In an effort to draw the businesscommunity into a discussion of ethical dimensions of doing business in China after the crackdown, Asia Watch prepared a draft set of principles for companies working in China.

Holly Burkhalter became one of the most vocal advocates of sanctions against China on Capitol Hill. Aryeh Neier testified on China in August before the Asia and Human Rights Subcommittees of the House Foreign Affairs Committee.

Another important response by Asia Watch to the China crisis was to set up a branch office in Hong Kong. This enabled us to tap the extensive information-gathering network in Hong Kong and facilitated our work on behalf of pro-democracy activists who escaped there after June 4.

The New York office of Asia Watch acted as an intermediary with donors to get financial assistance to a number of Chinese students, scholars and writers who were stranded without funds in the U.S. or Hong Kong after the crackdown. We also embarked on a program to translate into Chinese the writings of key members of Eastern European democracy movements.

In November, Asia Watch issued an urgent appeal to Premier Li Peng to halt plans for the execution of Tibetan monk Tseten Norgye, arrested in April 1989 for peaceful political activities. The arrests, trials and sentences of Tibetan activists were regularly reported in Asia Watch's updates on China.

INDIA

In 1989, Asia Watch concentrated on building links to Indian human rights organizations. In March, Patricia Gossman travelled to India where she met with human rights groups in Delhi, Bombay, Chandigarh, Madras and Hyderabad. She also met with Indian journalists and editors, who are now receiving Asia Watch reports regularly. (Asia Watch's reports on Afghanistan, Burma, Nepal and Sri Lanka have received wide coverage in the Indian press.)

In December, David Rothman travelled to Delhi and Bombay to meet with lawyers and human rights activists to prepare a planned Prison Watch report on Indian prisons. A fact-finding mission is scheduled for October 1990.

INDONESIA AND EAST TIMOR

Over 100 political trials took place in Indonesia in 1989; security forces continued, quite literally, to get away with murder; torture and physical abuse of detainees under interrogation was commonplace; and people suspected of having links more than 20 years ago to the banned Indonesian Communist Party continued to face persecution and discrimination. Freedom of opinion and expression continued to be tightly controlled, and hundreds of arrests in East Timor were cause for alarm.

In March, a News from Asia Watch, "Violence In Lampung, Indonesia," urged a public investigation into a military assault on a religious school in February in Lampung, Sumatra. As many as 100 civilians may have been killed. Muslim radicals at the school had taken a military officer hostage and later murdered him, but Asia Watch believed the military used excessive force and caused unnecessary civilian deaths in its assault.

Asia Watch sent a human rights briefing to Vice-President Quayle prior to his visit to Jakarta in early May. In early June, as President Suharto prepared to visit Washington, Asia Watch wrotePresident Bush, urging him to raise human rights issues. These issues, ranging from political prisoners to torture, were outlined in a June 1 News from Asia Watch.

In August, Asia Watch submitted a petition on human rights abuses in East Timor to the United Nations Special Committee on Decolonization, and in November, a joint Asia Watch-Prison Watch mission of Betty Vorenberg, James Vorenberg and Sidney Jones visited Indonesia to look at prison conditions. Bishop Paul Moore visited East Timor on behalf of Asia Watch to gather information on abuses there. A report on Indonesia was scheduled for early 1990.

MALAYSIA

Asia Watch continued to monitor human rights in Malaysia throughout 1989. In April, the last two detainees of the original 106 political activists arrested in late 1987 under the Internal Security Act (ISA) were released, and post-release restrictions on other detainees were later dropped. While welcoming these developments, Asia Watch was concerned about an amendment to the ISA in June which effectively eliminated judicial review.

In March, Asia Watch briefed a congressional delegation going to Malaysia. In December, Asia Watch publicly condemned the Malaysian government's "push-off" policy in dealing with boatloads of Vietnamese asylum-seekers. Since May, over 2,500 Vietnamese in more than 40 boats were reportedly forced from Malaysian territorial waters. At least four are known to have died as a result. Many more may have died at sea.

NEPAL

In September, Asia Watch released a comprehensive 104 page report on Nepal, based on a mission to the country undertaken by Jack Greenberg, Deborah Greenberg and Ingrid Kircher. The report describes a pattern of repression against government critics, restrictions on freedom of expression and assembly, and the routine torture of prisoners. The report received widespread coverage in the Nepali and Indian press. Shortly after release of the report, Patricia Gossman participated in a briefing for the new U.S. Ambassador to Nepal.

PHILIPPINES

The conflict in the Philippines between the military and the guerrilla New People's Army (NPA) resulted in violations of humanitarian law by both sides. Armed groups linked to the military were also responsible for disappearances and extrajudicial executions during the year.

Asia Watch sent a fact-finding mission of Sidney Jones and Jemera Rone to Manila and four provinces -- Zamboanga del Norte, Kalinga-Apayao, Negros Occidental and Quezon -- in September to investigate violations of the laws of war. A report was expected in early 1990.

Three issues of News from Asia Watch were issued on the Philippines during the year. One urged an investigation into the death of human rights lawyer Oscar Tonog in Samar. A second called attention to the killings in Mindanao of a Catholic priest and a Protestant minister active on human rights issues and the disappearance of a local left-wing politician, Carlos Vina, after his abduction by armed men. (He later re-appeared and is not in custody.) Men linked to the military or official paramilitary organization CAFGU werebelieved responsible for all three incidents. In a third bulletin, issued in June, Asia Watch called on the Philippines government to condemn death threats against human rights activists in Negros Occidental following their statements protesting the forced eviction of thousands of villagers during a military operation. CAFGU members were reported to have been responsible for the threats. Asia Watch wrote directly to the commander of that operation as well as to the governor of Negros Occidental, the Secretary of Defense in Manila, and the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, urging that the threats be investigated and the perpetrators punished.

In November, during President Aquino's visit to the United States, Asia Watch circulated a briefing on human rights issues in the Philippines to members of Congress.

SINGAPORE

In 1989 the Singapore government amended the Internal Security Act (ISA), extended both the detention orders of political detainees Teo Soh Lung and Vincent Cheng and the restrictions on the ex-detainees who had been arrested in a government clampdown on dissent in May and June 1987, and continued its attacks on the international press.

In April, Asia Watch initiated an international appeal for the release of Teo and Cheng, and the lifting of restrictions on the ex-detainees. Some 150 legislators from seven nations signed the cable to Singapore's Home Affairs Minister. Working with Asia Watch, 26 Members of Congress wrote to Vice President Dan Quayle urging him to press human rights issues during his September visit to Singapore.

Chia Thye Poh, detained without charge or trial for 22 years, was transferred from prison in May and confined to the small island of Sentosa under strict restrictions. Ken Roth visited Chia in July and wrote an article describing his detention, "Exile in Disneyland," for the Far East Economic Review (September 7, 1989). Throughout the year, Asia Watch carried on a running debate with the Singapore government in the letters column of the Review.

In September, Asia Watch published a 120 page report, Silencing All Critics: Human Rights Violations in Singapore. A month later a News from Asia Watch updated the cases of Teo and Cheng. Both detainees filed habeas corpus petitions and Allison Conner observed Teo Soh Lung's final habeas corpus hearing in November for Asia Watch.

In late December, Asia Watch condemned the Singapore government's decision to bring criminal contempt of court charges against the editor, publishers, printers, and distributors of the Asian Wall Street Journal.

Other efforts during the year included:

* initiating a congressional letter, signed by 30 members of Congress, to Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew protesting the extension of the detention orders on Cheng and Teo.

* briefing members of Congress before meetings with Singaporean officials.

SOUTH KOREA

The government of President Roh Tae Woo began a crackdown in April on "leftists." Hundreds were arrested and thousands of publicationswere seized from publishing houses and bookstores. By year's end, the number of political prisoners was over 1,000, many arrested for peacefully advocating reunification. Asia Watch efforts to publicize human rights abuses elicited a statement in Washington in October from President Roh, quoted in the Washington Post, specifically denying Asia Watch's allegations.

In February, 41 members of Congress working with Asia Watch sent a letter to President Bush urging him to raise the case of some four dozen elderly men detained during the Korean War who were being held following the expiration of their sentences.

Two issues of News from Asia Watch, in July and September, focused on the arrests of senior editors, journalists and other prominent dissident figures. In August, Asia Watch sent a letter to President Roh deploring continuing arrests of peaceful dissidents and reunification advocates. Before Vice-President Quayle's trip to Seoul in September, members of Congress, again working closely with Asia Watch, wrote President Bush urging that Mr. Quayle raise human rights issues. Asia Watch wrote a similar letter to the Pope during his highly publicized trip to South Korea the same month. These efforts were widely reported in the Korean press.

SRI LANKA

Human Rights conditions in Sri Lanka, already among the worst in Asia, deteriorated dramatically in 1989. By year's end, as many as 30,000 people had been killed, the vast majority of them civilians executed by government-backed death squads or by guerrilla forces.

In testimony before the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Foreign Operations in March, Asia Watch urged that foreign assistance to Sri Lanka be conditioned upon progress on human rights, and in particular upon Sri Lanka Government willingness to permit access to the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). International pressure on this issue paid off when the government granted the ICRC access to the south on October 9.

In July, Asia Watch issued an update, "Emergency Reimposed as Killings Continue," describing mass arrests and disappearances under the state of emergency, and the upsurge in political killings of human rights lawyers by death squads. In consultation with Asia Watch, the American Bar Association issued several appeals on the death squad killings of human rights lawyers.

A September press release on the massacre of 51 Tamil civilians by Indian forces and an update on reprisal killings of civilians by death squads and by Sinhalese militants received wide coverage in the Sri Lankan and Indian press. Following release of these reports, the Embassy of Sri Lanka requested a meeting with Asia Watch, at which Sidney Jones and Patricia Gossman raised concerns about Sri Lanka's Indemnity Act (which provides indemnity for security forces who have committed human rights violations), access for the ICRC and death squad killings.

TAIWAN

Asia Watch continued to monitor and publicize restrictions on freedom of expression, especially freedom to advocate Tawianese independence. We protested limits on the freedoms of assembly and association which were particularly apparent prior to national elections on December 2.

In April, Asia Watch cabled President Lee, expressing concern atthe death of Cheng Nan-rong, publisher of Freedom Era Weekly, who killed himself to escape arrest. The authorities had accused him of sedition because he published a draft constitution for an independent Taiwan.

In August, Asia Watch wrote to the Minister of the Interior expressing concern over a new Civic Organizations Law that denies the right to legal status to organizations using "Taiwan" in their names without following it by "Republic of China." Several organizations, including some human rights groups, refused to register, thereby risking dissolution by the government, a fine, or imprisonment.

In September, Timothy Gelatt attended a trial of a member of the opposition Democratic Progressive Party, arrested in connection with a demonstration in 1987 to protest the enactment of the National Security Law. The court did not allow the defendant, Dr. Hong Chi-Chang, to call witnesses, and Asia Watch protested that action.

Prior to the election on December 2, a News from Asia Watch analyzed how restrictions on civil liberties might impede democratic participation. James Feinerman testified for Asia Watch at a hearing on the elections held by the House Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs.

VIETNAM

In August, Asia Watch issued a News From Asia Watch, "Vietnam: Update on Prisoner Cases," providing information on the three Tran brothers arrested for trying to report on human rights conditions in Vietnam. In September, Asia Watch wrote to Vietnamese authorities welcoming the release of one of the Tran brothers but expressed concern about the continuing detention of Tran Vong Quoc, whose health has deteriorated markedly in prison.
INTRODUCTION TO THE WORK OF HELSINKI WATCH

No one would have predicted the succession of miracles that

transformed Eastern Europe in l989. As the world watched with incredulity, European communism collapsed in one country after another -- Poland, Hungary, East Germany, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia and, at year's end, Romania. Communist systems that were considered immutable capitulated with hardly a struggle, the result of popular revolutions that were, with the glaring exception of Romania, astonishingly peaceful. Ordinary people, hundreds of thousands of them, rose up in mass demonstrations against their Soviet-imposed communist leaders. There is poetic irony in the fact that the downfall of communism in Eastern Europe was brought about by the very masses whose interest the communists purported to serve and whose allegiance they were unable to win. Emboldened by Mr. Gorbachev's renunciation of the "Brezhnev Doctrine," by his assurances that the Soviet Union would not interfere in their internal policies, the new governments of Eastern Europe committed themselves to multiparty elections and, in another irony of the era, quickly outdistanced the Soviet Union in their reforms.

Early in l989 Helsinki Watch shifted the focus of its human rights monitoring to those countries that were most recalcitrant in introducing democratic reforms. Poland and Hungary, countries in which we have had a well-developed program of human rights work for many years, were no longer at the forefront of our activities in l989 because human rights abuses in those countries were negligible. Czechoslovakia, on the other hand, consumed a major part of our attention in l989: the "velvet revolution" in Czechoslovakia did not occur until late in the year and for most of l989, when police repression was at its strongest and most desperate, Helsinki Watch kept up an intensive program of missions, reports, news bulletins and trial observations aimed at protecting those whose steadfast championship of human rights inspired the changes that ultimately ensued.

Helsinki Watch in l989 also intensified its work in Bulgaria and East Germany, where, thanks to the winds of change that were enveloping the region, there were unique opportunities to send missions and gather information. In October, Helsinki Watch, together with the International Helsinki Federation for Human Rights (IHF), was able to send its first official mission to Bulgaria. So quick was the pace of change in Bulgaria that the mission witnessed what was to become the first of a series of demonstrations that, just a few weeks later, brought about the downfall of communist leader Todor Zhivkov.

After the December revolution in Romania, which provided an unprecedented opportunity to investigate abuses there, a Helsinki Watch mission was planned: it arrived in Bucharest at the earliest possible time, on the day that the airport reopened.

At year's end, with a radically changed landscape in most of the countries that have claimed our attention over the years, Helsinki Watch began planning its activities for l990. We will, of course, continue our traditional monitoring of human rights abuses in countries where such abuses remain and are even increasing, such as Turkey and Yugoslavia, and in the Soviet Union, where problems persist. We will continue monitoring all the countries in theregion where human rights abuses may continue or recur. We will continue our efforts to strengthen the existing network of Helsinki Committees, East and West, and to document and encourage the development of civil society in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, a process essential in the building of democracies. We also see opportunities for new types of activities in countries where reforms are now under way: documenting the abuses of the past; observing trials of past abusers to assure that they conform to the norms of international law; helping in the development of fair electoral conditions and procedures; and assisting in the drafting of new constitutions and new legislation.

In much of Eastern Europe there has been little or no experience with democracy. The new governments are fragile, sometimes compromised, and generally inexperienced. The security police may be operating secretly, autonomously. The possibility of a coup or a military takeover is always present. Beset by economic and social problems of great magnitude, by the resurgence of long-suppressed ethnic hostilities and yearnings for independence, there is a danger that even those governments with the best of intentions may succumb to pressures beyond their control.

As before, Helsinki Watch will be there -- to observe, to report and to help. The struggle for human rights in Eastern Europe is far from over. To the contrary, it is just beginning.

Jeri Laber

Executive Director

BULGARIA

The leading human rights problems in Bulgaria during 1989 concerned its ethnic Turkish minority, which continued its resistance to the government's policies of assimilation. In June, following days of demonstrations by ethnic Turks against the government's pressures, thousands of ethnic Turks were expelled or fled from the country. At the same time, independent groups promoting human rights, environmental and minority issues emerged in Bulgarian society. Helsinki Watch made contact with activists in these groups and in the course of the year was able to strengthen and expand such relationships.

Helsinki Watch devoted considerable attention to the situation of ethnic Turks in Bulgaria. Among the human rights violations committed by the Bulgarian authorities during the period of demonstrations and expulsions in late May and June are police and army brutality against peaceful demonstrators, restriction of movement, deportation, deprivation of property and family separation. At the time of the expulsions, Ted Zang met with Bulgarians in Paris who had come to protest against repression and then traveled to Turkey to collect testimony from refugees. The findings were published in "Destroying Ethnic Identity: The Expulsion of the Bulgarian Turks," released in October. An article by Zang in the July 24 Christian Science Monitor examined the link between Bulgaria's expulsion of the Turks and the country's domestic stirrings for reforms.

A CSCE (Helsinki process) meeting on the environment in Sofia in October presented Helsinki Watch with a unique opportunity to visit. Joining with the International Helsinki Federation for Human Rights (IHF), we sent a delegation that included Jonathan Fanton,Jeri Laber and Zang. For the first time in Bulgaria, a nongovernmental delegation held meetings with officials on human rights issues. In addition, the mission members met with independent human rights and environmental activists and traveled to southern Bulgaria to investigate discrimination against and repression of the Turkish and Pomak minorities.

Two editions of "News from Bulgaria" were published in 1989. In January, we reported on government crackdowns on human rights and environmental groups; and in May, we reported a series of arrests, exiles and expulsions of members of newly-formed human rights organizations.

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

The "Velvet Revolution" in Czechoslovakia in November resulted in the resignation of the Communist Party leadership and the appointment of Vaclav Havel, playwright and human rights activist, as President. Until the November demonstrations, Czechoslovak officials sternly resisted the movements toward open societies that were emerging in neighboring countries. On November 28, the Party relinquished its monopoly on political power. Multiparty elections are currently scheduled for June 1990.

Helsinki Watch focused considerable attention on Czechoslovakia during 1989, sending missions, publishing reports, issuing press releases to announce forthcoming trials of human rights activists and sending observers to political trials.

In January, Helsinki Watch released "Prison Conditions in Czechoslovakia," based on an investigation by Herman Schwartz. The report described unsanitary living conditions, insufficient food, and forced hard labor by inmates in unsafe working environments. It has been translated into Czech by the Czechoslovak Helsinki Committee.

In March, Jeri Laber participated in an International Helsinki Federation (IHF) mission to Czechoslovakia to meet with officials and independent groups and to attend the trials of Ivan Jirous and Jiri Tichy. The Czechoslovak officials canceled the scheduled meetings with the Helsinki representatives because Jiri Hajek, Chairman of the Czechoslovak Helsinki Committee and former Foreign Minister under Alexander Dubcek, was in the delegation. Jeri Laber wrote about this trip in "Fighting Back in Prague," in the April 27 The New York Review of Books.

Janet Fleischman, joined by Hester Minnema of the IHF, traveled to Prague, Bratislava and Brno in June to collect information on new independent groups that had been the targets of the year's crackdowns. In August, we published "Toward Civil Society: Independent Initiatives in Czechoslovakia." Two articles by Fleischman -- "Czechs Chilled by Beijing Spring, The Chicago Tribune, July 1, and "A Journey to Absurdistan," The Nation, September 18 -- were also based on this mission.

In June, Helsinki Watch and the IHF published "Human Rights in Czechoslovakia," a report written in Prague by the Czechoslovak Helsinki Committee.

In September, David Kennedy traveled to Prague to attend the trial of Sasha Vondra, a leading human rights monitor. Jeri Laber was again in Czechoslovakia in October where she attended another political trial. She and members of the Czechoslovak HelsinkiCommittee were detained by the police in an effort to prevent their meeting.

Three editions of "News from Czechoslovakia" appeared in 1989. In April we reported on nine political trials since February and six pending cases; in September, we reported on demonstrations throughout the country on the 21st anniversary of the Soviet invasion and on a subsequent crackdown by the authorities; and in November, we identified political prisoners still incarcerated and provided information about recent releases.

POLAND

Helsinki Watch sent a mission to Poland in June to investigate prison conditions as a follow up to our visit of June 1987 and a subsequent prison conditions report. The June 1989 visit was at the invitation of the Polish government. While in Poland, Herman Schwartz and Joanna Weschler visited 15 prisons and three jails. They found that many of the abusive conditions described in Helsinki Watch's earlier report had been corrected and that the report had played an important role in the changes. In addition, Professor Schwartz visited three pre-trial detainees in Gdansk prison, two of whom had been held longer than two years. The Helsinki Watch delegation expressed its concern about prolonged pre-trial detention to the Minister of Justice and upon return to the United States, filed an amicus curiae brief on behalf of the detainees that was instrumental in their release in October.

ROMANIA

Until the final days of 1989, Romania remained resistant to change, and the Ceausescu dictatorship seemed immune to the influence of the massive citizens' uprisings in neighboring states. In late December, however, demonstrations that started in Timisoara and spread to Bucharest, and the severe violence used to put down these demonstrations, resulted in Ceausescu's ouster.

On December 31, a Helsinki Watch team left for Romania to discuss with the new leadership and the emerging human rights community the importance of human rights considerations during the early stages of the new government. Jonathan Fanton and Jeri Laber were joined in Bucharest by Karl von Schwarzenberg of the IHF. They met with President Ion Iliescu and other government officials and also with the newly formed Group for Social Dialogue and the Romanian Helsinki Committee. Helsinki Watch stressed the need to take immediate steps to investigate the abuses of the Ceausescu era. Janet Fleischman and David Nachman traveled to Timisoara to investigate the reports of mass killings during the revolution and then to Bucharest. Helsinki Watch has prepared an ongoing Romanian program for 1990 that will include a representative in Bucharest, fact-finding missions and trial observations.

Earlier in 1989, Helsinki Watch addressed the problems of the Hungarian minority in Romania in a report, "Destroying Ethnic Identity: The Hungarians of Romania." The report points to increasing restrictions of the Hungarian language and threats to Hungarian schools, churches and broadcasting, all of which undermine the Hungarians' cultural identity. Information for this report was collected by Janet Fleischman in Hungary the preceding summer. Efforts to protect the Hungarian minority will be a major theme of Helsinki Watch's work in Romania in the post-Ceausescuera.

TURKEY

Helsinki Watch continues to receive reports of routine torture in Turkish police stations; hundreds of political prisoners remain in prison, many convicted for peaceful acts or for expressions of opinion; prison conditions are inhumane; journalists continue to be prosecuted for what they have written (400 journalists in 183 cases in 1989); demonstrators are detained and arrested for engaging in peaceful demonstrations; and the Kurdish minority in Eastern Turkey continues to be denied its ethnic identity and is caught between Kurdish separatist guerrillas and the Turkish armed forces and often abused by both.

In March, Helsinki Watch sent a fact-finding mission of Herman Schwartz, Kenneth Schoen and Jeri Laber to Turkey to investigate conditions in Turkish prisons. The team did not gain entry to the prisons but took extensive testimony from former inmates of jails and prisons throughout the country. The findings were reported in "Prison Conditions in Turkey." Since the publication, Helsinki Watch has been talking with Turkish authorities about arranging a follow-up prison investigation in which access to the prisons would be provided.

Helsinki Watch released in March its report on freedom of expression in Turkey, "Paying the Price." Based on a mission to Turkey in October 1988 by Lois Whitman and Tom Froncek, the report covers freedom of the press and censorship with regard to authors, filmmakers and musicians. In the report Helsinki Watch called on the United States to exert its influence with Turkish authorities to improve protection of freedom of expression. An article by Whitman and Froncek reviews the case of Fatma Yazici, an editor in Turkey facing years of imprisonment for publishing articles on such taboo topics as the Helsinki Watch report on the Kurds, appeared in the International Herald Tribune on February 25-26.

Helsinki Watch issued a News from Turkey in July on "Eight Cases of Torture," based on testimony of torture victims gathered by Jeri Laber during the March mission. Laber again addressed torture in Turkey in "Cruel and Unusual Punishment," in the July 20 New York Review of Books, the article was reprinted in part in the Turkish newspaper Hurriyet on August 7, 1989. Helsinki Watch received a significant amount of press coverage on its reports and missions and has compiled a 40-page "press package" of the articles and editorials published about them in Turkey.

In a November News from Turkey Helsinki Watch reported on the announcement by the Turkish authorities of new measures aimed at improving prison conditions and at reducing the practice of torture by allowing earlier access to a lawyer and shorter periods of detention. Helsinki Watch has expressed concern that the new measures are not being generally applied and that others are not yet in effect.

UNITED STATES

Within Human Rights Watch, Helsinki Watch has the responsibility for monitoring the United States. As in previous year, we focused primarily on U.S. policies affecting freedom of movement of people and ideas. In June, Helsinki Watch published "Detained, Denied, Deported: Asylum Seekers in the United States," a 105 page reportwritten by Karin Konig. Later in the year, representatives of Helsinki Watch and of the other Watch Committees took part in a training program of the Immigration and Naturalization Service to inform the Service's "adjudicators" of human rights conditions in various countries that produce substantial numbers of asylum applicants.

Also during 1989, the Prison Project began an investigation of prison conditions in the United States with a report anticipated late in 1990.

USSR

Helsinki Watch sent a delegation of legal scholars, James Busuttil, George Fletcher, Theodor Meron and Louise Shelley, to the Soviet Union in January to investigate legal reform and human rights under perestroika. They conducted interviews with officials, legal scholars and independent activists in Moscow, Leningrad and Kiev. The mission's report, "Toward the Rule of Law: Legal Reform and Human Rights in the Soviet Union Under Perestroika," was released at the end of the year.

Before the March 26 elections, Helsinki Watch released "USSR: Human Rights Under Glasnost," which describes efforts by the authorities to obstruct the campaigns of opposition candidates, the new phenomenon of short-term detention rather than long prison sentences for political activists and the set-backs to individual freedoms embodied in new legislation.

Helsinki Watch issued a lengthy News from the USSR in May that includes a report on the April massacre of demonstrators in Georgia, an update on political prisoners and status reports on freedom of expression, assembly and movement.

In the course of the year, Helsinki Watch hosted many visiting Soviet citizens including Arkady Vaksberg, Soviet lawyer, member of Moscow Tribune; Lagle Parek, Estonian activist; Larissa Bogoraz and Lev Timofeyev, Moscow Helsinki Group; Vytautas Landsbergis, Chairman, "Sajudis;" Kostel Gendorf; Martin Abolins, Latvian activist; Academician Andrei Sakharov; Andrei Kutenikov, USA-Canada Institute; Peter Barenboim, Soviet-American Foundation; Valdis Steins, Latvian Popular Front; Boris Nazarov; Yuri Rozenbaum, Institute on State & Law; Yuri Feofanov; Sergei Grigoryants, editor of Glasnost magazine; Supreme Soviet deputies Kazimirias Uoka (Lithuania) and Mavrik Vulfsons (Latvia); Lithuanian activists Viktoras Petkus, Antanas Terletkas, and Igor Dashkavich.

Catherine Fitzpatrick traveled to the Soviet Union in July-August on a mission that focused on the criminal justice system. In November, Fitzpatrick and Aryeh Neier went to the Soviet Union where they observed demonstrations and several political trials. Neier published an article in the February 1, 1990 New York Review of Books on punishment for past human rights abuses that was based substantially on information gathered during this visit.

YUGOSLAVIA

Yugoslavia has by far the greatest number of political prisoners in Eastern Europe. Additional human rights problems have resulted from ethnic conflicts between national groups living in Yugoslavia.

A May News from Yugoslavia described the activities of independent groups in the various republics.

In October Helsinki Watch released a report, "IncreasingTurbulence: Human Rights in Yugoslavia," based on a mission in December 1988 by M. Bernard Aidinoff and Ken Anderson.

In September Ken Anderson, joined by Hester Minnema of the IHF, went to the Kosovo region of Yugoslavia to investigate the ethnic dispute. Their report will be released in early 1990.
INTRODUCTION TO THE WORK OF MIDDLE EAST WATCH

In 1989, Human Rights Watch launched the fifth of its regional organizations, Middle East Watch, to monitor and promote human rights in the Middle East and Northern Africa. Over the course of the year, a Middle East Watch Committee was assembled, a staff was selected, priorities were set and several major projects were launched.

Because the region covered by Middle East Watch, which runs from Morocco to Iran, has a large share of the world's most serious human rights violators, the setting of priorities was an important part of the work of Middle East Watch in 1989. Staffing constraints prevented Middle East Watch from monitoring all countries of the region simultaneously, particularly in light of our commitment to sustain monitoring of any country that we begin to examine.

Several factors went into the choice of countries on which Middle East Watch focused initially. We want to deal with the most serious violators. Yet we must also ask where we can have the greatest impact. In addition, as a new group, Middle East Watch must demonstrate its fairness and impartiality by focusing on a range of countries cutting across geopolitical, ethnic and religious lines in the region. A broad focus also helps demonstrate that Middle East Watch applies universal standards that the world community has agreed bind all peoples and nations.

The necessity of being selective was underscored by the substantial number of governments in the area covered by Middle East Watch that are so repressive as to make it impossible for domestic human rights monitoring organizations to exist. Middle East Watch is determined not to permit such countries to evade international scrutiny by restricting access and the flow of information, but our work is complicated by the lack of contacts within these countries to help collect detailed and reliable information on human rights violations.

With these factors in mind, Middle East Watch devoted most of its energy in 1989 to four countries: Algeria, Iraq, Israel and Syria. Algeria merited attention in light of more than 500 killed by government forces during the October 1988 riots, and the government's promises of reforms to address the grievances that led to the riots. Middle East Watch monitored the reforms, pointing out the ways they fall short of international standards, and pressing the government to keep its vows to investigate and prosecute cases of torture. A report we published on the first anniversary of the October riots summarized these concerns.

In the Israeli-occupied territories, the intifada completed its second year with about 300 Palestinians killed by Israeli troops, roughly the same number as in 1988. Israel has said all killings by the IDF are investigated, and "in every instance where evidence exists of violations, legal steps are taken." Middle East Watch sent a delegation to Israel and the Occupied Territories in June 1989 to examine the vigor of this system of investigation. The study continued through 1989 and a report is due in the spring of 1990.

Iraq and Syria were the focus of major efforts by Middle East Watch because of their ruthless and despotic governments. Each refused to allow investigative visits by Middle East Watch. In the case ofSyria, a Middle East Watch investigator went anyway, and conducted a three-week investigation without government permission. In the case of Iraq, such a visit was deemed too dangerous, particularly for Iraqis who might provide information about abuses. In both cases, despite the lack of government cooperation, Middle East Watch investigators were able to piece together a detailed picture of human rights conditions by conducting scores of interviews in the Middle East, Europe and the United States with emigres and recent visitors to the countries. A 235-page report on Iraq was completed for release in February 1990, and a report on Syria is also scheduled for publication in early 1990.

In addition to continuing work on these countries, Middle East Watch in 1990 will direct its attention to Iran, Morocco and possibly Egypt.

The staff of Middle East Watch was assembled during 1989. Research Director Eric Goldstein and Senior Associate Salem Mezhoud were hired. Both are former journalists with extensive experience in the Middle East and Northern Africa. Executive Director Andrew Whitley, a long-time journalist with the Financial Times and the BBC who had been based in Teheran and Jerusalem, was selected to head the organization beginning March 1, 1990. All three are based in New York.

The Middle East Watch Committee, which has responsibility for setting policy for the organization within the context of Human Rights Watch, was also assembled in 1989. Its 27 members reflect the diversity of the region and include many of the top U.S.-based scholars on the Middle East and Northern Africa, as well as a range of other distinguished individuals, all with a commitment to apply human rights standards even-handedly to all countries of the region.

Kenneth Roth

Deputy Director

Human Rights Watch

ALGERIA

Since the riots of October 1988 that left more than 500 dead, Algeria has once again disappeared from the news media in the United States. Mindful of a need to take stock of changes since the riots, Middle East Watch published a short report assessing the reforms and human rights one year after the riots.

While the government of President Chadli Benjedid has introduced meaningful reforms, Middle East Watch expressed concern that its promises to investigate and prosecute cases of torture have not been kept, and draft laws introduced to ensure freedom of expression and political association did not go far enough. Although new parties have been given permission to form, it remains to be seen whether the ruling National Liberation Front will permit them to challenge its dominant position.

Middle East Watch will continue to monitor reforms in Algeria in 1990.

EGYPT

After collaborating informally with the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights for some time, Middle East Watch responded quickly to the detention and beating in August of two of its members, lawyer Amir Salem and journalist Mohamed al-Sayyid Said. Middle East Watchprotested to President Hosny Mubarak, organized a letter from members of Congress, and cooperated with other groups that voiced their disquiet to the Egyptian government. Salem and Said were released after approximately two weeks in detention.

IRAQ

The ruthlessness of the regime of Saddam Hussein has been long known but insufficiently documented, due to its brutal suppression of dissent, tight controls on journalists, and refusal to allow independent human rights organizations to investigate in the country.

During 1989, consultant David Korn compiled the first comprehensive human rights report on human rights in Iraq. Middle East Watch's requests to visit Iraq and meet with officials were met with transparent excuses and then silence. Nevertheless, Korn was able to gather telling evidence from interviews with scores of diplomats, journalists, and Iraqi exiles in the United States and Europe. His article, "Iraq's Criminal Credit Line," appeared in The New York Times, October 26.

Human Rights in Iraq, 235 pages, covers the suppression of dissent, torture, arbitrary arrests, disappearances, summary and political executions, mass expulsions, the use of chemical warfare against Iraq's Kurdish civilians, the forced resettlement of many thousands living in predominantly Kurdish areas, and violent attacks against Iraqi dissidents abroad. It was completed for release February 11, 1990, and will be issued as the first publication of a joint venture between Human Rights Watch and Yale University Press.

Middle East Watch also pressed the U.S. government to condition its relations with Iraq on improvements in human rights, urging a cutoff in the generous loan guarantees currently extended to Iraq. In the fall, Middle East Watch supported passage of an amendment by Senator Daniel Inouye to bar Export-Import Bank loan guarantees to Iraq and seven other countries. The legislation passed in November.

Representatives of Middle East Watch also met with State Department officials and recommended that they condemn Iraq's human rights record during the session of the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva in February 1990. Past U.S. support of efforts to censure Iraq for abuses has been only lukewarm.

ISRAELI-OCCUPIED TERRITORIES

Middle East Watch has in its first year endeavored to monitor the range of human rights conditions in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, while focusing its reporting efforts on a narrower topic: accountability for killings by the Israeli army.

During the second year of the Palestinian uprising, the number of Palestinians killed by security forces -- nearly 300 --was approximately the same as during the first year. in consultation with Palestinian and Israeli human rights groups, Middle East Watch decided to issue a report on the army's mechanisms for investigating and punishing excessive force. This report will also consider how much freedom authorities give others to conduct independent investigations of abuses, and whether the system as a whole effectively holds troops accountable when misconduct has taken place.

In June, Paul Chevigny, Bell Chevigny and Eric Goldstein conductedan investigative mission to Israel, the West Bank and the Gaza Strip to look into these issues. During the rest of 1989, we followed Israeli investigations into selected cases. Our report will be issued in the spring of 1990.

At the same time, Middle East Watch responded to measures taken by Israeli authorities against Palestinians active in monitoring human rights. We protested the continued closure of the Palestine Press Service, the arrest of lawyer Adnan Abu Leila, the detention and torture of Al-Haq field worker Sha'wan Jabarin, and the travel restrictions on lawyer Raji Sourani. In Washington, Middle East Watch organized letters to Israeli authorities signed by members of Congress concerning the detention of poet Sami Al-Kilani and of human rights worker Sha'wan Jabarin.

SYRIA

In 1989, Syria moved to mend its relations with other Arab nations, notably Egypt. At the same time, the Soviet Union signaled to the regime of President Hafez al-Asad that it could not count on unconditional support in the future. These shifts in Syria's external relations suggested that new possibilities may arise to press the Asad regime on its dismal human rights record.

Given the need for a comprehensive and up-to-date report on human rights in Syria, Middle East Watch sent consultant Jim Paul to Damascus and other towns of Syria in the summer of 1989 to interview scores of intellectuals, members of minorities, former political prisoners, and relatives of victims of abuses. Further interviews were conducted in Cairo, Paris, London and the United States. In early 1990, Middle East Watch will publish its report on Syria.

Among our gravest concerns in Syria are the pervasive practice of torture, deplorable prison conditions, a population of political prisoners conservatively estimated at 7,500, and the brutality of Syrian occupation forces in Lebanon. The report will also describe the denial of political pluralism and freedom of expression.


AFGHANISTAN

As the last Soviet troops withdrew from Afghanistan on February 15, Bush administration officials felt largely secure in their belief that the resistance (the mujahedin) would soon oust the Afghan government of Najibullah and seize power. Instead, the Soviet withdrawal left a protracted civil war with devastating costs for civilians across the country. As it has done throughout the war, the United States continued to condemn human rights violations by the Afghan government, and to criticize the Soviet Union for supplying arms that have been used in indiscriminate attacks on civilians in areas under resistance control. However, the Bush administration has failed to condemn in equally strong terms abuses by the resistance, including the summary execution of prisoners, politically motivated killings of relief workers and refugee intellectuals, and indiscriminate attacks on civilians in government-controlled areas.

The administration supported the establishment in early 1989 of an interim government which it hoped would be able to defeat the Afghan government in combat and be seen as representative of the Afghan people. The Afghan Interim Government ("AIG") thus was formed out of the uneasy alliance of seven resistance parties based in Peshawar, Pakistan. The AIG's support among the Afghan people has been limited, however, in part because it has excluded certain Afghan groups from playing any role in the political process. During the past year, the administration urged the AIG to broaden its base, in particular to include representatives from the eight Shia parties based in Iran, and the AIG has recently taken steps to do so. On December 11, Peter Tomsen, the U.S. envoy to the resistance, met with AIG ministers in Peshawar and reiterated the administration's position that the AIG must include representatives from a broader range of groups for it to be acceptable to all Afghans.

Despite these urgings, supporters of ex-King Zaher Shah, who still commands the loyalty of a large proportion of the refugee population, have consistently been excluded from the AIG and persecuted. These supporters, members of Afghan Mellat (a Pushtun nationalist party), and relief-agency employees have been threatened, and a number of them have recently been killed. There is evidence to support the widespread belief that many of the killings are the work of the more radical of the Islamic resistance groups, including the Hezb-e Islami led by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, the group which has received the largest share of U.S. and Saudi military assistance.

Afghan Mellat and Zaher Shah's supporters have both been highly critical of the interim government and the more fundamentalist mujahedin leaders; relief-agency workers have come under attack because of the importance of aid in the conflict among resistance factions for control of the refugee population. Two victims during the year were Mohammad Zakir, a field worker for the International Committee of the Red Cross and a member of Afghan Mellat, who was murdered on August 28 in Peshawar, and Abdul Fatah Wudud, an employee of the U.N. World Food Program in Peshawar, who disappeared on September 3 after leaving his office to meet with a member of Hekmatyar's Hezb-e Islami. According to the report of the U.N. Special Rapporteur on Afghanistan, attacks on refugees by members of resistance groups increased notably after June. The administration has not called publicly for investigations into these attacks, as it should.

The United States, together with Pakistan and Saudi Arabia, provides substantial support in the form of military and humanitarian aid to the organizations that make up the AIG. Through most of the war, the U.S. permitted the Pakistani military wide discretion in distributing this aid among the resistance organizations. The Pakistani military intelligence organization, the Directorate of Inter-Services Intelligence ("ISI"), channeled the bulk of U.S. aid and arms for the resistance to the Hezb-e Islami organization of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. In November, however, the Bush administration reportedly decided to stop providing such aid to Hekmatyar. The reported decision has had little practical effect, however, because, of the $715 million reportedly provided to the mujahedin by the United States and Saudi Arabia during the three months beginning in November, the U.S. share was only $280 million. Technically, the administration can maintain that its share now goes to factions other than Hekmatyar's, but because Saudi Arabia has imposed no such ban, the U.S. money may simply be channeled to other mujahedin factions, while Saudi aid continues to reach Hekmatyar. If the U.S. were sincere about ending funding to Hekmatyar, it could put pressure on Saudi Arabia to end all such aid. There is no indication that such pressure has been exerted.

The administration in its public statements has largely chosen to disregard evidence that Hekmatyar's Hezb-e Islami has used its favored position to attack rival mujahedin groups and other refugees. Following an attack by Hekmatyar's forces on those of Jamiat commander Ahmed Shah Massoud in July, and the summary execution of Jamiat prisoners by the Hezb-e Islami, State Department spokesman Richard Boucher was asked if the Afghan guerrillas were required to respect human rights as a precondition for receiving U.S. aid. He replied, "I don't see how that comes into play here." Asked about continued fighting in August, Boucher stated that the U.S. had "discussed with the Resistance the importance of unity and continue to urge them to work toward common goals." One is left to conclude that the Bush administration's concern with unity among the resistance outweighs its concern over summary executions and other abuses by the resistance, even when the abusive organizations are backed by millions of dollars of U.S. military aid.

Since late 1988, the Pakistani ISI has increased pressure on resistance commanders to shell cities. Far from pinpointing military targets, this shelling has been almost uniformly indiscriminate, in violation of the laws of war protecting civilians. Following the Soviet withdrawal, the ISI approached the shura (governing council) of mujahedin commanders in Qandahar province and urged them to shell the city of Qandahar and its airport, promising weapons in return. The commanders were willing to shell the airport but not the city, unless civilians could be evacuated, which was not possible. The ISI then recruited other commanders who were willing to, and did, shell the city; they were formed into a second shura, ultimately bringing about the collapse of the first. The Bush administration has failed to use its influence with Pakistan to prevent this kind of pressure on resistance commanders to undertake indiscriminate attacks on civilians, even though U.S. arms are playing a major role in these attacks.

Rocket attacks by the mujahedin on Kabul, Jalalabad and other major cities increased in 1989, as the resistance tried for a major military victory against the Afghan government. The resistance relied on U.S.-supplied Egyptian SAKR-20 and SAKR-30 rockets in these attacks. These rockets are reportedly so inaccurate that casualties resulting from such attacks have been predominantly civilian. For its part, the Afghan government has relied on notoriously inaccurate Soviet-supplied SCUD missiles, firing more of them since November 1988 than were launched during the entire Iran-Iraq war. The SCUDs, too, have killed mainly civilians.

Although the Bush adminstration has publicly condemned indiscriminate attacks on civilians by Afghan government forces, it has downplayed reports of similar casualties resulting from indiscriminate attacks on the cities by the resistance. At a June 15 hearing before the House Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Howard Schaffer stated that the Afghan government had "stage-managed activities for some American journalists," who had then reported on growing anti-American sentiment among civilians in Kabul because of rocket attacks by the resistance. State Department officials have also articulated their belief that resistance commanders have taken steps to minimize civilian casualties. However, independent sources, including the International Committee of the Red Cross ("ICRC"), have confirmed that high numbers of civilian casualties continue. The Bush administration should publicly condemn all indiscriminate attacks on civilians, and deny military assistance to resistance groups that engage in such attacks.

When pressed to respond to allegations that U.S.-supplied cluster munitions have been used in attacks on civilian areas of Kabul and other cities, the administration has refused to comment. The use of such weapons has been reported by Western journalists based in Kabul and by the U.N. Special Rapporteur for Afghanistan. These reports are sufficiently serious and troubling to warrant an investigation by the U.S. government. The administration should state publicly its opposition to the misuse of such weapons, and if charges of abuse are verified, stop providing such munitions to the resistance.

Following reports in late November of the release of four Soviet prisoners of war held by the resistance, the administration stated that it has been U.S. policy to encourage the exchange of prisoners of war in line with the Geneva Conventions and the policies of the ICRC. Such statements are particularly welcome given that some resistance groups receiving U.S. assistance have summarily executed prisoners of war.

In his address to the Third Committee of the U.N. General Assembly on November 27, U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Thomas Pickering cited "overwhelming evidence of continuing massive violations of human rights by the Kabul authorities, including political killings, disppearances, torture, summary executions, arbitrary arrests and imprisonment under unacceptable conditions." The statement appears to be based on conditions of a few years ago, and does not take into account changes in Afghan government practices which have been reported by such independent sources as Amnesty International and the U.N. Special Rapporteur. Exaggerated accusations of this sort divert international attention from serious abuses that remain. For example, security laws in effect define "crimes" in such broad terms that they have been used against political opponents, such as Mohamad Mohsen Formoly, a member of the Afghan Academy of Science, who was arrested for his political activities and later disappeared. After investigation by the Special Rapporteur, Formoly was found to be in detention at the Shashdarak interrogation center.

PAGE = The Special Rapporteur's report also describes the continuing serious mistreatment of prisoners under interrogation, and states that while prison conditions have improved for convicted prisoners, those under investigation are kept in conditions that fall far short of minimum standards. Prisoners sentenced to terms of less than ten years are denied the right of appeal. Afghan government sources have stated that some 2600 political prisoners are currently in jail, among them members of resistance forces who have been tried as "terrorists." The ICRC does not have access to prisoners under investigation, but it does have access to other prisoners.

The administration is right to call for an end to these and all other continuing human rights violations by the Afghan government, including indiscriminate attacks on civilians, and to bring them to the attention of the Special Rapporteur and other international bodies. However, such expressions of concern ring hollow when they are not coupled with calls for an end to abuses by U.S.-supported forces, and with strong action to ensure that U.S. military assistance is not used to perpetrate abuses.
Algeria
The human rights situation in Algeria improved significantly in 1989 in the aftermath of the bloody riots of October 1988 in which, according to Algerian authorities, 176 people died. Independent sources put the death toll at between 500 and 1000, with many more injured. Since the riots, substantial political reforms have been proposed and some important legislation has been adopted. Many reforms have yet to be implemented, however, with the result that basic rights have yet to obtain a sound legal footing.

The Bush administration has made no public effort to encourage Algiers to implement reforms. Yet a combination of factors makes this a particularly favorable time for Washington to exert such pressure. The Algerian government is facing a severe economic crisis and is looking for foreign investment, including U.S. capital. In an indication of the severity of the crisis, the government has abandoned its socialist stance and is now anxious to do business with Western countries. Similarly, Algeria for the first time has turned to the International Monetary Fund. As a result, Algeria wants more than ever to improve relations with the United States.

In the past, Algeria and the United States have found themselves at odds in the international political arena, due in large part to Algeria's perceived pro-Soviet stance, its rhetoric of anti-imperialism and non-alignment, and its advocacy of a new international economic order. In addition, the U.S. friendship with Morocco, Algeria's rival in the region, seemed for a long time to preclude any warmth between Washington and Algiers.

On a few occasions the Algerian government moved to improve its relations with the United States -- most notably by playing an important role during the Iranian hostage crisis -- but it was disappointed by the lack of U.S. response. The U.S. could have used the interest in improved relations represented by these overtures as an opportunity to raise human rights concerns, but it let the moment pass.

In more recent years, Algeria's desire for closer ties with the United States has been met by a U.S. recognition of its important political and strategic role. The U.S. has responded, for fiscal year 1990, with the sale of over $20 million of military equipment, and the provision of $150,000 for military training. Although still modest, especially when compared with the amounts given to Tunisia and Morocco, this military assistance represents a significant increase in U.S.-Algerian military cooperation.

George Bush, while vice president, visited Algeria and established personal contacts with President Chadli Bendjedid. These contacts were not, however, then used to promote human rights. For example, in October 1988, State Department spokeswoman Phyllis Oakley denounced the riots but did not condemn the repression. She said: "We don't believe violence is the appropriate way to achieve political change in any country. And we continue our close cooperation with officials from the government of Algeria."

Substantial human rights problems remain in Algeria that warrant U.S. attention:

Pledges by President Chadli and other senior officials to punish all those responsible for torture and killings during the riots have not been fulfilled. More than a year after the event, there have been no prosecutions and no disciplinary measures against those responsible for these abuses.

The media remains largely controlled by the government and freedom of expression remains limited.

Although new political parties have been authorized to exist alongside the official National Liberation Front ("FLN"), restrictions on political activity remain. The government and the National Assembly are still entirely composed of FLN members, many of whom oppose reforms. And the new law governing political parties imposes serious financial constraints on new parties, limiting the financial resources of the latter while leaving the FLN largely unrestricted. As a result, new parties do not have the means to enter into fair competition with the ruling party, and members of the FLN still control all official business. Free elections in which all political parties would participate have not taken place.

In contradiction of the new Constitution, the Family Code of 1984 is still in force, legislating vast inequities between men and women. Under the code, an Algerian woman, whatever her age, is always under the "tutelage" of a male member of her family.

And Algerians of Berber origin, who constitute a large part of the population, are still denied the right to learn their own language and use it in publications and the media.

Public attention to these problems by the administration, at a time of considerable Algerian eagerness to improve ties with the United States and the West, could lead to a significant improvement in the Algerian human rights situation. We urge the Bush administration to take advantage of this opportunity to improve Algerian rights practices.
Angola
The Bush and Reagan administrations have been quick to criticize human rights violations by the Angolan government. Among the abuses protested have been the intolerance of dissent, the use of land mines against civilians, and the holding of political detainees and prisoners. These serious abuses deserved the strong condemnation that they have received. However, both administrations have neglected serious violations by the U.S.-backed rebels seeking to overthrow the Angolan government, the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola ("UNITA").

PAGE = This refusal to criticize rebel abuses stems from the Bush administration's unwavering support of UNITA and its leader, Jonas Savimbi. For 14 years UNITA has been seeking to topple Angola's post-independence government in a war that to date has resulted in the deaths of over 100,000 people, most of them civilians. The U.S. policy of funding UNITA, first initiated by President Reagan in late 1985, has if anything been solidified under President Bush. Even before President Bush took office, he wrote to Savimbi assuring him that "all appropriate and effective assistance" would continue. Then, in 1989, to compensate for the loss of South African military and economic assistance to UNITA, the Bush administration increased the level of U.S. covert aid for Savimbi to close to $50 million. Although termed "covert," U.S. assistance is widely characterized as an "open secret." Savimbi himself made a public statement in June that Congress had renewed his aid, and was also quoted in Jeune Afrique magazine as saying that he had received $35 million in funding from the Central Intelligence Agency. Characterizing the aid as "covert," however, helps minimize Congressional and public scrutiny.>

UNITA, a loser in the three-way struggle for power that followed the announcement that Portugal was pulling out of its colonies in 1975, has continued since then to wage a guerrilla war against the ruling Movimiento Popular de Libertacao de Angola ("MPLA"), with aid to UNITA coming principally from South Africa. One of South Africa's interests in supporting Savimbi's forces was to limit the effectiveness of the South West African People's Organization ("SWAPO"), which conducted its guerrilla war against South Africa's occupation of Namibia from bases in Angola. With the repeal of the Clark Amendment in 1985, During and after the war for Angolan independence, the United States provided covert funds for the military activities of two of the three nationalist groups, the Frente Nacional de Libertacao de Angola ("FNLA") and UNITA. All military assistance was cut off by Congressional action in 1976 in an amendment proposed by former Senator Dick Clark. the Reagan administration renewed its covert support of UNITA, providing between $15 million and $30 million a year in arms, medicine and food. The main justification for the aid was the continuing presence of an estimated 30,000 Cuban troops which had first been summoned to help the Marxist MPLA repel a South African invading force in 1975.

In addition to aiding UNITA and refusing to recognize the MPLA government -- which is recognized by virtualy all U.S. allies -- the United States has consistently blocked Angolan applications for loans from the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. Explaining U.S. policy to a Congressional panel in September, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Warren Clark, Jr. said that the Bush administration would continue "appropriate and effective assistance to UNITA until national reconciliation is achieved," and that the purpose of the policy was to "impress upon the MPLA that it had no alternative but to negotiate."

In part in response to this pressure, Angola agreed to send the Cuban troops home as part of the U.S.-brokered New York accords leading to Namibia's independence and South Africa's withdrawal of support for UNITA. The phased withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola began soon after the accords and is reportedly ahead of schedule. The MPLA also continued to allow increasing numbers of Western journalists into the country and to repudiate its previous strictly Marxist economic policies.

On June 22, 1989, Angolan President Jose Eduardo dos Santos met publicly with Savimbi at Gbadolite, Zaire, at a summit brokered by the Zairean president, Mobutu Sese Seko, and attended by 18 African heads of state. At Gbadolite, Savimbi and Dos Santos shook hands to signify their mutual desire to end the civil war and begin the critical task of national reconciliation. In their public declaration of the Gbadolite agreement, the Angolans agreed to national integration, a cessation of all hostilities and a cease-fire beginning midnight, June 24, 1989. According to later declarations by a core group of eight of the African leaders present at Gbadolite, Savimbi and Dos Santos also agreed to an unpublished accord, which included ending all foreign interference in the internal affairs of Angola, integration of UNITA into the institutions of the People's Republic of Angola, and the acceptance of Savimbi's temporary and voluntary retirement.

Within days of the accord, Savimbi denied that he had accepted any such terms, and on June 26, two days after Gbadolite, six nurses on their way to give polio vaccinations to rural children were killed when their truck hit a land mine. One of the survivors, who was severely injured, contended that the mine had been newly planted by UNITA, since the group had traveled on that same road several times before that week. On July 7, according to the Angolan government, UNITA soldiers killed 18 civilians and set fire to three trucks in the province of Huige. On August 8, as peace talks began for the third time in Zaire, Angolan Foreign Minister Pedro de Castro Van Dunem said that UNITA had repeatedly violated the cease-fire. Then, on August 18, the MPLA launched a major offensive against the UNITA center at Mavinga in southern Angola. Intermittent fighting continued at year's end.

Most observers agree that Savimbi's forces were the first to break the cease-fire, and that until August, the MPLA had taken a purely defensive stance. After Gbadolite, Savimbi boycotted two further "peace" summits -- in Harare, Zimbabwe and Kinshasa, Zaire.

The Bush administration has made efforts to persuade Savimbi to return to the negotiating table. President Bush wrote to Savimbi asking him to go to the September 18 meeting in Kinshasa in which Mobotu wanted the UNITA leader to sign a cease-fire accord as a first step toward a political settlement, and Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Herman Cohen made a special trip to Africa in a vain attempt to persuade Savimbi to participate. In October, President Bush met with Savimbi at the White House and apparently successfully persuaded him to return to the bargaining table. However, critics charge that the Bush administration has also helped to sabotage the negotiations by supporting Savimbi's interpretation of the Gbadolite accords and by refraining from any public criticism of UNITA's conduct since the June cease-fire declaration. Suspicions of the Bush administration's lack of commitment to the cease-fire were further supported by reports of the crash, in late November inside Angola, of a Central Intelligence Agency plane carrying weapons to UNITA's headquarters in Jamba.

In continuing to aid Savimbi, the Bush administration appears willing to support and condone a disturbing level of abuse on the part of UNITA forces.For example, the administration has refused to condemn UNITA's actions in response to widely disseminated reports of brutal attacks by UNITA soldiers on unarmed peasants. In one such onslaught, carefully documented by, among others, New York Times reporter Kenneth Noble, UNITA soldiers killed 15 peasants in an attack in late September on Samba Caju, in Angola's central highlands. Townspeople, roused from their sleep by soldiers singing and banging machetes against the sides of their trucks, were mowed down as they attempted to flee. Esperance Antonio Camoes said that her husband Antonio was shot in the back: "He fell on the ground, and they started hitting him with machetes." Maria Domingo Couveia lost her mother and a blind brother: "My mother ran out of the house, and my brother was holding onto her, and they shot and killed them both."

The State Department's response was to deny that the incident had occurred and to assert that "all appropriate assistance [to UNITA] would continue." A spokesman said that the State Department had no evidence to substantiate the claims against UNITA, and added: "We have raised the allegations with UNITA, which has emphatically denied them."

Also in September, a medical delegation sponsored by the United Church of Christ's Commission for Racial Justice witnessed the shelling by UNITA of the central Angolan city of Huambo in which the casualties included a couple asleep in bed. According to members of the delegation, the area shelled could not have been mistaken for a military target. A delegation member, Dr. Adewale Troutman, further reported finding "[i]n every hospital we visited<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>children, women and men who had been shot by UNITA or lost legs from UNITA land mines just in the last two months [since the cease-fire agreement]."

In March, Fred Bridgland, a conservative British journalist who wrote an admiring biography of Savimbi and had until then been a staunch UNITA supporter, stated that Savimbi had committed several human rights abuses. Bridgland alleged that Savimbi was holding former Washington UNITA representative Tito Chingunji against his will at UNITA headquarters in Jamba. He also claimed that Savimbi was responsible for the death of Chingunji's parents and former UNITA Chief of Staff Jose Alberto Chendovava.

Amnesty International confirmed that Chingunji was held briefly for expressing opposition to some of UNITA's policies and may have been ill-treated while in custody. Other defectors surmised that Chingunji, who was later seen alive and not imprisoned at Jamba, may have been intimidated into silence. According to the conservative National Review of September 29, 1989, Bridgland "is now being subjected to crude UNITA threats of physical violence."

Also in March, several former UNITA supporters seeking asylum in Lisbon and the United Kingdom accused Savimbi of ordering the beating and the burning of "witches." One student, Aremelindo Kanjugu, said the victims were former political rivals of the UNITA leader. Among the victims were Joao Kitangue, his wife and three children, who were burned to death on September 7, 1983, and Aurora Katalaio and two children, who were also killed in 1983. Katalaio was the wife of Mateus Katalaio, UNITA's former interior minister, who was killed in 1982.

On British television, two UNITA defectors, Dinho Chingunji (Tito Chungunji's nephew) and Sousa Jamba, also accused UNITA of gross abuses. Dinho alleged that his grandparents Jonatao, 69, and Violeta, 60, were clubbed with rifle butts, kicked and then run over by a truck, on Savimbi's orders.

One of the tactics of both armies has been to strew land mines across the countryside, thus destroying agriculture and forcing thousands of Angolan peasants to flee their homes.Thousands of Angolan civilians have been killed by land mines, indiscriminate attacks and starvation. When short of rations, both government and UNITA soldiers have stolen from the fields of peasants. And UNITA has deliberately encircled and strangled villages, causing near starvation of civilian residents.

The single exception in 1989 to the U.S. silence on UNITA abuses was the State Department's country report on Angola, drafted by the Reagan administration and published in February 1989, which noted reports of abuses by both MPLA and UNITA forces. However, the country report was careful to qualify all charges, noting, for example, that "limited information is available on the administrative structure and practices within UNITA-held areas" and that reports of abuses generally "could neither be confirmed or denied." While we are aware of the difficulties of gathering reliable information from Angola, we would have hoped that UNITA's principle source of funds would have known enough of its client organization's "administrative structure and practices," particularly its human rights practices, to avoid obscuring accountability with statements of this sort.

The Bush administration's deep involvement with UNITA makes its refusal to condemn UNITA excesses extremely disturbing. As UNITA's main funder, the United States has the clout to pressure the rebel group to curb abuses. Only clear condemnation of UNITA abuses, tied to a willingness to limit aid on human rights grounds, will make that end come about.
Argentina
Democracy returned to Argentina in 1983 and continues in force six years later, albeit after some perilous moments. Through this period, the Reagan administration fostered warm and cordial relations with President Raúl Alfonsín, and the Bush administration has continued equally friendly relations with his successor, Carlos Saúl Menem, who captured the presidency on behalf of the Peronist party by defeating the candidate from Alfonsín's Radical Party. That the United States has shown itself able to maintain good relations with two Argentine presidents of different political orientations demonstrates the high value the U.S. places on democracy in Argentina.

Because of these good relations, and because of Argentina's difficult economic problems, related in large part to its foreign debt crisis, the U.S. government has more leverage in Argentina today than in previous times, and there have been many opportunities to use that leverage constructively in the cause of human rights and democracy. Unfortunately, both the Reagan and the Bush administrations have chosen not to take advantage of these opportunities, observing instead an obstinate silence on all matters concerning human rights. The democratically elected government was defended by President Reagan, in the face of military rebellions in 1986 and 1987, but even then he made no comment on the merits of the mutineers' demand for an end to prosecutions of those responsible for human rights abuses. Unfortunately, over time the mutineers have largely obtained this goal.

In many ways, 1989 has been more hectic and troubling than the five preceding years of democratic rule. In January, a fringe leftist group assaulted military barracks in La Tablada, a suburb of Buenos Aires, and the ensuing battle left 39 dead and many wounded on both sides. The surviving attackers have been convicted and sentenced to stiff prison terms. There is evidence that at least four or five of the attackers were murdered by army troops after they surrendered, but unfortunately, investigations into those serious crimes have gone nowhere under either Alfonsín or Menem.

In May and June, the collapse of the economy brought food riots for the first time to a country that had always been regarded as a relatively prosperous "breadbasket to the world." The Alfonsín government established a state of siege for 30 days, and more than 40 persons were arrested, for the most part for engaging in legitimate forms of political association and expression. The severe crisis prompted President Alfonsín to give up the presidency in July, six months ahead of schedule, thereby establishing a dangerous precedent for a future occasion in which democratic institutions may face a power vacuum.

In October, President Menem issued a sweeping pardon for the crimes of the military dictatorship. All remaning prosecutions except one have thus been cancelled, and only five generals or admirals remain in custody. High-ranking advisors to President Menem have made accusatory statements against prosecutors and judges involved in the trials of the "dirty war," and two prosecutors who challenged the constitutionality of the pardon are facing disciplinary proceedings. Such actions raise the prospect that the remaining legal actions still under way to correct past wrongs -- such as the search for children abducted with their parents and then given in irregular adoption, and the identification of remains thought to belong to those who disappeared during the "dirty war" -- will from now on be discouraged.

Throughout 1989, the Bush administration persisted in its silence. There has been no public representation to the Argentine government on any of these subjects. There has been no public encouragement of investigation into the killing of some of those who surrendered in La Tablada; no public expression of concern about the need to preserve the independence of prosecutors and judges; and no public support for the right of families to know the fate and whereabouts of their loved ones. There was also not a word in public about the need to exercise restraint so that the extraordinary powers granted by the state of siege are not abused to silence legitimate though unpopular dissent. And, most important, no U.S. official publicly questioned the pardoning of those responsible for murder, disappearance and torture.

Before enacting the pardon, Menem made a state visit to the United States, where he was cordially received. By then, the pardons had become a burning political issue in Argentina, with public opinion polls registering strong disapproval for Menem's position favoring pardons. The silence of the U.S. government on the matter was shrewdly presented in Argentina as a sign of support for Menem's policy of "national reconciliation," which is offered as justification for the pardon. Expressions of concern by many members of Congress worked, in part, to dispel that notion. However, Argentines clearly remembered that the Reagan administration had attempted, between 1981 and 1983, to improve relations with the military dictatorship, including by a spirited defense of its human rights record, until the weight of the evidence of the "dirty war" made such a defense untenable. It is that early defense of the Argentine military, and the current silence, which lead many Argentines to believe that the Bush administration was comfortable with Menem's policy of forgetting the egregious crimes of the past.

The Bush administration's silence on the pardon is regrettable, but it is consistent with the Reagan administration's acquiescence in the laws of punto final (requiring all prosectuions to be brought by an accelerated date) and due obedience (extending the defense of following orders) promulgated by Alfonsín under pressure from the military. Both laws also had the effect of preventing a large number of investigations and prosecutions. Nor has the Reagan or Bush administration ever said a favorable word about the work of the commission created by Alfonsín, and chaired by writer Ernesto Sabato, which in 1984 produced an impressive report on the policy of disappearances. And nothing has been said about the historic trial in 1985 of the members of the military juntas for the abuses of the 1970's. Words of praise for these extraordinary efforts would even now be in order, as the Argentine military and their erstwhile allies have begun a creeping vindication of the "dirty war."
Brazil
In 1989, Brazil continued to experience serious human rights violations. In the countryside, violence resulting from land conflicts claimed lives of peasants, union organizers and lawyers. Peasant leaders in particular were singled out for murder and harassment, and in at least two documented cases they were tortured by police. There have also been serious abuses against Indians, such as expulsions from their lands by landowners and gold miners, pollution of Indian waters by gold prospectors, and killings. These abuses have been particularly severe in areas controlled by the military, where Indians have been deprived of outside help, including medical assistance, and where the ability to monitor is limited.

Brazilian police have continued to use torture in interrogating criminal suspects. In February, seven suspects were tortured to death by police in Rondonopolis, Mato Grosso state. Also in February, 18 inmates suffocated to death in a punishment cell in a Sao Paulo police jail.

Allegations that the police are involved in organized crime led to the recent murder of two journalists. One, in Vitória, Espirito Santo state, published an article containing such allegations in July and was murdered a few days later. The other was killed in Manaus, Amazonas state, in the last days of 1988, after he had made similar discoveries.

PAGE = Perpetrators of most of the human rights violations in Brazil routinely enjoy almost total impunity. The Brazilian government has been responsible for tolerating violence in the countryside, often at the hands of private militias paid for by large landowners, and for not taking decisive steps to reform the ineffectual and corrupt judicial system. The government has also failed to curtail human rights abuses by the police.

During all of 1989, the Bush administration made no public pronouncements on human rights in Brazil. It is astonishing and disturbing that the administration seems to lack a human rights policy with respect to the largest Latin American country, and one of the most violent, particularly given the troublesome and potentially explosive human rights situation. We urge the administration to outline such a policy immediately, and to make it an important part of its agenda with the new Brazilian government.

BULGARIA

Due to the rapidly changing configuration of Eastern Europe, Bulgaria -- a country that has traditionally received little attention in Washington -- suddenly became one of the focal points of the Bush administration's foreign policy. The administration closely tracked human rights practices in Bulgaria, and frequently criticized the government for its human rights policies. Bulgaria was initially grouped with three other holdouts against change in the eastern bloc: Czechoslovakia, East Germany and Romania. The strongest criticism was reserved for Bulgaria's treatment of its Turkish minority, members of which were expelled by the thousands throughout May and June. Somewhat belatedly, the administration also focused on Bulgaria's persecution of a small core of human rights activists. In the latter part of the year, it became clear that these activists could attract significant domestic support and could eventually become an independent political force in Bulgaria. The U.S. embassy in Sofia deserves special praise for its diligent efforts to keep in touch with human rights activists despite persistent government efforts to isolate them. Now, when recent events in Bulgaria, including the removal of Party leader Zhukov, hold the promise of new freedoms and democracy for all Bulgarian citizens, the U.S. embassy and the adminstration should continue to be vigilant while encouraging the institutionalization of democratic freedoms through legislative reform.

On several occasions during the summer of 1989, the administration condemned Bulgaria's persecution of its Turkish minority. These Turks have faced a harsh assimilation campaign since 1984 intended to eradicate their cultural and religious identity. The campaign gained visibility in late May, when tens of thousands of Turks took to the streets in the northeastern and southeastern provinces to demonstrate against assimilation. Police and soldiers violently suppressed the demonstrations. Scores of Turks were reportedly killed and hundreds of others were injured. On May 24, several days after the first reports of the demonstrations appeared in the Western press, the State Department denounced Bulgaria's crackdown. In a brief statement, a spokesperson deplored Bulgaria's "blatant use of force in attempting to silence the long repressed ethnic Turkish minority." During the June Helsinki follow-up meeting on human rights -- part of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe ("CSCE") -- Ambassador Morris Abram and other U.S. delegates singled out Bulgaria for having one of the worst human rights records in the eastern bloc.

In the weeks that followed, reports of beatings, arrests and expulsions of Turks continued to reach the West. As Bulgaria forced thousands of Turks out of the country, the administration took a series of measures to express its disapproval. These measures seemed intended to send a warning signal to Bulgarian authorities, but did not disrupt relations in any significant fashion. The administration should have acted more forcefully in the wake of such large-scale repression; nevertheless, the United States was generally more critical of Bulgaria's policies than was any other Western democracy.

According to State Department sources, in a June 5 meeting with Bulgarian Ambassador Velichko Velichkov which had been requested by the Bulgarian embassy in Washington, Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger raised U.S. concerns over the Turkish issue. The State Department also expressed its displeasure to the Bulgarian ambassador and other embassy officials on at least two other occasions in June. The same month, the State Department instructed the U.S. embassy in Sofia to make a formal inquiry into the treatment of ethnic Turks under the newly established CSCE mechanism for bilateral discussion of human rights violations.

The administration also gingerly used U.S. trade relations with Bulgaria to gain leverage on the Turkish issue. On June 12, the State Department cancelled a series of official meetings that a deputy trade minister from Bulgaria was to have with Department officials. Although the administration deserves praise for this symbolic gesture, it is unclear why the meeting was scheduled in the first place, given Bulgaria's five-year-old policy of persecuting its Turks. Had the May demonstrations by the Turks not taken place and thrust the issue into the spotlight, it appears that the administration would have been willing to conduct business as usual.

On June 26, the White House issued a somewhat tardy though strongly worded statement on Bulgaria's treatment of the Turks. The statement noted that in the last month "over 60,000 people have either fled or been forcibly expelled from Bulgaria to Turkey -- many with nothing more than the clothes on their backs"; and it attributed the mass migration to "the Bulgarian Government's systematic denial of basic human rights to its Turkish minority." The White House went on:

We deplore Bulgaria's blatant violations of the human rights of its citizens, rights which Bulgaria has committed itself to protect as a signatory of the Helsinki accords and other international agreements. We urge the Government of Bulgaria to cease these violations and to allow for the orderly emigration of those ethnic Turks who desire to leave.

During July and August, tens of thousands of additional Turks were pressured to leave Bulgaria. As this occurred, the administration began to focus on ways in which to assist the refugees, most of whom were resettling in Turkey. On July 3, President Bush telephoned Turkish Prime Minister Turgut Ozal to express his concern about the forced departures and reportedly offered economic assistance to Ozal to help resettle the new refugees. On August 11, after more than 250,000 Turks had fled Bulgaria, a State Department spokesperson called upon Bulgaria to "provide an orderly departure with dignity and personal property for those who wish to leave Bulgaria." A foreign aid bill, not yet enacted as of this writing, includes $10 million in refugee assistance to Turkey to assist it in resettling the Bulgarian Turks.

When the number of refugees reached 310,000, the United States, on August 29, recalled its ambassador to Bulgaria, Sol Polansky, for consultations. This, the strongest reaction to date, was intended to register U.S. concern over the ongoing abuses. On the day the recall was announced, a State Department spokesman explained that the general worsening of repression against ethnic Turks rather than any specific incident led to the move.

In 1990, the administration should continue to protest the treatment of the ethnic Turks, but should also focus on human rights abuses against Bulgaria's Pomak minority. Although fewer in number than the Turks, the Pomaks are subjected to similar human rights abuses. Bulgarian Muslims, the Pomaks are generally denied the right to practice their religion or to use their Islamicized names. They are frequently harassed and persecuted by police and security forces. As of this writing, Pomaks who have requested passports have been denied them, even though under Bulgaria's new passport law any citizen (with certain well-defined exceptions) who applies for a passport has the right to obtain one. The administration should press the Bulgarian authorities to ensure that Pomak passport applications are processed in the same manner as applications from other citizens.

Until a CSCE meeting on the environment convened in Sofia in late October, the State Department paid insufficient public attention to the plight of a small but growing number of individuals who engaged in independent activities. Since January 1988, a number of independent groups have formed in Bulgaria to address such issues as human rights, the environment, religious freedom, and broader citizen participation in the political process. Members of these groups have had to endure varying degrees of persecution, ranging from job dismissal or expulsion from the country to imprisonment. As we indicated in last year's report, we would like to see the administration condemn human rights violations against these individuals more forcefully and more openly, and as soon as it learns of them. We note that in August, a State Department spokesman said that the United States would "continue to seek every opportunity" to express its concern over the problems of "individual Bulgarian human rights activists." However, aside from several speeches made at various CSCE conferences, we are aware of no public statements until the October meeting that actually extended strong support to Bulgarian human rights activists; at most the administration gave the persecution of these activists only cursory mention. Finally, in October, after several human rights activists were reportedly threatened with criminal charges for meeting with delegates to the CSCE environmental conference, the head of the U.S. delegation, Richard Smith, told the forum:

We are especially disturbed by reports that individuals have been harassed, threatened with expulsion and now may face criminal charges for their involvement in this gathering. We hope that these recent reports are not true and that Bulgarian citizens concerned with the environment -- or any other issue for that matter -- will be able to act upon their rights and freedoms this week and in the future.

We applaud the efforts of the U.S. embassy in Sofia to keep abreast of independent groups and their activities. During a fact-finding mission to Bulgaria, three representatives of Helsinki Watch were invited to a reception at Ambassador Polansky's residence to meet with a "Who's Who" of the independent movement in Bulgaria. In what should be a model program for other embassies, U.S. embassy staff members attend public events sponsored by independent groups to monitor the ability of these groups to engage in activities without harassment.
BURMA (Myanmar)

The Bush administration's stance on Burma (Myanmar) was generally positive, although the U.S. embassy in Thailand has been slow to respond to requests for refugee status by Burmese students fleeing repression. The human rights situation in Burma continued to deteriorate sharply throughout 1989, following the bloody end in September 1988 of Burma's pro-democracy demonstrations, when at least 3000 students and other largely unarmed civilians on the streets of the capital and other cities were massacred. The Reagan administration was quick to suspend its small military and economic aid program, and the Bush administration continued to speak out against Burmese rights violations. As one diplomat in Rangoon told the Washington Post in March, "Since there are no U.S. bases and very little strategic interest, Burma is one place where the United States has the luxury of living up to its principles."

In a desperate move early in 1989 to restore the appearance of legitimacy and with it foreign aid, Burma's governing State Law and Order Restoration Council promised multi-party elections, which are now scheduled for May 27, 1990. While cautiously welcoming the pledge to hold elections, the U.S. appropriately criticized other government actions which undermined that pledge. In September, David Lambertson, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, said, "We have shared our views directly with the Saw Maung government and offered to assist in next year's election, without any substantive reponse from the Burmese."

Two months later, in November, the Bush administration in a press briefing strongly condemned the continuing house arrest of Burma's prominent opposition leaders, Aung San Suu Kyi and U Tin Oo, and the detention of thousands of opposition activists. The administration has called for the release of all political prisoners and their full participation in the elections, stating that "elections which exclude participation of those who represent Burmese aspirations for democratic change<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>cannot be regarded as free and fair."

In his November address to the Third Committee of the U.N. General Assembly, U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Thomas Pickering stressed that "the government's actions over the past few months justify doubts that a truly fair election will actually take place. For example, ordinary democratic political activity has been severely curtailed by a long-standing curfew and a decree which prohibits gatherings of more than five persons."

Elections were far from the only issue. In April, President Bush indefinitely suspended trade benefits under the Generalized System of Preferences, citing Burma's failure to respect internationally recognized workers' rights. And in August, during a massive crackdown against the opposition, U.S. embassy officials in Burma confirmed the widespread torture of prisoners and the practice of forced portering, condemning in particular an incident in July in which 500 political prisoners tied together by ropes around their waists and ankles were made to carry arms and ammunition for Burmese troops. On September 13, the State Department said, "We now have credible, firsthand reports that instances of torture, beatings and mistreatment are commonplace and that deaths have resulted.... These reports relate accounts of cigarette burns,beatings and of the use of electric shock."

The Burmese army has engaged in similar practices in its conflict with ethnic insurgents on the border, and the administration has appropriately condemned these abuses against Burma's ethnic minority population.

In November, the Burmese press accused U.S. ambassador to Burma Burton Levin of interfering in Burmese internal affairs because of his comments on human rights. The State Department used its November 15 statement rejecting the charge to criticize the Burmese government again for human rights violations.

The weak point in the administration's policy was its position on Burmese refugees in Thailand. Following the 1988 massacre of pro-democracy demonstrators, thousands of students fled to the jungle area near the Thai border, where some 2,000 remained at the end of 1989, under threat of attack by the Burmese army. Approximately 1,000 are now in border camps in Thailand or in Bangkok. After Thailand's rapprochement with Burma in December 1988, some 300 of these students were deported from border areas and returned to Rangoon, despite evidence that they faced arrest, torture and possible execution upon their return. The administration raised concern about reports of later arrests and deaths in custody of a number of the returned students. After receiving reports of further deportations in September, U.S. embassy officials in Bangkok ordered on-site investigations by U.S. embassy consular officials in Thailand.

The U.S. embassy in Thailand was not as quick to respond to early requests for humanitarian parole by Burmese students in Thailand. At that time, U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service ("INS") officials in Bangkok reportedly stated that it was difficult to distinguish Burmese students "from all the rest who want to come" to the United States.

Following significant pressure from members of Congress, however, the Bangkok embassy reversed its position on two cases, and on August 11, the INS granted permission for two student activists who had been hiding in Thailand, Min Sun Min and Yuzana Khin, to enter the United States under the humanitarian-parole provision of U.S. immigration laws. That decision was welcome. Since then, U.S. embassy personnel in Bangkok have been directed to consider Burmese students for refugee status, although they reportedly have been slow to do so.

The international response to the severe repression in Burma has been muted, but the U.S. has tried to discourage allies from pursuing arms sales or new trade relationships with Burma. After the September 1988 crackdown and the killing of opposition demonstrators, Burma's principal donors, including Japan, West Germany and the United States, suspended aid. This was apparently the first time that Japan had used economic assistance to protest human rights abuses. That response was short-lived, however, and in February, Japan partially reinstated its $300 million aid program, by far the largest in Burma, citing the restoration of "law and order" and signs of gradual democratization in the country. This move came too quickly and sent precisely the wrong signal to Burma's military rulers; the U.S. had cautioned the Japanese against resuming aid too fast. Singapore providedextremely significant support to the Burmese government by way of arms sales at the moment of greatest military carnage. Pakistan has also sold arms. The administration should give these governments a similar message.

In November, Ambassador Pickering called on the United Nations to "give thorough and painstaking consideration to charges of human rights abuses in Myanmar." He should also enlist U.S. allies in calling for a special rapporteur on Burma before the U.N. Human Rights Commission.
CAMBODIA

The Bush administration has never come to grips with an inherent contradiction in its policy on Cambodia. While repeatedly professing opposition to a Khmer Rouge return to power, the administration has consistently supported the position of Prince Sihanouk that a coalition government headed by Sihanouk and including the Khmer Rouge was the only way to forestall civil war following the September 1989 withdrawal of Vietnamese forces from Cambodia.

Since 1979 when the Vietnamese invaded Khmer Rouge-controlled Cambodia, the main aim of the United States and its friends in the region -- China and the countries making up the Association of South East Asian Nations ("ASEAN") -- was to get the Vietnamese out. To this end, the U.S. supported the creation of the tripartite Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea ("CGDK"), which included the Khmer Rouge and the non-Communist forces of Sihanouk and the Khmer People's National Liberation Front ("KPNLF"). By the end of the Reagan administration, the U.S. seemed to be moving toward a position of opposition to the return in any guise of the Khmer Rouge which, under the leadership of Pol Pot, is estimated to have killed at least one million Cambodians between 1975 and 1979.

Since its ouster, the Khmer Rouge has continued to violate the human rights of thousands of refugees in camps it controls along the Thai-Cambodian border, and there is no indication that its policies or personnel have fundamentally changed. It is not alone in violating human rights: the Phmon Penh government and the non-Communist factions do as well. But the scale of Khmer Rouge killings in the 1975-79 period makes its inclusion in any future government particularly repugnant.

In January, at his confirmation hearing, Secretary of State James Baker promised, "The U.S. will continue to work for a new Cambodia, free of both Vietnamese occupation and the Khmer Rouge." This was essentially a reiteration of the Reagan administration's formulation.In February, during his visit to Beijing, President Bush reportedly requested the Chinese government to halt or reduce its supply of arms to the Khmer Rouge, an appeal that had been made in the past to no avail.

But if these gestures were welcome, Secretary Baker turned around in March and announced that the Khmer Rouge had to be accepted as a "fact of life," and he advocated support for a four-party government composed of the current Hun Sen government, the Khmer Rouge, and the non-Communist factions, with Sihanouk as head of state. This became the operative administration policy toward Cambodia in 1989.

The quadripartite solution became part of what was called the "comprehensive peace settlement," supported by Sihanouk, China and ASEAN, under which the Khmer Rouge would share power with the other factions in an interim administration that would hold elections under international supervision. Under the plan, the Khmer Rouge could return to four key ministries -- defense, interior, foreign affairs and information -- and incorporate its army into an army of "national reconciliation."

Administration officials defended the plan on the ground that the Khmer Rouge was less dangerous inside than outside the government. The actions of China were seen as crucial -- if China, the major arms supplier of the Khmer Rouge, could be persuaded to go along with elections, the U.S. argued, it might cut off the arms supply if the Khmer Rouge lost. Agreeing to an interim role for the latter, administration officials contended, was the only way to turn off the arms tap.

But nervousness in Washington about the return of the Khmer Rouge was evident by April when the Vietnamese announced their plans to withdraw from Cambodia by September 30. A policy review by the adminstration led to the determination that the U.S. should supply arms to the non-Communist factions to strengthen them against both the Khmer Rouge and the Vietnamese-backed government in Phnom Penh. The plan was to supply 12,000 rifles and other light arms, primarily to Sihanouk's forces.

(The Bush administration continued to provide covert non-lethal aid of some $20-24 million a year for uniforms, vehicles, food and training, and overt aid of $5 million for medicine and tents to the non-Communist factions, according to The New York Times of November 16, 1989. U.S. military intelligence officials continued to participate in a Bangkok-based working group responsible for buying arms for the non-Communist factions. The working group is composed of representatives of the Thai, Malaysian and Singaporean governments and the non-Communist factions, and the arms it buys, including U.S. weapons, are paid for by Singapore.)

In May, Vice President Quayle visited Cambodian refugee camps in Thailand, met with Sihanouk and used the visit to advocate U.S. military aid. Such aid was seen as an important bargaining chip to assure a full Vietnamese withdrawal, to force Hun Sen to undertake serious negotiations for a political settlement, and to bolster Sihanouk's position vis-a-vis the Khmer Rouge. The administration did not want the Khmer Rouge back, Quayle said, but at the same time he publicly allied the U.S. with Sihanouk, who thought Khmer Rouge participation in an interim government essential.

The aid proposal was greeted with some skepticism in the region, but by the beginning of June, an administration proposal for covert military aid had been sent to Congress. Quayle, in a speech to the Heritage Foundation, said that military assistance was part of U.S. "moral responsibility" to keep the Khmer Rouge from returning to power. How the administration could maintain its backing of Sihanouk, who was committed to a Khmer Rouge role, and uphold that responsibility was not made clear.

The plan to provide lethal aid drew initial strong support from Representative Stephen Solarz, but other leading members of Congress were deeply opposed, seeing it as the first step toward military "re-engagement" in Indochina. In a debate on the issue during a June 5 Senate hearing, Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs Robert Kimmet stressed that the administration's objective in recommending the aid was to bolster Sihanouk's bargaining position.

At the Paris opening of an international conference on Cambodia on July 30, Secretary Baker stated that "[t]he United States strongly believes that the Khmer Rouge should play no role in Cambodia's future" and that "the strength of U.S. support for any Cambodian government will directly and inversely depend on the extent of Khmer Rouge participation, if any, in that government." But at the same time, he said that the United States was prepared to back Sihanouk's call for inclusion of the Khmer Rouge in an interim government and indicated to Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, in a private meeting during the conference, that the United States agreed the Khmer Rouge should have a role.

Such an agreement was contrary to the spirit and perhaps the letter of U.S. Public Law 100-502 of October 18, 1988, which states in its fifth paragraph that the United States

in cooperation with the international community should use all appropriate means available to prevent a return to power of Pol Pot, the top echelon of the Khmer Rouge, and their armed forces, so that the Cambodian people might genuinely be free to pursue self-determination without the spectre of the coercion, intimidation, and torture that are known elements of the Khmer Rouge ideology.

When the conference failed to produce a settlement, the administration blamed Hun Sen for having "shown no willingness to compromise to create a coalition government," simply because he refused to allow the Khmer Rouge to become equal partners in a coalition. An unnamed administration official, interviewed after the conference, said, "Our lead in this is Prince Sihanouk and it is his judgment that [the Khmer Rouge be included] to prevent civil war."

After the conference, as adminstration policy came under more Congressional fire, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs Richard Solomon testified at a September House hearing on Cambodia that while letting the Khmer Rouge sit in an interim government might not be "particularly morally impressive," it was the only realistic path to pursue. He went on:

Should the Khmer Rouge, responsible for genocidal violence of the 1970's, be totally excluded from the political process with only a military option? Or, should it, less its top leadership, be given a limited stake in a transitional political coalition that would, under international supervision, face elections?<%-20 <%0 We firmly believe that the chances are much better to get this problem under control if you have a structured political settlement than if you just leave a situation that is totally unstructured or constrained, where civil conflict is virtually a certainty.

Later the same month, Assistant Secretary Solomon called Sihanouk "our horse in this race."

By the end of September, the Vietnamese had substantially completed the unilateral withdrawal of their troops from Cambodia. At this point military aid to the non-Communist factions took on a different light. Secretary Baker rejected a Soviet-initiated arms moratorium in the region, but kept the supply of lethal aid to the non-Communist factions on hold. One of the major proponents of such aid, Representative Solarz, began to call for a restudy of the justification for military assistance.

In October, the perennial question arose as to which of the governments and factions should represent Cambodia at the United Nations. The administration spoke in favor of continued U.N. recognition of the CGDK, thereby allowing the Khmer Rouge delegate to represent Cambodia at the U.N. (The Soviet delegate, by contrast, argued that the seat should be left empty until a political settlement was reached.)

Similarly, the administration supported a General Assembly resolution calling for a "comprehensive political settlement" of the Kampuchean problem, which was understood in the debate to mean support for the quadrapartite coalition that includes the Khmer Rouge. The administration supported a resolution containing the vague formulation calling for the "non-return to universally condemned policies and practice of a recent past," rather than a more direct condemnation of the mass murder committed by the Khmer Rouge. Also, significantly, this phraseology does not suggest that the Khmer Rouge should not return to power, only that if it returns it should not act as it did before.

This weak stance was in non-compliance with the expressed provisions of Public Law 100-502, which states in its sixth paragraph:

[The U.S.] should seek the support of the member nations of ASEAN and other nations for the inclusion, in declarations and resolutions promulgated by the United Nations pertaining to the Cambodian conflict, of the principle that those responsible for acts of genocide and massive violations of internationally recognized human rights shall not return to positions of political power in Cambodia upon withdrawal of the foreign occupation forces.

Thomas Pickering, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, explained the U.S. position in a letter to Asia Watch shortly after the vote. In a curious turn of logic which plagues U.S policy on Cambodia, he stated:

The United States Government remains unequivocally opposed to a return to power of the Khmer Rouge. We therefore support the resolution submitted by the ASEAN nations, with nearly eighty co-sponsors, calling for a comprehensive political settlement<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>[That resolution] is aimed at the elimination of the Khmer Rouge threat through the democratic process under stringent international safeguards.

These "stringent international safeguards" were not specified in either his letter or in the U.N. resolution.

As the civil war intensified in Cambodia, Secretary of State Baker came up with the "Baker formula." Under this plan, which was a variation of the "quadrapartite solution," the Bush administration began actively seeking to gain acceptance for the "minimal participation" of the Khmer Rouge in a transitional Cambodian government. This was seen as an attempt to break the international diplomatic deadlock, since a solution freezing out the Khmer Rouge is said to be unacceptable to China and thus would not stop the fighting.

Opposition to this plan was expressed in a November 29 letter to Secretary Baker signed by 187 repesentatives and 26 senators, which read:

QUONOINEND = We are concerned that any U.S. effort directly or indirectly to promote a power-sharing role for the Khmer Rouge -- no matter how minimal -- would represent an implicit legitimization of a movement the world finds abhorrent and would constitute a profound shift in our policy.

In December, Representative Solarz called for an interim United Nations role to help forge a political settlement, a concept which the Austrialian government independently proposed as well in December. Both the Australian and British governments have sent diplomats to meet with Hun Sen officials. While the Bush administration has made no official response to these new developments, they provide an important opportunity for the administration to reassess its role in Cambodia and to match rhetoric with reality by truly working to isolate the Khmer Rouge.

CHILE

The Bush administration, with a relatively new ambassador in Santiago, new senior officials and a new Chile desk officer at the State Department, and new U.N. representatives, has nonetheless pursued a Chile policy unchanged from that of the second Reagan administration. Chile's transition to open elections after the October 5, 1988 plebiscite has been supported, just as it was during the second Reagan term; the United States has continued to pursue a resolution of the Orlando Letelier-Ronni Moffitt assassination case, for which two high-level Chilean secret-police officials were indicted by a U.S. grand jury in 1978; and officials at the U.S. embassy continued to meet with a range of opposition figures and human rights advocates. Unfortunately, at the United Nations in December 1989, the U.S. abstained on a widely supported resolution critical of ongoing human rights abuses in Chile; such abstentions also had been common in the later Reagan years, reflecting the Reagan administration's refusal to apply international standards consistently at the U.N.

The Bush administration's policy has contained a single surprise, and even this was consistent with Reagan policy. Unbeknownst to either the Chilean people or the U.S. Congress, the Bush administration consummated a deal to sell 15 transport helicopters to the Chilean army -- a deal made secretly by the Reagan administration in 1987, at a time when the plebisicite's date had not even been determined and when the opposition was still fragmented; 1987 was a year in which, for the first time since the mid-70s, people disappeared in Chile, and a year in which members of the opposition were murdered, imprisoned, tortured and threatened with death. The helicopter deal technically did not have to be cleared with Congress, because the helicopters were not outfitted for offensive use and were of a type not included on the "munitions list" of arms covered by human-rights conditions. But members of Congress concerned with human rights were stunned nevertheless at hearing of the sale after it became public knowledge in Chile in August 1989. They considered the timing of the sale poor, the timing of the original deal very unfortunate, and the secretiveness of the maneuver underhanded.

The Chilean military has fulfilled its constitutional commitment to allow open elections for president and parliament, in light of General Augusto Pinochet's defeat in the presidential plebiscite of October 1988, and the elections took place without incident on December 14, 1989, with the democratic opposition handily winning the presidency and a majority in the parliament. Partially due to unfair advantages awarded to the regime under the peculiar "binomial" electoral system, however, the democratic coalition did not win the two-thirds majority of parliament that it needed to change regressive laws left in place by the regime, including curbs on expression and a lack of civilian authority over military commanders. U.S. embassy and State Department officials consistently endorsed the political process underway in Chile during the past year, and in their enthusiasm were reluctant to criticize the failings of the electoral system or ongoing human rights abuses. While the year saw a consolidation of plans to transfer the Chilean government to elected representatives, a more open climate for the press, and increased tolerance of political-party activity, there was also intimidation of opposition campaign workers, and a leftist politician was assassinated, while two national labor leaders were held in internal exile for most of the year and violent threats, house raids, abductions and physical attacks continued. These negative aspects of the situation did not draw comment from the State Department.

The helicopter sale, however, put Congress on its guard, and the 1990 foreign aid appropriations bill contains language which would permit a small amount of International Military Education and Training funds to go to the Chilean military after a civilian government is installed in March 1990, only on condition that the new Chilean president requests such aid, that human rights are being respected in Chile, and that the new government is cooperating with U.S. efforts to resolve the Letelier-Moffitt case through a bilateral commission.

The human rights issue that will be central in Chile next year -- the question of accountability for past human rights abuses -- is one on which the Reagan administration had a poor track record elsewhere in Latin America; in this the Bush administration should chart a new course for itself. The new Chilean government, led by Christian Democrat Patricio Aylwin, will need substantial international support in an effort to achieve truth and justice regarding the past sixteen years; the armed forces will be evaluating the balance of civilian versus military power in the new era and will be reluctant to be held accountable, especially for the mass killings and disappearances of the regime's early years. The United States could play a valuable role if the Bush administration were consistently willing to show positive interest in the pursuit of truth and justice in Chile, as this process will be essential to the strengthening of civilian authority and the rule of law.
CHINA

The Bush administration's policy toward China has been one of maintaining relations at any cost and sacrificing human rights in the process. The near-silence of the Reagan administration on human rights violations in China juxtaposed with its stridency toward the Soviet Union showed a clear double standard. The Bush administration, however, has raised hypocrisy to new heights by coupling public expressions of concern with behind-the-scenes efforts to patch things up with those responsible for the slaughter and arrests following the June 4 crackdown. The symbolism of a top-level U.S. delegation meeting in secret on the Fourth of July with the Chinese leadership who crushed the democracy movement, and again on International Human Rights Day, December 10, will stand as the hallmark of the Bush administration's human rights policy in 1989.

The Bush administration's willingness to ignore human rights and let the Chinese government set the terms of U.S.-China relations became evident in February when President Bush visited Beijing. He turned what could have been an important opportunity to raise human rights issues into a clear message that human rights in China was off the U.S. agenda. On February 26, he hosted a barbecue to which the U.S. ambassador, Winston Lord, had invited Professor Fang Lizhi, China's most outspoken dissident and human rights activist. Embassy officials told the press that the invitation was meant to signal concern about human rights. But that concern was not shared by the White House, which made it known before the event that the President would probably not meet with Fang. In any case, there was no opportunity: uniformed Chinese police physically prevented Fang from attending the dinner.

In final meetings with Chinese leaders before his departure, the President expressed only "regret" over the incident. The White House then went out of its way to say that the invitation to Fang had not been the President's idea and blamed the U.S. embassy for the fiasco. The message could not have been clearer: President Bush was more concerned with soothing the sensibilities of Chinese authorities than with defending human rights.

Quite apart from his studied avoidance of China's most famous advocate of basic freedoms, the President also ignored "talking points" on human rights prepared for him by his staff for use at the dinner. Throughout January and February, intellectuals in China, inspired by Fang, had sent petitions to Deng Xiaoping and the National People's Congress urging amnesty for such political prisoners as Wei Jingsheng, who has been imprisoned since 1979 for writing an article urging that China's modernization program include democracy. Their hopes that the U.S. President would give a boost to their efforts were dashed.

In March, martial law was declared in Tibet following a demonstration on March 5-7 in which Chinese troops followed Politburo member Qiao Shi's exhortation to be "merciless." Dozens were killed, and more than 300 were arrested. The State Department made a public statement deploring the violence and excessive use of force against demonstrators, but it did not mention China by name and did not express its views directly to the Chinese leadership -- undoubtedly to avoid offense.

From mid-April on, as student demonstrations in Beijing and elsewhere gathered strength, avoiding offense appeared to become the Bush administration's guiding principle. The President and Secretary of State studiously avoided comment on the growing democracy movement, and at no time did they publicly suggest that there would be serious repercussions if the authorities responded violently.

Lower-level officials were marginally more forthcoming. At a May 4 hearing before the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Asia, the Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Ambassador Richard Williams, stated the U.S. hope that Chinese authorities would act with restraint. In response to a question from the subcommittee chairman, Ambassador Williams conceded that it would be a positive gesture if the Chinese authorities would talk with the students, but declined to answer a question as to how the United States would respond if there was a crackdown on the demonstrators. When Representative Jim Leach, the ranking Republican on the subcommittee, asked whether the United States stood for absolute freedom of press and expression in China, Williams responded, "We are for absolute freedom of expression and press, and so forth, but I do not believe that we advocate any country taking steps if such steps would result in social chaos, and thus be incapable of reaching the goals which we want."

The administration refrained from public comment when martial law was declared on May 20. Administration sources have said that President Bush sent private messages to Deng Xiaoping, urging him not to use force against the students, but it is unclear with what strength those messages were conveyed.

After the tanks rolled into Tiananmen Square, the administration wasted precious hours "watching and waiting" before condemning the random massacre of civilians. Secretary Baker, appearing on Cable News Network just after massive violations had been extensively reported, said: "It would appear that there may be some violence being used here on both sides." He declined to discuss whether the Bush administration would consider sanctions against the Chinese, stating: "Before we get into hypothetical situations, let's see how this most recent and extremely deplorable development unfolds<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>Let's see what happens over the course of the next few days before we start hypothesizing about what we might or might not do in the future." Baker's refusal to "start hypothesizing" was a refusal to meet clear human rights violations with a firm U.S. response.

On June 6, after considerable prodding by Congress, the administration reluctantly imposed limited sanctions on China, including a suspension of sales of military items, suspension of visits between U.S. and Chinese military leaders, and a "sympathetic review" of requests of Chinese students for asylum. But it was clear even as he announced the sanctions that President Bush was unenthusiastic about applying economic pressure on China. At a news conference, the President stated: "I don't want to hurt the Chinese people. I happen to believe that commercial contacts have led, in essence, to this quest for more freedom." The President's fears about "hurting people" was rather disingenuous. No such concern was expressed when the United States imposed sanctions against Nicaragua, Cuba or Vietnam.>

The President went on to state that "I think that it's important to keep saying to those elements in the Chinese military, 'Restraint. Continue to show the restraint that many of you have shown.'" In view of the ferocity of the army's action against the demonstrators and the later round-up of democracy-movement participants, it hardly seemed appropriate for the President to be speaking of the military's "restraint." The President further reduced the significance of the sanctions -- and, indeed, trivialized the events at Tiananmen Square -- by stating that "now is the time to look beyond the moment to important and enduring aspects of this vital relationship for the United States."

Not content with the Bush administration's tepid response, Congress responded almost immediately to the crackdown. Within days, dozens of sanctions bills had been introduced by both Republicans and Democrats. On June 20, the House Banking Subcommittee on International Development Institutions and Finance held a hearing to discuss the U.S. position on loans to China in the multilateral development banks. The administration refused to send a witness to the hearing, thus depriving itself of an important platform to condemn Chinese abuses and to state a strong policy against loans to China by the World Bank. By law (Section 701 of the International Financial Institutions Act), U.S. representatives to the multilateral development banks are required to vote against loans to governments engaged in a pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights. Faced with the near certainty of Congressional action to force the U.S. to oppose loans to China, the administration announced later that day that it would seek to postpone new multilateral-development-bank loans to China, and suspended "participation in all high-level exchanges of Government officials" with China.

The sanctions announced by President Bush on June 6 and the later decision to oppose loans to China was as far as the administration was willing to go, despite calls in Congress for more extensive measures, such as suspension of China's Most Favored Nation trading status and an end to high-technology exports. Although the President promised to review other aspects of the U.S.-China relationship, additional sanctions were not imposed, despite the persistently serious human rights situation in China. Moreover, at no time did the administration state clearly what the United States expected from the Chinese government if sanctions were to be lifted -- a crucial step for making sanctions meaningful. Worse, the administration began undercutting the few sanctions it did impose almost immediately.

On July 9, the administration announced its decision to sell three Boeing jetliners to China, valued at $150 million. (A fourth aircraft was delivered in August.) The delivery had been halted, along with all other military sales, in June. The items are considered "dual-use" because their navigational equipment can be used for military purposes. The change in policy was justified by White House Chief of Staff John Sununu, who stated: "There was some indication a few days ago by the leaders in China that they were going to try to extend the hand [of conciliation] back to the students<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-25 <%0>That was a constructive step." No such "constructive step" took place.

In October, the ban on military sales was further weakened when the 42 Chinese military officers assigned to work on Project Peace Pearl, a $500 million program to upgrade Chinese fighter aircraft, were permitted to resume their work. The officials had been taken off the project at the time of the President's announced sanctions. On December 20, President Bush waived a Congressional ban on the export of three communications satellites to China. The ban had been imposed by Senator Albert Gore through an amendment to other legislation. Secretary Baker justified the sale -- which should have been prohibited under the President's own sanctions package -- as being in the U.S. "national interest."

According to The Washington Post (December 12, 1989), the only arms deal with China which now remains on hold is an $8.2 million contract for the shipment of submarine torpedoes and torpedo launchers. Again, as in the case of the sale of the Boeing aircraft, there is no sign that China modified its repressive policies in any way that would justify a diminution of sanctions.

The administration also undermined other aspects of the sanctions package. Immediately following the events of June 3-4, the Export-Import Bank (a U.S. corporation which provides loans to U.S. businesses seeking to invest overseas) quietly stopped processing Chinese loan applications. The State Department held up the applications for two weeks, then began processing loan applications as if nothing had happened.

By October, administration officials were quietly testing Congressional waters about the feasibility of resuming support for loans to China by the multilateral development banks. House and Senate leaders, however, made clear their opposition to such a move.

Despite the alleged ban on meetings between Chinese and U.S. officials, Secretary Baker openly met with the Chinese Foreign Minister in July during an international conference on Cambodia. In September, representatives from the office of the U.S. Trade Representative ("USTR") held meetings with Chinese officials to discuss China's entrance into the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ("GATT") -- a move ardently sought by the Chinese government. Although USTR officials told Human Rights Watch that they had conveyed their opposition to China's admittance to GATT in conversations with the visiting officials, they also admitted that as a result of the widely publicized meeting, Chinese entrance was brought a step closer. In October -- to the delight of the Chinese leadership -- the new U.S. ambassador to China, James Lilley, attended a major aeronautics show in Beijing in which a large number of military aircraft were displayed; representatives of the Western European countries were conspicuously absent.

The Bush administration attempted to export its own tepid response on China to its Asian allies. On July 6, Secretary Baker met with foreign ministers of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and urged them not to adopt additional sanctions against China. An administration official who briefed reporters stated: "We are not considering new sanctions [and] we will be articulating our measured response -- that is what we will be arguing for." When meeting with the Japanese Prime Minister, Baker apparently warned Japan not to "isolate" China. This effort to lobby other countries against forceful measures to protest the killings and arrests sent yet another signal to the Chinese that the U.S. was not concerned about human rights.

The speed with which the Bush administration dismantled its own sanctions policy caught Congress off guard. Despite a flurry of Congressional activity on China sanctions, legislation was not completely enacted before Congress adjourned in November for the year. Sanctions against China (including a ban on arms sales, U.S. satellite exports and police equipment, an end to nuclear cooperation, a ban on further liberalization of export controls, and a suspension of investment insurance by the U.S. Overseas Private Investment Corporation) were actually passed by the House and Senate, and a conference report was drafted and adopted by the House -- over strong administration protests. Thanks to extensive lobbying -- led by National Security Advisor Brent Scowcroft -- the bill was weakened to allow a presidential waiver of the sanctions on "national interest" grounds. Unfortunately, due to a legislative technicality, the Senate failed to approve the conference report, and the bill languished. At the end of 1989, it was unclear whether Congress would again take up the issue of China sanctions when it returns to Washington on January 23.

Symbolically, the Bush administration's most important action toward China in 1989 was its decision to send a high-level delegation, including National Security Advisor Brent Scowcroft and Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger, to China on December 9. Anticipating the outrage that greeted the news, the administration made its decision in absolute secrecy. Congress was not consulted and, it appears, even the State Department's Asia Bureau was unaware of the plan. The enduring symbol of the Bush administration's human rights policy toward China will be the televised image of General Scowcroft, drink in hand, toasting the Chinese leadership with these words: "We extend our hand in friendship and hope you will do the same." He then went on to say, in a callous slap at the Chinese now in prison for their advocacy of peaceful change: "In both our societies there are voices of those who seek to redirect or frustrate our cooperation. We both must take bold measures to overcome these negative forces." These actions were clearly meant to placate Beijing and to apologize for the rupture in ties imposed by Washington after Tiananmen Square, despite the lack of Chinese action in curbing human rights abuses.

Faced with a barrage of criticism, President Bush did further damage. He justified his decision by stating that he was looking for ways to find "common ground" with Beijing, and noted that "[w]e have contacts with countries that have egregious records on human rights." Secretary Baker attempted to justify the mission by stating that human rights were on the agenda, and noted that China's leaders "[are] going to have to help us" if good relations between China and the U.S. were to be restored. Such a statement rang hollow, however, in light of the administration's unilateral move to repair relations on Chinese terms. President Bush then made plain that the West should not expect any quick reciprocity from the Chinese for the extraordinary U.S. gesture, stating that "time is required" before Beijing's full response can be evaluated.

There would be yet one more revelation in 1989 which eclipsed even the December mission. On December 18, the White House revealed that Scowcroft and Eagleburger had made a secret trip to China in July, just weeks after the crushing of the democracy movement. The trip had been kept secret and was only revealed when it was reported by Cable News Network. (The Secretary of State had apparently deliberately misled the Congress about the July visit when he said that the December trip was the first high-level U.S. visit to China.)

The administration stated that the purpose of the July mission was "to show the sense of purpose and direction of the U.S. Government." But it clearly violated the President's June 20 statement suspending all high-level exchanges with China.

While the Scowcroft-Eagleburger missions overshadowed other administration efforts to ignore human rights issues, there are several other aspects of the administration's policy which deserve condemnation. For example, the State Department attempted to persuade the Robert F. Kennedy Memorial foundation not to give its annual human rights award to Professor Fang Lizhi. According to Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, the chair of the memorial board, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs Richard Solomon asked that the award not be presented to Fang, stating that negotiations with the Chinese on Fang's release were at a "very delicate stage." Townsend said that the State Department was "not very helpful," because the award called attention to Fang's presence in the U.S. embassy -- a source of extreme irritation to the Chinese authorities which the Bush administration hoped to minimize.

The administration also opposed an important Congressional initiative which would have granted safe haven to Chinese students with J-1 visas in the United States. On November 30, the President announced that he would veto legislation to permit Chinese students to stay in the United States and, instead, would grant the students a four-year extension in the United States by administrative order. The President did not technically veto the bill. Since Congress had adjourned, presidential inaction on the bill would normally have constituted a "pocket veto." Instead, President Bush sent a memorandum of disapproval to the Congress indicating that he was returning the bill to the legislative branch. Because the President's order is actually more generous to Chinese students in the United States than the Congressional measure, it can only be assumed that the President vetoed the legislation to avoid offending the Chinese government by disassociating himself from the hugely popular Congressional measure. Congressional supporters of the bill -- which passed unanimously in both Houses of Congress -- objected to the administrative alternative because they feared that the President could change his mind if the Chinese government objected. Representative Nancy Pelosi and Senator Edward Kennedy, the chief sponsors of the legislation, have said that they intend to pass the legislation again, and many observers feel that Congress will have the necessary votes to override a presidential veto. (It should be noted that neither the Presidential action nor the Pelosi bill addressed the problems of Chinese nationals holding visas other than J-1, who will not have an automatic right to reside in the United States after June 5, 1990, when the President's June 6, 1989 directive offering one-year's safe haven to all Chinese nationals in the United States expires.)

The Bush administration also exhibited a lack of generosity toward Chinese nationals who fled their country after the June 4 crackdown. A group of more than 100 student leaders, dissident writers, intellectuals and independent trade unionists escaped to Hong Kong following the crackdown. France, alone among the Western democracies, speedily accommodated the asylum requests of about 70 of them. The rest remained in limbo, fearing detention and possible repatriation if they revealed their whereabouts to Hong Kong authorities. Instead of making it known that the Chinese would be welcome, the administration threw up bureaucratic obstacles and admitted only a handful.

Perhaps the one salutary response made by the administration after the Tiananmen Square bloodbath was the decision to offer sanctuary to Fang Lizhi and his wife, Li Shuxian, at the U.S. embassy in Beijing on June 6. Unfortunately, similar concern was not demonstrated about the fate of dozens of other activists. Ren Wanding, a human rights activist imprisoned during the Democracy Wall movement and prominent among the demonstrators in Tiananmen Square, went to the U.S. embassy after the June 3-4 crackdown. Instead of being treated like a person in imminent danger and in need of assistance, he was read bureaucratic regulations and eventually turned away. He was soon arrested and remains in detention.
COLOMBIA

In 1989, political violence in Colombia continued to be the most dramatic in the hemisphere. The figures are almost identical to those of 1988: almost 4,000 Colombians have been killed for political reasons, 75 percent in some 70 massacres involving five or more victims. In the United States, however, this human rights tragedy has been overshadowed by -- and often confused with -- violence by the Medellín cartel of drug traffickers in fighting President Virgilio Barco's efforts to bring them to justice, including by extraditing them to the United States.

The main actors in the political violence are the so-called "paramilitary groups" that operate against left-wing politicians, union leaders, grass-roots organizers and human rights monitors. Although these groups of private gunmen are recruited, financed and trained by the Medellín cartel, they are distinct from the armed thugs that are responsible for the violence committed in the ordinary course of the drug business. As the drug traffickers accumulate vast wealth and increasingly adopt the extreme right-wing views of certain members of the Colombian establishment, they have formed the "paramilitary groups" to conduct an ideologically based "dirty war" against actual and perceived leftist threats to their wealth. The "paramilitary groups" act under the direction of the Medellín cartel, but they also enjoy crucial assistance from well-placed and high-ranking officers in the Colombian army who share the druglords' right-wing ideology or who are willing to be bought off for those ends. These officers provide intelligence and ensure impunity for "paramilitary" actions. The high command of the army may not be deliberately involved in this unholy alliance, but it has repeatedly obstructed judicial and investigative efforts to stop it. For its part, the Barco administration took some brave steps in 1989, first to outlaw the "paramilitary groups," and then to prosecute some of their junior members. But it has yet to conduct aggressive inquiries into the connections between these groups and high-ranking military officers.

In August, the Medellín cartel escalated its war on Colombian society by murdering Senator Luis Carlos Galán, the candidate from the governing Liberal Party and the front-runner for the presidency. In response, President Barco launched a sustained attack on the cartel's vast holdings and, applying state-of-emergency powers, reinstated an extradition treaty with the United States. The Bush administration, for its part, outlined a dramatic plan to back Barco's efforts. President Bush announced the broad contours of the plan in a September 5 address, but the full details were still being worked out at year's end. The plan will eventually include $2 billion in military aid, crop substitution and economic development for Colombia, Peru and Bolivia. For fiscal year 1990, however, all of the new assistance sought is in the form of military aid, including weapons, training and advice.

In August, President Bush used his authority to "draw down" defense stockpiles and released $65 million in military aid and equipment to Colombia. This was the largest amount ever drawn from that stockpile, which exists to confront military emergencies. In 1989, Colombia received a total of $82 million in U.S. military aid, which represents more in one year than all the military aid received by Colombia in the 20 preceding years combined. This aid is designed exclusively to help the Colombian army fight the druglords. For fiscal year 1990, the Bush administration proposes to give Colombia $86.2 million in military and narcotics-control aid. The figures proposed for Bolivia and Peru are even larger.

The bill now before Congress that would authorize this aid (H.R. 3611, International Narcotics Control Act of 1989) requires as a condition of funds going forward a certification by the State Department that the recipients are not engaged in a consistent pattern of gross violations of human rights. The Reagan administration had a history of making such certifications about some of the world's most abusive regimes. We urge the Bush administration to use the certification process in a fair and accurate manner so that the condition on U.S. military assistance might be used as a powerful inducement to respect human rights.

Secretary William Bennett, the administration's "drug czar," has offered assurances that aid will not be given to human rights violators. In October, however, he requested from Congress a special waiver of the prohibition on police aid that is currently in effect for Colombia, Peru and Bolivia, as part of a package of $125 million in additional military aid. In a compromise, Congress approved the package in November but ordered that only 10 percent of the money spent in each country could go to police forces. In this fashion, restrictions that have been in place since the 1970's, and that effectively prevented the United States from becoming linked to police practices of torture, disappearances and executions, are quickly being swept aside. Latin American police bodies, whether under democratic or dictatorial governments, continue to use torture regularly as a standard interrogation technique. The current drug crisis seems to be the excuse for abandoning a policy that was soundly based in ethical and pragmatic terms.

Most important, the rush to provide military aid to the Colombian army and police ignores the unholy alliance between the Medellín cartel and high-ranking officers. The Bush administration does not seem concerned with this aspect of human rights in Colombia and reacts only to the cartels' attacks on establishment politicians and judges; while the U.S. has rightfully protested the killing of judges and Sen. Galán, it has ignored the killing of leading figures of the leftist Unión Patriótica, including presidential candidates and high-ranking officials. The danger in this approach is that indiscriminate military aid will strengthen the hand of, among others, the most anti-democratic elements in the army, and thus could further fuel Colombia's "dirty war." Although the Colombian government deserves help in fighting the drug cartels, military aid can and should be conditioned on an effort to sever the military-cartel alliance that plays such a large part in Colombia's political violence. The infusion of vast amounts of aid could help promote human rights, but only if the Bush administration is willing to use it as leverage to encourage the democratic institutions of Colombia to investigate the "paramilitary groups" thoroughly, to punish those officers who have contributed to recent massacres, and to drive the drug cartels' military allies out of the armed forces. Unfortunately, the Bush administration has yet to show any interest in pursuing these ends.

Finally, we note that the Bush administration has shown no interest in restricting the private export of weapons to Colombia. Paramilitary groups and cartel thugs buy assault rifles and semi-automatic guns of all sorts in the United States, where the gun lobby effectively prevents any meaningful restrictions on their sale. It appears that a large number of the Chinese-made AK-47 assault rifles which were sold by the thousands in the United States have made their way to the cartels. In response to public outcry over the killing of schoolchildren in California, President Bush restricted the sale of imported automatic weapons, but he refuses to institute any controls on semi-automatic weapons and on any weapon manufactured in the United States. Nor are there any plans to control the export of guns. This attitude eases the drug cartels' effort to build effective defenses against Colombian law enforcement and it gives the paramilitary groups the tools to commit political murders. Congressman Charles B. Rangel, Chairman of the House Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, has introduced a bill to control the flow of weapons to Colombia. The administration should support this effort.

CUBA

The Bush administration's human rights policy toward Cuba has been marked by internal contradiction. On the one hand, the administration, like the Reagan administration before it, has devoted considerable energy to documenting and denouncing Cuban rights practices. This had some positive impact, although unfortunately the benefits have often been temporary. On the other hand, the Bush administration, like its predecessor, has continued to take positions on ideological grounds which work at cross purposes with efforts to promote human rights in Cuba. The impression that emerges is of an administration that is interested in human rights in Cuba when it serves the purpose of discrediting Fidel Castro, but which quickly loses interest if there is an ideological price to pay. Although many at the State Department's Cuba desk in Washington and the U.S. interests section in Havana There is no embassy because the United States has no diplomatic relations with Cuba. have carefully monitored Cuban rights practices (including through trial observation) and have produced increasingly accurate reports, several senior administration officials seem to suffer from this policy contradiction.

After a brief period of relative openness in 1987 and the first half of 1988, Cuban rights practices deteriorated sharply in late 1988 and 1989. Much of the earlier improvement was due to a U.S.-led campaign before the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, which meets annually in Geneva. A resolution to highlight Cuban abuses narrowly failed in 1987, and in a compromise agreement in 1988, the Commission accepted a Cuban invitation to send a delegation to investigate human rights conditions. The delegation visited Cuba in September 1988.

Until that visit, the heightened international scrutiny and the threat of international condemnation helped create a narrow but significant space for independent activity in Cuba. The best evidence of this opening was the emergence of several small nongovernmental human rights organizations in Cuba. Though harassed, these activists managed to meet, to investigate human rights conditions, and to report on them publicly, without immediate imprisonment.

Unfortunately, in March 1989, the Commission sharply downgraded the level of scrutiny accorded Cuban rights practices. In the place of sending an investigative delegation, or even authorizing relations with independent human rights organizations in Cuba, the Commission simply welcomed "the willingness of the Government of Cuba to cooperate with the [U.N.] Secretary-General in maintaining direct contacts" on human rights issues.

Beginning several months before this vote, apparently in anticipation of it, the Cuban government moved to close the small space for independent activity that had opened while international attention was at its height. At the end of 1989, at least 27 independent activists were being held in Cuban prisons, including the heads of most of the major Cuban human rights organizations. These arrests began during and following the visit of the U.N. delegation in September 1988, continued with two sweeps at the time of the visit of Soviet General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev in April 1989, and resumed in August 1989 with the arrest of the leaders of three human rights organizations. Many of these human rights monitors have been jailed for infractions of Cuban law such as producing a human rights newsletter and attempting to hold a peaceful demonstration; these are considered petty crimes, punishable by up to one year in prison, and are tried at the municipal-court level, where Cuban law deems defense attorneys "not indispensable." Others have been convicted of such felonies as spreading false information, and have received prison terms of up to two years. At the same time, Cuba stopped permitting visits from international human rights organizations. During the brief opening, representatives of such organizations, including Americas Watch, were occasionally allowed to visit, although under the fiction that the organizations themselves were not being admitted.>

This crackdown on independent activity was made possible by the lack of legal protection for basic liberties, including the right of privacy, due process of law, and freedom of expression, association, assembly and movement. The earlier opening was entirely the product of a political decision by the Cuban government; because this greater tolerance was never codified in Cuban law, the government remained able to close this political space at any time.

Although the U.N. Human Rights Commission is an exceedingly political body, the political mix that led to an effective suspension of scrutiny of Cuban rights practices was in at least two respects a product of the continuing ideological strains in U.S. human rights policy toward Cuba. First, because the Commission's initial decision to review human rights in Cuba was due in large part to exaggerated U.S. charges of ongoing political executions, disappearances and torture, it became difficult to sustain that scrutiny when the U.N. delegation to Cuba found no evidence to support those allegations. Indeed, to the credit of those who drafted the State Department's accurate country report on Cuban rights practices issued in February 1989, those charges have also been omitted from the formal U.S. assessment of Cuban rights practices.

Second, U.S. credibility before the Commission was hurt by the perception that the administration's single-minded focus on Cuba was to the exclusion of comparable violators who happened to be U.S. friends. That perception was only reinforced by the Bush administration's decision to retain Ambassador Armando Valladares as the U.S. representative to the Commission. A former long-term political prisoner in exile, Valladares's understandable deep, personal antipathy for the Castro dictatorship appears to have left him with little interest in pursuing other violators, particularly of the non-Communist sort.

Accused of such selective attention during a September 20 hearing before the House Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere Affairs, Ambassador Valladares pointed to his work against rights violations in Afghanistan, Romania and South Africa to show that he had interests outside Cuba. But none of the three demonstrated an even-handed commitment to human rights -- Afghanistan and Romania because, like Cuba, they were Communist states, and South Africa because condemnation would be routine regardless of the U.S. position. Notably, Valladares made no mention of abusive governments where a strong U.S. stance against abuses would have made a difference before the Commission -- such U.S. friends as Iraq and Guatemala.

The administration's apparent aim of discrediting the Castro government, even to the point of undermining efforts to improve human rights in Cuba, has manifested itself outside the U.N. context as well. In testimony on August 2 before the House Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere Affairs, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs Richard Schifter concluded his description of Cuban rights abuses with the comment, "if [a] better tomorrow comes, it will not be under the rule of Fidel Castro." Whether or not this prediction turns out to be accurate, it is hardly a productive way to encourage Castro to curb rights abuses. Rather, it leaves the impression that the administration is using Cuban rights abuses simply to discredit the Castro government.

Although the Bush administration, following the lead of the February 1989 country report, has generally refrained from exaggerating Cuban abuses, there have been exceptions. For example, in August 2 testimony before the House Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere Affairs, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Michael Kozak stated:

QUONOINEND = Aryeh Neier of Americas Watch estimated last month that the number of prisoners held on political charges could range as high as 300, some of whom had been held in prison since shortly after Castro came to power. Other estimates, which include those jailed for religious beliefs or for attempting to leave the country without permission, range in the thousands. The Castro regime admitted in March of 1988 that 455 prisoners were being held for "crimes against state security," an acronym for loosely defined political crimes.

This statement was deceptive in several respects. First, by referring to "[o]ther estimates, which include those jailed for religious beliefs or for attempting to leave the country without permission," it implied that the figure of 300 cited by Neier in the article referred to did not include those categories of prisoners, when in fact it clearly did; there was simply no basis for Kozak's allegation of "thousands" of political prisoners. See Aryeh Neier, "Cuba: The Human Rights Show," The New York Review of Books, June 15, 1989. After citing Cuban government figures on the number of political prisoners, Neier noted that those figures left out several categories of political prisoners, among them those charged with allegedly attempting to leave Cuba, desacato (disrespect or contempt) and clandestine printing -- the latter including Jehovah's Witnesses. He then explained that when prisoners convicted of these crimes are added to those listed by the Cuban government, the number of known political prisoners was "less than three hundred." Kozak thus was wrong in implying that Neier did not consider those imprisoned "for religious beliefs or for attempting to leave the country without permission." Although Neier went on to say that "[t]here may be some others whose names are not known, particularly among Jehovah's Witnesses held for clandestine printing and among conscientious objectors held in military prisons," there was nothing to support Kozak's estimate of "thousands" of political prisoners. Second, while Kozak cited the figure of 455 political prisoners given by the Cuban government in March 1988, he omitted the more recent figure of 121 political prisoners -- cited in the same column of Neier's article -- which the government gave to the U.N. delegation after its September 1988 visit; that figure reflected the substantial numbers of prisoners released in anticipation of the U.N. visit. Finally, Kozak chose not to mention the most accurate source on numbers of prisoners (because it systematically visits all political prisoners with the exception of military offenders) -- the International Committee of the Red Cross; it counted 257 political prisoners as of May 1989. What emerged was a greater concern with discrediting Cuba than with accurately describing Cuban rights practices -- the same tendency which contributed in part to the ultimate failure of the U.S. effort on Cuba at the U.N.

In an apparently less calculated error, Ambassador Valladares testified on September 20 that Elizardo Sanchez, the head of the Cuban Commission for Human Rights and National Reconciliation, had been "sentenced to one year for spreading false propaganda." Although Sanchez had been arrested on August 6 and was sentenced to two years in prison for the charges cited on November 24, there was no basis for Valladares's statement at the time he made it. False reports are probably inevitable when monitoring as closed a country as Cuba, but it is to be hoped that Ambassador Valladares would take greater care in verifying his information before incorporating it into formal Congressional testimony, particularly when it was one of only two specific cases he detailed.

Another important way in which the United States could have a significant impact on Cuban rights practices is through the prospect of improved relations with Cuba. Human Rights Watch takes no position on whether U.S. relations with Cuba should be upgraded and, if so, under what circumstances. We note, however, that the Bush administration has failed to use the prospect of improved relations as an effective tool to promote human rights.

President Bush has stated that the current state of U.S.-Cuban relations is due, at least in part, to Cuban rights violations. But he has refrained from stating explicitly that relations would warm if Cuban respect for human rights improved. In his most explicit comments on the topic since taking office, a May 22 speech at the White House marking Cuban Independence Day, the President stated:

I challenge<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>Fidel Castro to take concrete and specific steps leading to free and fair elections and full democracy. A useful first step would be to accept a proposed plebiscite in Cuba. I also strongly believe that Cubans who wish to leave Cuba should be allowed to do so -- a fundamental human right guaranteed by free nations<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>

These were appropriate and useful comments. But the President went on to address the prospect of improved U.S relations with Cuba:

And this I pledge -- unless Fidel Castro is willing to change his policies and behavior we will maintain our present policy toward Cuba -- knock off this wild speculation as just that -- some suggesting that our administration is going to unilaterally shift things with Fidel Castro -- I am not going to do that and I'm glad you're here to hear it directly from me.

These comments are notable for the manner in which President Bush carefully avoided saying that relations would improve if specified violations ceased. Instead, the President simply blamed those rights violations for the current state of U.S.-Cuban relations. The distinction is important because Cuban desires for improved relations with the United States, particularly in the economic sphere, could provide a powerful incentive for improvement in Cuban human rights practices, but only if the Cuban government is able to see a clear linkage between the two issues. So far, the Bush administration has been unwilling to make that linkage explicit.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA

Although an extraordinary series of demonstrations brought down the regime of Milos Jakes in November, the human rights situation in Czechoslovakia during most of 1989 was characterized by dozens of political trials, violent dispersals of peaceful demonstrations, and nearly constant harassment of independent activists. The Bush administration, with occasional exceptions, responded to these crackdowns with appropriate protest and concern.

U.S. embassy officials developed ties to the human rights community in Czechoslovakia, especially Charter 77, which kept them informed about human rights violations. An embassy representative, usually the human rights officer, attended most political trials and hearings held during the past year. The embassy presence at trials demonstrated U.S. concern for activists persecuted for the legitimate exercise of their rights, and often had a beneficial effect on the outcome of such trials. In addition, U.S. officials made clear that U.S.-Czechoslovak relations would not improve until Czechoslovak authorities made significant progress on human rights.

For example, the administration protested police violence against demonstrators on November 17, 1989 and later issued statements supportive of Civic Forum, the umbrella group of independent activists formed in November. The administration then cancelled the proposed visit to the United States of Czechoslovak party ideology chief Jan Fojtik, citing the police actions of November 17:

Now as in the past, only full respect for the human rights of Czechoslovak citizens can provide the basis for stable, long-term good relations between the U.S. and Czechoslovakia.... We are disappointed that the actions of the government of Czechoslovakia have made a mockery of the U.S.-Czechoslovak dialogue begun in a sincere atmosphere in New York. We are even more disappointed that the Czechoslovak government has demonstrated so violently its unwillingness to address its citizens' hopes for democracy.

The U.S. delegations to the Helsinki review conferences in Vienna (January), London (April) and Paris (May-June) -- part of the process known formally as the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe -- also deserve credit for raising human rights concerns involving Czechoslovakia. For example, Ambassador Morris Abram, the head of the U.S. delegation to the Paris conference, pointed to continuing Czechoslovak violations and the government's disregard for the Helsinki process:

Virtually on the eve of this meeting Czechoslovakia released prisoners of conscience Vaclav Havel and Jiri Wolf, yet Havel, as we recall, was arrested for participating in a peaceful demonstration the very week the Vienna meeting ended. Others arrested at that time remain in prison.

During the extraordinary events of November, the administration played a constructive role in urging Czechoslovak authorities to address Civic Forum's demands for democracy in a peaceful manner. After a widely observed general strike on November 27, State Department spokesman Margaret Tutwiler "encourage[d] further dialogue between the Czechoslovak authorities and Civic Forum...."

At times, however, the administration seemed to let down its vigilance. For some ten years, the Czechoslovak government had requested a high-level meeting with U.S. officials, but the U.S. had been unresponsive, at least in part on human rights grounds. Then, on September 27, 1989, the highest level meeting between the United States and Czechoslovakia in eleven years took place during the United Nations General Assembly session, when Secretary of State James Baker met with Foreign Minister Jaromir Johannes. Although Secretary Baker delivered a strong message that human rights violations are the main stumbling block for improved bilateral relations and also raised some specific cases of political prisoners, the timing of the meeting seemed ill advised because it took place during a period of crackdown and hard-line retrenchment by Czechoslovak authorities. On August 21, for example, police and militia wielding night sticks attacked a peaceful demonstration of 2,000 to 3,000 people and beat many of them. Some 375 people were arrested, including a number of foreigners. This was followed by a new wave of arrests and political trials of leading human rights and independent activists. Given this context, September was the wrong moment for the Bush administration to switch from shunning to trying to engage the Prague leadership.

Similarly, in November, when the Czechoslovak government announced what appeared to be a liberalized travel policy, the administration went too far in applauding the change. President Bush called the announcement "a very good and encouraging step." But the new visa policy did not merit such unqualified praise because it represented no change whatsoever in the ability of citizens to receive passports, only in the ease with which those already holding passports might receive exit visas for travel to the West. A more tempered response would have focused attention on the obstacles to free travel that remained.

As the new situation unfolds in Eastern Europe and relations between the United States and Czechoslovakia expand, it is hoped that the Bush administration will continue to be a strong proponent of human rights in Czechoslovakia. We caution the administration, however, not to let euphoria over dramatic developments dull its critical faculties. Attention must be paid to half-way measures and any backsliding, and improved relations should depend on concrete progress, institutionalized through legislative enactments, in respect for human rights.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

The United States has largely failed to address the serious abuses that plague Haitian sugar-cane cutters on Dominican government-operated plantations, such as forced recruitment and labor, restrictions on freedom of movement and association, inadequate living conditions and dangerous working conditions. Because it is the Dominican Republic's largest trading partner and the largest consumer of Dominican sugar, the U.S. is in a position to take the lead in demanding that the Dominican government correct these practices. However, apart from the State Department's annual Country Reports on Human Rights Practices --which was drafted most recently by the Reagan administration and issued in February 1989 -- the Bush administration issued no public statements on the treatment of Haitian sugar-cane workers in 1989. Moreover, the country report is evasive and cursory in reporting as mere allegations the abusive practices that have been widely documented in the Dominican press and could easily have been verified by U.S. embassy representatives in Santo Domingo.

Indicative of the administration's inattention to the plight of Haitian sugar-cane cutters was the admission of the embassy's human rights officer, during an interview with Americas Watch in June 1989, that he had never been to a batey -- the name for the primitive residences where Haitians live as they are made to cut cane. Rather than use its considerable leverage to encourage the Dominican government to put an end to these serious violations, the Bush administration has chosen to ignore them.

The Haitian victims of this coerced labor are of three sorts. Some come directly from Haiti, seeking escape from the repression, unemployment and grueling poverty of their country; they are usually captured at the border and sent forcibly to government-run plantations. Others are among the estimated 500,000 Haitians living permanently in the Dominican Republic; they are rounded up at random and brought to government-run plantations for the harvest season, either by force or by threat of expulsion, to which they are extremely vulnerable because the Dominican government refuses to regularize their civil status despite the years that many of them have spent in the country. Still others have been born in the Dominican Republic and thus should be considered Dominican citizens under the terms of the Dominican Constitution; instead, they find themselves in the same position as their first-generation parents.

The overseers of forced labor by Haitian workers are the officials of the Dominican government's State Sugar Council ("CEA"), which operates most Dominican sugar plantations. The conditions on the state-run plantations are so poor, the pay so low, and the work so onerous that the CEA is unable to attract the number of voluntary workers needed to harvest the sugar crop. The CEA attempts to secure the thousands of additional workers it needs through forced recruitment. The CEA is assisted in this effort by the Dominican military, which provides the muscle behind the coercion. Dominican soldiers are responsible for capturing Haitians and delivering them to CEA plantations. And uniformed, armed men patrol the plantations -- both the sugar cane fields and the bateys -- to prevent escapes. Haitian workers are frequently made to live in shacks that lack cooking facilities, running water, latrines, electricity or medical facilities.

On January 27, 1989, a truck carrying approximately 73 Haitians and guarded by armed Dominican soldiers overturned, killing 47 Haitians. Several of the survivors told of being captured on the border, kept in military barracks for several days, then put on the truck to be taken to a sugar plantation. Although it was widely reported in the Dominican and international press, this incident, and the larger problem it dramatized, were overlooked by the Bush administration.

The State Department's most recent report on human rights in the Dominican Republic systematically understated the abuses faced by Haitian sugar-cane cutters. For example, while noting that "human rights groups and other organizations charged that Haitian laborers in the sugar-cane fields, especially those in the country illegally, were subject to work against their will" (emphasis added), the State Department failed to endorse these "charges" in its own voice. The embassy's apparent failure even to visit the bateys undoubtedly accounted for its reluctance to comment more directly on these abuses.

Moreover, the report went on to highlight the least coercive form of forced recruitment employed by Dominican authorities. It noted that "one issue raised by human rights groups, which has continued to generate criticism and allegations of abuse within the Dominican Republic, was the Government program of rounding up illegal Haitian residents and requiring them to choose between a contract to cut sugar or deportation." But many Haitians rounded up by the military are not even presented with this "choice," but are simply taken forcibly to the sugar-cane fields.

To make matters worse, these Haitians at times are not "illegal immigrants routinely<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>deported under Dominican immigration law," as the State Department called them, but Haitians who, having been born in the Dominican Republic, should be considered Dominican citizens according to the Dominican Constitution. The State Department's sole allusion to this problem was in the following qualified reference to third-party allegations: "Some domestic human rights groups expressed concern that such actions [the round-ups] may have impinged on the legal and human rights of Dominicans of Haitian descent as well as Haitians residing legally in the Dominican Republic."

In purporting to describe the conditions of work in the Dominican Republic, the State Department's report omitted any mention of the working conditions of the sugar-cane cutters, who often are forced to toil twelve or more hours a day, at the back-breaking and dangerous task of cutting cane, with little if any opportunity to rest. Nor did the State Department mention that trade unions formed to organize Haitian sugar-cane workers have been denied the right to register and thus have been prevented from funtioning. The report also neglected to highlight the problem of child labor in the sugar-cane fields, although it noted the problem as a general one facing the Dominican Republic. This U.S. indifference to the plight of Haitian sugar-cane cutters comes despite close U.S. ties to the Dominican sugar industry. The United States continues to allocate various trade benefits and its largest sugar quota to the Dominican Republic. In addition to approximately $30 million in annual bilateral aid, the United States accounts for approximately 75% of Dominican exports, having granted the Dominican Republic trade benefits under the Caribbean Basin Initiative and the Generalized System of Preferences. Moreover, the United States continues to allocate the Dominican Republic by far the largest segment of the U.S. sugar quota, According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the 333,035 tons of sugar allocated to the Dominican Republic for the 21-month period beginning January 1, 1989 represents 17.6% of the total U.S. sugar quota. The next largest beneficiary, Brazil, is allocated 274,375 tons, or 14.5% of the quota, followed by the Philippines at 298,975 tons (13.5%) and Australia at 157,056 tons (8.3%). No other country is allocated more than 100,000 tons during this period. despite reductions in the quota during the mid-1980's, so that sugar is still the main Dominican export to the United States. Despite this substantial U.S. interest in the Dominican sugar industry, the abuses that underwrite that industry have received little critical attention from U.S. authorities.

U.S. embassy officials justified this inattention by claiming that Haitians on CEA plantations live no worse than many Dominicans. But whether or not that is true, it provides no justification for U.S. inaction toward CEA abuses. Because many of the Haitians working on CEA plantations are essentially in government custody, Dominican authorities have a special duty to ensure standards that are minimally sufficient, regardless of the standards that prevail for those at liberty. Moreover, the poor living and working conditions endured by many Dominicans provide no justification for the coercive practices employed by the CEA and the Dominican military in seizing Haitians and sending them to CEA plantations.

There are two rays of hope in U.S. human rights policy toward CEA abuses. First, the new U.S. ambassador, Paul Taylor, expressed concern over the plight of Haitian sugar-cane cutters during a meeting with Americas Watch in June. Moreover, the United States Trade Representative has accepted for review a petition filed by Americas Watch challenging abuses of labor rights at the hands of the CEA. We hope that the Bush administration will use the occasion of that petition, as well as the apparent interest of its ambassador, to apply its considerable leverage to curb Dominican government abuses of Haitian sugar-cane workers.
EAST GERMANY

The opening of the Berlin Wall was one of the most dramatic events of 1989. For 28 years, it stood as a symbol of both the division of Europe and the hardline regime of Erich Honecker. Although no one could have predicted the extraordinary events that rocked East Germany in the second half of 1989, the Bush administration was slow to react when they occured. During the first half of the year, the administration paid little attention to East Germany; in the second half of the year, beginning with the huge exodus of East Germans to the West but especially after the opening of the Wall, the administration concentrated on the political aspects of the situation -- stability and reunification -- and barely mentioned human rights. Although political considerations are important, the administration must not equate promises for free elections with respect for human rights.

Before the fall of Honecker's government in October, human rights violations in East Germany centered mainly on freedom of movement, expression and association. The U.S. State Department and its delegations at the Helsinki follow-up meetings, formally part of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe ("CSCE"), criticized East Germany on these grounds. On October 10, for example, after police attacked peaceful demonstrators during the wave of demonstrations that eventuallly forced Honecker to resign, State Department spokesman Margaret Tutwiler stated that "[t]he United States deplores the use of violence to respond to peaceful calls for dialogue and reform," and that Washington supports East Germans "seeking peaceful dialogue aimed at bringing progressive change to their country."

The State Department also applauded the Hungarian government's decision in September to open its borders to allow more than 12,000 East Germans to leave for the West. On September 11, spokesman Richard Boucher commended "the unilateral action of the Hungarian government [that] courageously resolved what threatened to become a human problem of great magnitude. In so doing, the government of Hungary has demonstrated its own commitment to human rights and freedom of movement<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>"

But on November 9, when the East German government opened the Berlin Wall and allowed its citizens to travel freely to the West, the administration was surprisingly subdued in its response. In a press conference on November 9, President Bush called it "a good development in terms of human rights," hardly an enthusiastic reception for such an historic act. He continued:

I'm very pleased. And I've been very pleased with a lot of other developments. And, as I've told you, I think the United States' part of this, which is not related to this development today particularly, is being handled in a proper fashion. And we'll have some that'll suggest more flamboyant courses of action for this country, and we're, I think, handling this properly with the allies, staying in close touch in this dynamic change. Try to help as development takes place, try to enhance reform, both political and economic.

Since November when the mass movement in East Germany began to effect significant political changes, statements about East Germany by administration officials have concentrated on the political and economic reforms without emphasizing human rights issues. Secretary of State James Baker's speech in West Berlin on December 12 illustrated the administration's attitude. Although he touched on human rights issues, the thrust of his message concerned political and economic questions. He deserves credit, however, for making the following points relating to human rights:

[T]rue stability requires governments with legitimacy, governments that are based on the consent of the governed<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>NATO should also begin considering further initiatives the West might take<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>to build economic and political ties with the East, to promote respect for human rights, to help build democratic institutions, and to fashion, consistent with Western security interests, a more open environment for East-West trade and investment.... The ballot box and the free market are the fundamental instruments of choice.... We need to offer the nations of the East hope, opportunities that can be seized as they take steps toward democracy and economic liberty<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>"

Despite the rapid pace of events, supporting East Germany's transition to democracy, based on respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, should be the cornerstone of U.S. policy toward that country. Political considerations, such as stability in the region, the future of NATO and the question of German reunification, should not obscure the human rights dimension. In its actions and statements at this critical time, the Bush administration should make clear that respect for human rights in East Germany is a priority for the United States that goes beyond the holding of free elections. In so doing, the U.S. would be allying itself with the forces working to institutionalize democracy and respect for human rights in East Germany.
EL SALVADOR

The low point of the Bush administration's human rights policy toward El Salvador was its handling of the case of the six Jesuit priests who were murdered, according to all indications by the army, during the November 1989 offensive launched by the Salvadoran guerrilla organization, the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front ("FMLN"). Prior to the FMLN's November offensive, the Bush administration appeared to have departed from some of the policies of the Reagan administration, particularly in its seeming willingness to pressure the Salvadoran armed forces to prosecute military officers for human rights abuses. But the administration's handling of the murder of the six Jesuit priests showed a reversion to the Reagan-era role of apologist for Salvadoran army abuses, largely overshadowing the more positive aspects of U.S. policy toward El Salvador in 1989.

The murder of the six priests (and their two domestic workers) at their residence in the University of Central America ("UCA") on November 16 is, in symbolic terms, the most important human rights case since the murder of Salvadoran Archbishop Oscar Romero in 1980. Like the Romero assassination, the Jesuit murders show that in El Salvador, no dissenting voice, no matter what its stature, can be safe -- that the space for peaceful political opposition is once again closed. A great deal of circumstantial evidence implicates the army in the Jesuit killings, as well as the eyewitness testimony of a domestic worker who heard shots fired and saw men in the residence in uniforms like the ones worn by soldiers. The circumstantial evidence includes the fact that the army was patrolling the area at the time, the fact that the massacre took place during the military-imposed curfew, the leisurely pace with which the executions were carried out, the military's previous hostility and denunciations of the UCA and the Jesuits, and the search of the pastoral residence by soldiers two days before the murders.

Despite fulsome condemnations of the murders by State Department spokesmen, no one in the administration would publicly discuss the likelihood of the Salvadoran army's responsibility, or comment on the overwhelming circumstantial evidence implicating the army. Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Bernard Aronson told members of Congress that his "gut feeling" was that "right-wing" forces were the perpetrators -- a term that was used, at least by the Reagan administration, in an attempt to distinguish violence by supposedly autonomous forces of the right from army-sanctioned conduct. Defense Secretary Dick Cheney stated that there was no evidence that the Salvadoran army was involved in the murders. President Bush said that "renegade forces on the right or the left" should be punished, but made no mention of the more obvious suspects, the uniformed soldiers seen at the crime scene. On November 20, President Bush announced that cutting off aid would be an "absolutely unacceptable" response to the killing of the priests, and added that he "absolutely believed" President Cristiani's assurances that the Salvadoran government had not been involved in the killings and would "get to the bottom" of the matter. The President's optimism about a serious investigation of the case was unwarranted. Fully two weeks after the murders, the Salvadoran Attorney General reported that he still had not questioned any of the soldiers who were stationed at the university on the night of the massacre. At year's end, no important developments in the investigation had been announced.

The failure of the President and his deputies to speak frankly about the likelihood of the military's responsibility for the crime and their efforts to shift the blame to the "right," or even the "left," were decidedly unhelpful. The Salvadoran armed forces and the courts can be expected to take their cues from U.S. pronouncements on the case, which cannot help but reduce the pressure for a proper investigation and the conviction of the military unit which probably carried out the killings.

The administration's determination to shield the Salvadoran military from criticism for the Jesuits' murders became glaringly apparent in its handling of the eyewitness to the massacre, Lucía Barrera de Cerna. A week after the massacre, Cerna testified before the judge of the 4th Penal Court of San Salvador that at the scene of the murders she had seen men in uniforms of the sort worn by the army. She, together with her husband and child, were then brought to the United States, accompanied by U.S. embassy political officer Richard Chidester, ostensibly for their protection.

Instead, Cerna and her husband were interrogated by the FBI for four days in Miami, during which time Cerna was held virtually incommunicado. Among those participating in the interrogation was the Salvadoran military official who heads the U.S.-funded Special Investigations Unit, Colonel Manuel Antonio Rivas. Chidester, without identifying Rivas, assured Cerna that she could trust him; Rivas was then particularly insulting, abusive and threatening in his questions. For three of her four days of interrogation -- far longer than would have been necessary to record her short account -- Cerna was repeatedly encouraged to change her testimony and say that she had seen nothing on the night of the killings. Col. Rivas repeatedly accused her of lying. According to Cerna, Spanish-speaking FBI agents suggested that she would be sent back to El Salvador -- and almost certain death -- if she did not tell the story that the FBI wanted to hear. Father Paul Tipton, president of the Association of Jesuit Colleges and Universities, described the interrogation in a December 17 op-ed in The New York Times. "In Ms. Barrera's mind," Tipton wrote, "the agents left no doubt about the implications of her testimony: `What you say will determine whether you can stay here or have to go back to El Salvador,' said an FBI agent.... `They're waiting for you there [in El Salvador.] They are going to kill you.'" Chidester was present throughout the ordeal.

After intense pressure, Cerna reportedly stated that her testimony had been coached. When her interrogators read down a list of names of individual Jesuits and church officials who might have coached her, Cerna reportedly responded, "la licenciada" -- apparently a reference to María Julia Hernández, head of the human rights office of the Catholic Archdiocese Tutela Legal. This allegation was then repeated by U.S. officials, according to The Washington Post, although it was emphatically denied by Hernández.

According to reports received by Americas Watch, Cerna was subjected to three polygraph tests at the end of her interrogation -- after she had accepted her questioners' suggestions that she had seen nothing on the night of the slayings. It was precisely when Cerna gave these false answers --the ones that she believed her interrogators wanted to hear -- that she failed the polygraph tests. After she was rescued from this interrogation, Cerna reaffirmed the accuracy of her original testimony given to the court.

Administration officials, including officials of the U.S. embassy, made purposefully misleading off-the-record statements to the press to the effect that the witness had failed the lie-detector tests and was therefore "useless." They insinuated that Cerna had failed the test in stating that she had seen uniformed men at the crime scene, while withholding the fact that she had failed the test only when, under pressure, she retracted her testimony and said that she had seen nothing. According to Father Tipton, U.S. Ambassador to El Salvador William Walker was among those spreading this rumor. "The ambassador was going around, privately saying to the press, `You can't quote me on this, but this witness is valueless,' Tipton said." (Martin McReynolds, "Salvadoran Witness Failed Lie Test After U.S. Coercion, Activist Says," Miami Herald, December 12, 1989.) Salvadoran Archbishop Arturo Rivera y Damas also objected to the treatment of the witness, stating that she had been "subjected to a veritable brainwashing in [the United States] and to the blackmail that she would be deported if she did not tell the truth. After this psychological torment, Mrs. Barrera hesitated and retracted her statement.">

Washington also appears to have energetically spread the word to the press that Cerna, Salvadoran Archbishop Arturo Rivera y Damas, and María Julia Hernández of Tutela Legal are not to be believed. The effort to smear them, particularly Hernández -- who is a true human rights professional, and does her work at great personal risk -- was most unwarranted.

The Bush administration denied that it had done anything wrong in handling the witness. U.S. Ambassador to El Salvador William Walker, in response to a statement by Archbishop Rivera, said:

I am saddened that the Archbishop does not believe that the United States government and he are in the same quest for the truth of what happened to, and who was responsible for, the murder of Father Ellacuría [one of the Jesuit priests], his colleagues, and two other civilians. From the moment that this outrage occurred, there have been a great many misinformed and unsubstantiated statements offered by persons in positions of authority. The version that was provided to the Archbishop is incorrect.

Ambassador Walker later denied that the witness had been threatened with deportation, and dismissed Archbishop Rivera's accusations with the following remark:

The archbishop is under a great deal of pressure. He wants to get the truth of the murder, and he has glued together a string of circumstantial evidence and decided that the army is guilty. But I think he is willing to accept a degree of evidence considerably lower than I'm willing to accept.

In a December 11 interview, President Bush stated that he had "looked into" the allegations that Cerna had been pressured to change her testimony and that he was "assured that is not the case." Bush expressed "confidence that our attorney general would not permit the kind of inquisition process that was alluded to<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>" Since Cerna's mistreatment at the hands of U.S. and Salvadoran investigators, no other witness to the killings is known to have stepped forward.

It is worth noting that the evidence against the army in the case of the Jesuits' murder was far more persuasive than the evidence purportedly demonstrating knowledge of an FMLN arms cache on the part of Jennifer Casolo, a U.S. citizen living in El Salvador. But the administration insisted that the evidence of Casolo's guilt was "definite." Indeed, every aspect of the administration's handling of the Jesuit murder case -- the refusal to comment on the evidence implicating the military, the abusive treatment of the sole known witness, the participation in a cover-up by spreading rumors of the witness's unreliability after having forced her to retract her testimony -- contrasts sharply with the administration's posture in the Casolo case.

Casolo, a U.S. churchworker who assisted religious and Congressional delegations visiting El Salvador, was arrested on November 25 when the Salvadoran police raided her house and allegedly found a cache of weapons in the backyard. The Casolo arrest came at a time when the Salvadoran police and army were arresting, jailing and expelling dozens of foreigners who had worked with Salvadoran churches and relief organizations. Hundreds of Salvadorans working for church and human rights causes were also jailed, and many were tortured. Virtually every church in El Salvador was raided and robbed by troops, and top church officials and other workers were arrested. Casolo was promptly jailed, and the authorities announced their intention to try her for terrorism. The National Police paraded Casolo in front of the press and, while not allowing her to say anything or see a lawyer, claimed that she had stored the weapons at her house. She was accused in the local press of running an FMLN safe house.

There is no doubt that the government used the incident as part of an effort to threaten and discredit the entire foreign religious community in El Salvador. According to the Salvadoran press, the National Police reported on November 28 that the case "proves once again the interference of foreigners who come to the country to collaborate with the FMLN terrorists<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>"

Under normal circumstances, one would expect the U.S. embassy to insist that the rights of a U.S. citizen who has been arrested by a foreign government be upheld, including the right to the presumption of innocence. In the case of El Salvador, the U.S. embassy staff, as well as officials in Washington, appeared to accept the Salvadoran military's view that Casolo's guilt was an established fact and thus leapt to associate the U.S. government with the unproven charges. An embassy spokesman pronounced the raid a "good bust" and embassy staff made off-the-record comments to the press about the quality of the evidence against Casolo. On November 27, White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater stated that "there are indications of her involvement, that's for certain." When pressed, Fitzwater was forced to admit that he had no information on Casolo's alleged "involvement" but declared that press reports had shown "definitive involvement in terms of her role and her past history there." But the press had said nothing about Casolo's "role" other than to describe her as a well-respected guide to foreign delegations who took no sides in the conflict. Fitzwater made his remark before Casolo had even seen a lawyer or been formally arraigned on the charges against her. Faced with harsh criticism, Fitzwater has since apologized "to anyone who feels that they were offended by this.">

In addition to condemning Casolo before she had been tried, administration officials leaked to the press that the Justice Department was considering prosecuting Casolo in the United States under the rarely used Neutrality Act, which bars U.S. citizens from taking part in military conflicts against countries with which the United States is at peace. Given the weakness of the Salvadoran judiciary, such statements by top U.S. officials could not help but affect the outcome of any trial of Casolo.

On December 11, following a storm of Congressional criticism, President Bush belatedly urged President Cristiani to ensure that Casolo receive a fair trial. The communication probably helped secure Casolo's release on December 13, when a judge who had earlier ordered her held for further investigation ruled that there was insufficient evidence to proceed. But even then, the administration made known that it was not convinced of the lack of evidence of Casolo's guilt. An unnamed administration official stated to the press:

There are real, compelling issues about how the weapons got there and why her personal effects were found with them.... We had hoped she would stay down there and cooperate in the case, but she did not. Our position was not to lean or pressure or strongly urge or condition assistance to El Salvador on her release in any way. The mention of Casolo's personal effects being found in the arms cache refers to the Salvadoran army's claim to have found photographs and other personal items buried in the backyard with the arms. The army had access to Casolo's personal effects in the course of searching her house, and there is no known independent witness to the supposed discovery of these items with the arms. Since it strains credulity to suggest that Casolo would implicate herself by placing such personal items in an illegal arms cache, this "evidence" appears more probative of a frame-up than of Casolo's guilt.

The Bush administration's performance on other human rights issues during the November offensive was not much better. At no time throughout the offensive did the administration condemn the killings and massacres of civilians reported by human rights groups. At no time did the State Department publicly deplore the torture of Salvadoran noncombatants -- many of them church workers and others who had attempted to provide assistance to the victims of the war -- who were swept into jails. At no time did the administration condemn the round-up of foreign religious workers -- including many U.S. citizens -- and their detention and expulsion from the county. Nor did the administration speak out against the widespread searches and damage done to dozens of Salvadoran churches and offices of popular organizations or the campaign of threats and abuse against church leaders.

By remaining silent on human rights abuses when the war escalated, the Bush administration signaled to the Salvadoran military that "anything goes" when fighting with the FMLN heats up. Such a policy not only encouraged abuses by the military during the offensive, but also undercut future efforts to restrain the Salvadoran authorities from killings, disappearances and torture once the current crisis passes.

Among the stances taken by the Cristiani government during the offensive was its refusal to agree to a truce to allow the International Committee of the Red Cross ("ICRC") to evacuate the wounded from areas of conflict. The ICRC appealed several times to both sides to the conflict to permit such a cessation of hostilities, but the Cristiani government, backed by the Bush administration, refused. In meetings with members of Congress, Assistant Secretary Aronson justified this position by referring only to the FMLN's willingness to agree to a cease-fire, charging that it wanted a "tactical truce." By disregarding the ICRC's call upon all parties to obey their obligation to permit care of the wounded, and by equating the humanitarian effort with a guerrilla tactic, the Bush administration did a grave disservice to the laws of armed conflict, and contributed to additional civilian casualties in San Salvador.

While the administration's handling of the Jesuits case, the Casolo case, and human rights violations during the November offensive will long be remembered as setting the tone of U.S. human rights policy toward El Salvador in 1989, there were some positive aspects to the Bush administration's posture in El Salvador. President Bush used the technique of sending high-level delegations to El Salvador to raise human rights concerns. This tactic, which helped to reduce military-supported death-squad abuses when President Reagan employed it by sending then-Vice President Bush on a similar mission six years ago, was one worth emulating because it signaled U.S. concern at a high level, and bolstered efforts which may have been underway by the U.S. embassy. Vice President Quayle visited El Salvador in February and delivered a strong message on human rights -- which reportedly included naming at least three soldiers and demanding that they stand trial for the murder of ten peasants at San Sebastián in September 1988. Quayle's trip persuaded the military to reopen its investigation of the massacre and eventually resulted in the army's announcement that army troops had been responsible for the massacre and for a later cover-up. Two officers, three noncommissioned officers and four soldiers were accused by the army brass and detained by the security forces, although they continue to receive their salaries. Marking a rare event in Salvadoran human rights cases, a civilian judge ordered the detention of the officers and soldiers. The prosecution was still pending at year's end.

Vice President Quayle again visited El Salvador in June, and once more delivered a human-rights message to the government. The trip was badly needed, since human rights conditions had deteriorated in the intervening months. This time, however, the message was diluted because Quayle used the occasion to meet with Roberto D'Aubuisson -- the former military officer who is widely credited with creating and sustaining the death squads. The Quayle visit with D'Aubuisson -- and a later invitation to D'Aubuisson to attend the Fourth of July celebration at the U.S. embassy -- marked a change in the U.S. policy of refusing contact with the death-squad leader. (The United States had previously isolated D'Aubuisson because of his involvement in a 1984 plot to kill then-U.S. Ambassador to El Salvador Thomas Pickering. D'Aubuisson is also said to have masterminded the murder of Archbishop Romero in 1980, and numerous other political killings.) In an interview with The Washington Post in December, Ambassador Walker justified the new U.S. tolerance for D'Aubuisson by noting that he occupied a position of importance within the ruling ARENA party. Walker then went out of his way to praise D'Aubuisson, stating: "There is no one in Salvador who does not recognize that D'Aubuisson is the best politician in the country."

The latest in the series of high-level missions was taken by Assistant Secretary Aronson and General Maxwell Thurman of the U.S. Southern Command, who visited El Salvador in early November. Yet, the value of the mission was diminished by the delegation's failure publicly to acknowledge or condemn government abuses.

While the Bush administration waited until the last several months of 1989 to adopt some of the worst features of the Reagan administration's policy toward El Salvador, other discredited aspects of Reagan policy continued without interruption. In August, the administration rejected for the third straight year a petition on Salvadoran labor rights before the U.S. Trade Representative ("USTR"). The petition was filed by Americas Watch pursuant to Section 502(b)(8) of the Trade Act, which contains legislation linking respect for labor rights with trade benefits under the Generalized System of Preferences. Once again, the administration denied the petitioner the right to appear before the USTR to present information on gross abuses of worker rights (including murders, arrests and torture of trade-union leaders, as well as severe limitations on Salvadoran workers' rights to associate, assemble, bargain and strike). The administration's repeated failure to examine labor-rights petitions on El Salvador has been a matter of concern to members of Congress. On July 14, Representative Joe Moakley and a bipartisan group of 106 other members of the House wrote to USTR Carla Hills, requesting that the petition be reviewed.

The administration's failure to review petitions on worker rights in El Salvador relates to the fact that many of the victims of government repression are members of left-wing unions. The administration's policy has been to attempt to discredit the unions associated with the National Union of Salvadoran Workers ("UNTS") federation, which administration spokesmen have repeatedly condemned as "guerrilla fronts," despite the fact that all are legal associations and have been responsible for the bulk of the collective contracts negotiated by Salvadoran workers in recent years.

Until recently, the State Department's position has been bolstered by that of the AFL-CIO, which has not supported a review of labor rights in El Salvador. The AFL-CIO's Department of International Affairs is hostile to the UNTS unions and financially supports a rival federation, the National Union of Workers and Peasants ("UNOC"), through its U.S. tax-funded organization, the American Institute for Free Labor Development ("AIFLD"). In late October, however, the AFL-CIO changed its position and supported review, and the Federation's president, Lane Kirkland, wrote to President Cristiani announcing the AFL-CIO's intention to seek USTR review of labor rights in El Salvador when a new review cycle begins next April. The AFL-CIO's change of heart appears to be the result of a decision by the labor federation that it supports in El Salvador to request a review, as well as a response to strong pressure from within the U.S. labor-union movement for a move away from the Reagan-Bush policy on Salvadoran worker rights.

The Bush administration has also continued the Reagan policy of refusing to limit or condition aid to El Salvador on respect for human rights. In this regard, Congress is as much to blame as the executive branch. Until the November military offensive and the murder of the six priests, there existed in Congress a virtual consensus about the need to maintain high levels of assistance to the Salvadoran government. Even after the ARENA party, long suspected by many in Congress of links to death squads, won the presidency and assumed office in June 1989, efforts by human rights leaders in the Senate (including Senators Tom Harkin, Patrick Leahy and Mark Hatfield) to limit military aid to El Salvador were defeated during a Senate vote in September. The Leahy amendment, as it was known, was an attempt to attach conditions to the fiscal year 1990 foreign aid appropriations bill. The measure, which was defeated, would have limited aid to $85 million per year and allowed Congress to review the government's human rights record before making available the second half of the aid package. A majority in the Senate, led by Senator Chris Dodd, objected to the restrictions and defeated the measure.>

Even after the murder of the six priests, an amendment to delay provision of a portion of U.S. military aid, offered by Representative David Obey in the House during consideration of the conference report on foreign-aid appropriations, was defeated by 21 votes. An amendment in the Senate, which tied the release of 30 percent of the military aid to a resolution of the priests' case, was defeated by a vote of 58 to 39. The message sent by the administration and Congress was that no abuse is too great to jeopardize U.S. aid. Such actions can only encourage the Salvadoran military to continue operating as a law unto itself. Thanks to ten years of uninterrupted aid, the Salvadoran military has grown from a force of 16,000 to 57,000. Its officer corps is virtually immune from prosecution for its abuses against the civilian population, and as an institution it eclipses any civilian structure in the country.

The Bush administration is today in the position of defending the "civilian" government of Alfredo Cristiani. That is an impossible task because President Cristiani is either in control of the army and security forces and thus responsible for the unspeakable abuses of those forces, or he is not in control. If in fact he is powerless to exert any meaningful control over those forces, then the Bush administration's fiction that it supports a legitimate government is really no more than a thin veil to cover up its support for a murderous and lawless military dictatorship. We urge that the Bush administration use the occasion of the serious army abuses committed in November and December to reexamine that unqualified support.
GUATEMALA

Building on the foundations laid by the Reagan administration and the U.S. Congress, the Bush administration has significantly strengthened ties with the Guatemalan military at a time when human rights violations by that force are rising sharply. This increased cooperation with the Guatemalan military inevitably puts a stamp of tacit U.S. approval on ongoing military repression. While administration officials have issued strong statements deploring political violence in Guatemala and have reinstated a travel advisory because of the violence, the increased U.S. involvement with the military gives the impression of only token concern, particularly when the administration has resisted attributing abuses to the military. The high level of political violence in which the military and security forces are implicated -- violence into which the Guatemalan government almost never launches vigorous investigations -- demands a cutback, if not a cutoff, in U.S. military assistance. President Vinicio Cerezo's credentials as a fairly elected civilian head-of-state are not sufficient reason for Washington to continue funding a military establishment that he is unable to control, particularly when that military bears major responsibility for the dramatic recent increase in violent abuses.

Elements of the Bush administration's growing ties with the Guatemalan military include:

the commercial sale, after approval by the State Department, of approximately 16,000 M-16 rifles for the Guatemalan army in 1988-89; Guatemala is reportedly seeking another 20,000 rifles at the time of this writing;

the construction by U.S. Army engineers and the Guatemalan military of a road circling Lake Atitlán, an area of active insurgency;

the training of Guatemalan paratroopers in marksmanship, tactics and night-patrolling by U.S. Green Berets, beginning in March; Lee Hockstader, "U.S. Raises Its Profile in Guatemala," The Washington Post, August 18, 1989.

a series of civic-action exercises by armed and uniformed National Guard units from Kentucky, Georgia, Iowa, Oklahoma, and Hawaii, mostly in Chimaltenango, a department with considerable rebel activity; Memorandum to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee by Bonnie Tenneriello, Washington Office on Latin America ("WOLA"), September 19, 1989.>

the ferrying of supplies and medical personnel by U.S. helicopters to areas of forced relocation in the department of El Quiché;

parachute and jungle-survival training by U.S. Special Forces for Guatemala's elite Kaibil counterinsurgency troops in the Petén in November 1988;

training Guatemalans to fly A-37 attack planes and to repair C-47 transport planes; WOLA, ibid. and

the provision of $9 million in "nonlethal" military aid in the 1989 and 1990 fiscal years.

Most of these forms of military support are a significant departure from previous U.S. policy toward Guatemala. Since military aid to Guatemala was renewed in 1985 for the first time in eight years, that aid has been limited to what is termed "nonlethal" assistance. The State Department's 1988 approval of a $13.8 million commercial sale of M-16 rifles for the Guatemalan army marked a clear shift away from that policy. Congressional objections delayed, but did not stop, delivery of the weapons. Some democratic members of the House of Representatives also sought unsuccessfully to ban further lethal commercial arms sales to Guatemala in the 1990 Foreign Aid Authorization bill.

The Bush administration's actions are based on a perception that increased U.S.- Guatemalan military cooperation will yield increased accountability on the part of the Guatemalan military. Yet this theory is clearly not working, and it cannot work until the Bush administration demonstrates a willingness to cut the aid when military violations continue, let alone increase.

Reliable statistics on political violence are not available in Guatemala, due to the extreme danger of monitoring human rights violations. That danger was driven home by the disappearance of five human rights activists in 1989 and the murder of another. However, figures put together from press accounts and cases investigated by human rights groups suggest a worsening trend since the fall of 1987, following nearly two years in which improvement had been noted. Noticeable surges in political violence followed two military coup attempts, in May 1988 and May 1989. While these coup attempts failed, at least nominally, they appeared to signal a strengthening of those sectors in the army least disposed to allow a modicum of respect for human rights. Among the cases in which suspicion has been cast on the army or security forces over the past year or so are the following:

In April, soldiers seized four members of the rural human rights group known as the Council of Ethnic Communities "We Are All Equal" ("CERJ") in two separate incidents at the Trinidad Miramar coffee plantation near Patulúl, Suchitepéquez. The military has refused to account for the whereabouts of the four, who remain disappeared.

In July, a member of the Mutual Support Group ("GAM"), an association of relatives of the disappeared toward which the government and the army have a long history of hostility, was murdered and another disappeared. On August 15, the GAM office in Guatemala City was partially destroyed by an explosive device. Later that month, a GAM director, Miguel Morales Morales, was abducted, held and interrogated in a secret location for 40 hours.

Also on August 15, unknown assailants threw an incendiary device in front of the office and residence of a U.S.-based peace group, Peace Brigades International, shattering several windows. On December 20, two unidentified men stabbed three Peace Brigade members as they were returning to their Guatemala City offices. The attack appeared politically motivated because nothing was taken. A guerrilla deserter at a government press conference in January 1989 had accused the Peace Brigade of supporting the guerrillas.

Several incidents in which soldiers or military commissioners threatened GAM and CERJ members in hamlets in Quiché province were reported throughout the year. The army repeatedly showed videotapes in these communities alleging that GAM and CERJ leaders were guerrilla commanders, and it also forbade community members from joining those rights groups.

Armed men dressed in uniforms typical of the Treasury Police killed five civilians in the tiny village of Sanquín, near Patzicía, Chimaltenango, on May 18. Although President Cerezo and an army spokesman blamed guerrillas for the massacre, witnesses interviewed by Americas Watch held government forces to blame.

Armed men driving a grey and black jeep with tinted glass windows abducted José Rolando Pantaleón, a trade unionist and actor in a political theatre group known for its anti-military satire. Pantaleón's body was found that afternoon. He and other members of the theatre group had been threatened repeatedly by armed plainclothesmen believed to be members of the security forces. Three of the group's players, including Pantaleón's brother Fladio, have since fled the country.

Since August 1989, at least fourteen members of the university community have been abducted; seven of them were later found dead. Evidence in several of the cases, detailed below, points to security-force acquiescence, if not complicity.

Three men, one of them apparently a uniformed police officer, kidnapped, interrogated and tortured U.S. Ursuline nun Sister Diana Ortiz for more than 24 hours on November 2-3. Two of the men took Ortiz from the courtyard of a Catholic retreat in Antigua on the morning of November 2. Ortiz recognized one as a man who had accosted and threatened her in July. The men forced her to board a bus, where they showed her a grenade and vowed that "innocent people would die" if she called for help or tried to escape. Getting off the bus, the men were met by a uniformed police officer in a white police car. They blindfolded Ortiz and took her to what she believed to be the basement of a large building, where she heard men moaning and a woman screaming in pain. The men interrogated her, beat her, repeatedly burned her with cigarettes, and sexually molested her. They stopped only when a fourth man entered the room, swearing, to announce that Ortiz was a North American and that her abduction was on the news. This man removed her blindfold and drove her away in a grey Suzuki jeep, saying that they would go talk to a friend in the U.S. embassy who would help her. When the jeep stopped in heavy traffic, Ortiz opened the door and escaped.

In November 1988, twenty-one peasants and one unidentified man were slain near El Aguacate, a hamlet in the department of Chimaltenango. The case remains unsolved, but some domestic groups have blamed the army. An Americas Watch investigation found insufficient evidence to assign blame, although some support was found for the contention that the army had carried out the massacre and little was found to support the government's contention that the guerrillas were to blame. The military has thwarted independent investigations into the slayings.

After the surge in violence in the months following the May 1989 coup attempt, the State Department and the U.S. embassy in Guatemala issued several strong statements condemning the violence, and reinstated an advisory against travel to Guatemala. On September 14, after the bodies of four of the disappeared university students had been found, State Department spokesman Richard Boucher opened the daily noon briefing with an announcement condemning political violence in Guatemala. The State Department's use of announcements, as opposed to the more common practice of preparing answers in anticipation of questions from the press, was appropriately used to convey the administration's serious concern. The statement read:

Extremist violence has been on the rise in Guatemala. In recent months, a number of bombs were exploded in the capital and several days ago, the bodies of four missing university students were found.

We condemn these acts in the strongest possible terms. We have expressed our concern at the highest levels of the Guatemalan government and our Ambassador in Guatemala has publicly condemned these acts on various occasions.

In response to questions, however, Boucher then undercut much of the impact of this statement by suggesting that the Guatemalan government bore no responsibility for the violence. Asked who was responsible, Boucher said: "We don't have information that would fix responsibility to individuals or groups." Asked what he expected the Guatemalan government to do, Boucher said: "The government is working hard to reduce the violence<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>I guess I'd say we are hoping that the perpetrators of the violence would think twice, and that we could, in that way, assist the government in stopping the violence."

In addition to this announcement, U.S. Chargé d'Affairs Phil Taylor delivered a speech on September 13 at a ceremony involving the U.S. Agency for International Development and the Guatemalan Ministry of Education which condemned the killings of four members of the university community and called on those holding the other victims to release them. Taylor has reportedly spoken out about these and other cases on several occasions, although, again, he has not assigned responsibility. In December, U.S. Ambassador to Guatemala Tom Stroock met with President Cerezo to urge strongly a serious investigation into the violence against the unversity community, according to the State Department desk officer for Guatemala.

We welcome this heightened attention to the political violence in Guatemala. We are also pleased that the Bush administration has raised the issue "at the highest levels" of the Guatemalan government. We disagree, however, with the administration's claim that there is insufficient information to assign blame. In the case of at least some of the university students, as in many violent abuses in 1989, there is circumstantial evidence that government forces -- most likely members of the army and security forces -- have been responsible. For example:

In the case of Víctor Hugo Rodríguez Jaramillo and his wife, Silvia María Azurdía Utrera, abducted on August 21 and found dead on September 10, witnesses said that the eight heavily armed men who kidnapped the two in Guatemala City showed their weapons openly without being questioned by police who passed by the spot.

In the case of Mario René Hernández Centeno and Roberto Mazariegos, both were seized by the National Police at a checkpoint in Escuintla on August 9. Although the authorities have denied holding the young men, Hernández smuggled a note to a friend saying that the two were being held at the prison in Escuintla. Witnesses saw the men in custody there, and members of local human rights groups said that they had seen the missing men's car in the police headquarters in Escuintla. Although Hernández and Mazariegos have been treated as members of the university community, recent investigation reveals that in fact they appear to have had no connection to it.>

The modus operandi used in several of the other kidnapping cases conforms to that used by the security forces and death squads.

Moreover, at the very least, government forces have done nothing to prevent or investigate the killings and kidnappings. To the extent that the Bush administration's statements shy away from assigning blame in such cases, they allow the Cerezo government to remain unaccountable for abuses which appear to have been committed or permitted by its own security forces.

Recent abuses attributed to the police also merit a strong response from Washington, such as the suspension of police aid programs administered by the U.S. Department of Justice. (Washington's police training program was suspended after military officials replaced U.S.-trained civilians at the head of the police Office of Professional Responsibility this summer. The program was reinstated after U.S.-trained civilians returned to these posts.) For example, the kidnapping and torture of Sister Diana Ortiz by a group of men including a uniformed police officer, described above, ought to have brought about an immediate end to U.S. training programs with the Guatemalan police, at least pending prosecution of the police offenders. In addition, information published in September by the Washington Office on Latin America, which reported evidence of torture committed in the Zone 18 police precinct of Guatemala City and described torture victims being dropped off in the investigative office located in the National Police headquarters, provides additional justification for the U.S. to distance itself from the security forces. WOLA, ibid.; and Bonnie Tenneriello, "Abuse in Guatemala," The Christian Science Monitor, October 11, 1989.>

A major obstacle to investigations of political crimes is that the agency with principal responsibility for such investigations, the police, remains under de facto control of the military, despite the Interior Ministry's nominal control. The derailing of the touted prosecution of Treasury Police agents for the infamous "White Van" killings in 1988 demonstrates the lack of will to prosecute members of the security forces responsible for political killings. Under these circumstances, U.S. aid to the Guatemalan police simply increases the efficiency and effectiveness of one of the nation's prime repressive forces.

Finally, we note that some U.S. embassy staff have made statements that endangered a Guatemalan human rights monitor. During a well-attended dinner in July at the home of the president of the American Chamber of Commerce in Guatemala City, Lewis Anselme, the human rights officer at the U.S. embassy, loudly challenged an Americas Watch representative to prove that CERJ leader Amílcar Méndez was not a guerrilla. This allegation was first put forward by the Guatemalan army in January 1989 with the presentation of an alleged guerrilla deserter who claimed in conclusory terms that Méndez belonged to the Guerrilla Army of the Poor (EGP). See Persecuting Human Rights Monitors: The CERJ in Guatemala, Americas Watch, May 1989. Officials of the civilian government of Vinicio Cerezo Arévalo have also made this accusation. The charge has never been supported by a shred of evidence. We deplore these unsupported charges, not only because they unfairly smear a dedicated human rights activist, but also, and more important, because the label "guerrilla" in the violent climate of Guatemala is tantatmount to a death sentence. We are appalled that the human rights officer of the U.S. embassy would involved the United States in such a campaign.

In a meeting with the Americas Watch staff in Washington a few weeks later, Ambassador Stroock articulated a more refined version of this accusation. He reported that embassy staff had informed him that Méndez, if not himself a guerrilla, at least shared the rebels' agenda. We thus take this opportunity to note that the agenda of CERJ, which Méndez leads, is to promote respect for the rights established in Guatemala's Constitution, particularly the right not to join civil patrols (Article 34). Military commanders consider this agenda to be subversive. The U.S. embassy's parrotting of that line only reinforces the widespread view in the Guatemalan military that civilian institutions, including the fundamental rights set forth in the Guatemalan Constitution, are to be ignored if they prove inconvenient to the military's counterinsurgency campaign.
HAITI

Despite continuing attacks on popular organizations, unchecked random violence and slow progress toward elections, Haiti's military government continued to enjoy the support of the Bush administration throughout most of 1989. That support included the first major government-to-government aid since the violent collapse of the November 1987 elections, and excuses and silence in the face of ongoing abuses. By year's end, however, with increasingly bold military repression and a new U.S. ambassador, the administration had begun to show greater resolve in pressing for elections and a halt to abuses.

Lieutenant General Prosper Avril took power in a September 17, 1988 military coup, the fourth military or military-dominated government to rule Haiti since the fall of the Duvalier dictatorship in February 1986. Despite vows to hold elections and respect human rights, General Avril has made little progress on either front. Arrests and beatings of members of popular organizations that were critical of military rule continued throughout the year, as did the military practice of breaking up demonstrations held by such organizations. This repression heightened on November 1, when three popular leaders in Port-au-Prince were arrested by the Presidential Guard, savagely beaten and, the next evening, displayed on national television. The military government charged the three with plotting to assassinate General Avril and other military leaders, but no proof of the purported plot has been presented, and the arrests came three days after a highly publicized press conference in which the three had participated in a call for a month of nonviolent protest leading to a demonstration on November 29, the second anniversary of the aborted 1987 elections. The three, together with another purported plotter, remained in custody at year's end.

Haiti has also continued to be plagued by what Haitians have come to call "insecurity" -- the killing of seemingly randomly selected victims. The attackers are almost always heavily armed and at times are sighted wearing parts of uniforms. In late September the Avril government announced the arrest of several soldiers said to be behind the "insecurity." But the killings, as well as rapes and armed robberies, have continued, and many have come to believe that, by sowing terror, they are designed to impede organized opposition to the government and provide a pretext for postponing elections. Those suspicions were fueled during the night of November 17-18, when seven armed men in civilian clothes murdered three youths who were pasting up posters for ousted President Leslie Manigat; two were shot dead and the third was dragged to his death at the back of the assailants' vehicle, according to a fourth youth who escaped. No one has been prosecuted for this crime.

These developments have led many to question whether elections promised for 1990 will take place. In late September 1989, fully a year after assuming power, the Avril government accepted an electoral calendar proposed by an independent electoral council which called for elections in six stages, beginning with local elections in the spring of 1990, legislative elections the following summer and presidential elections in the fall, with a new president to assume power in February 1991. The prolonged and complicated calender has been criticized by Haitian political parties for inviting fraud and violence -- since international monitoring of such an extended calendar will be difficult -- and for discouraging popular mobilization. General Avril himself has fueled speculation that the elections will be postponed by making such statements as his November 24 proclamation that, before elections can be held, the Haitian people need enough food to eat so that politicians cannot buy their vote for several cents. General Avril has used similar comments to argue for renewed U.S. aid before an elected civilian government takes office.

Despite this serious human rights situation, the Bush administration, and the Reagan administration before it, uttered not a word of public criticism over ongoing military abuses during General Avril's entire first year in power. The Bush administration made its first public comments on Haiti on March 14, when Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Richard Melton testified before a House subcommittee. (The State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in 1988, written by the Reagan administration but issued in early February, described abuses only under Haiti's prior rulers, but none under General Avril.) Echoing U.S. comments about past Haitian dictators, including Jean-Claude Duvalier, Melton described the Avril government as "offering the best, and perhaps the last real chance for democratic reform in Haiti." He acknowledged ongoing abuses but claimed that "there is little if any evidence to link these abuses to policy levels within the Avril government." This claim was contradicted by widespread attacks on Avril opponents, including, for example, the January beating of two Avril opponents in the National Palace, the site of General Avril's presidential office. Two weeks later during a trip to Port-au-Prince, Melton called for elections but said nothing about military abuses.

At the same time that Melton was exculpating General Avril, the Bush administration was pressing Congress to resume direct aid to the Haitian government as a reward for the "progress" that General Avril was said to have made. The progress cited included the reinstatement, on the day before Melton's testimony, of portions of the popularly enacted 1987 Constitution, which had been suspended by the predecessor military government in June 1988; the establishment in April 1989 of the constitutionally prescribed electoral council to organize and run elections, although at the time no electoral calendar had been set; and assistance in combatting drug trafficking.

These developments were considerably short of the conditions for the restoration of aid that had been set at the time that most aid to the Haitian government was suspended following the aborted November 1987 elections. At that time, the State Department had proclaimed that, at the very least, "the electoral process [would have to be] resumed and restored" and that "an independent Electoral Commission is a key to restoring the electoral process." In addition, the State Department had noted "other measures that are crucial to Haiti's transition to democracy, [including]: the arrest, prosecution and punishment of those responsible for the election violence, the maintenance of public order, and the protection of Haitians during the election period as well as respect for the results of the new elections."

Congress agreed, however, to permit $10 million in food aid (wheat given to the government for resale on the local market). While an unsuccessful coup attempt in early April delayed disbursement of this aid, it was released on August 3. Two weeks later, on August 17 and 18, Melton visited Haiti, where his statement to the press made no mention of the military's attacks on popular organizations, the "insecurity" killings, or the Avril government's failure to halt these abuses. Rather, Melton contented himself with broad statements on the importance of democracy and expressed "hope that elections can be scheduled in the not-too-distant future."

One month later, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Bernard Aronson visited Haiti. In a statement issued on September 16, he underscored the administration's support for the Avril government's vow to uphold the electoral calendar and to ensure the security of voters. But he made no mention of continuing human rights abuses.

U.S. silence on abuses under the Avril government was due in large part to Ambassador Brunson McKinley, whose insistent deference to the Haitian military since the ouster of the Duvalier dictatorship led gradually to this virtual abandonment of U.S. public criticism of military abuses. But with the appointment of a new U.S. ambassador, Alvin Adams, and the increasingly stark repression of the Avril government, the Bush administration appeared during the last two months of 1989 to be taking a more aggressive posture toward human rights in Haiti. On November 9, shortly after Adams's confirmation though before he had arrived in Port-au-Prince, the State Department spokeswoman issued a protest over the November 1 beatings of the three popular leaders -- the first critical U.S. statement ever on rights violations by the Avril government. The State Department observed that "based on their appearance on television, they had been mistreated," and noted that "concerns about these arrests" had been expressed to "senior officials of the Haitian government." The State Department then called on the Haitian government "to ensure that any detainees are treated in strict accordance with Haitian law and with respect for their civil and human rights." It also reaffirmed the belief that "free and credible elections leading to the inauguration of a civilian government is an essential step in finding solutions to Haiti's problems."

Four days later, in an address to the Organization of American States ("OAS"), Secretary of State James Baker suggested concern over the Avril government's ability to protect the electorate and to carry out fair and honest elections when he called on the OAS and the Caribbean Economic Community ("CARICOM") to monitor elections. He added: "In 1987, the democratic community stood helpless as voters were gunned down in polling booths; surely we cannot permit that nightmare to return."

As Ambassador Adams arrived in Haiti to assume his post on November 24, he showed a personal willingness to speak publicly about Haiti's human rights problems. In a speech at the airport upon his arrival, Ambassador Adams invoked a Creole proverb, "Bourik chaje pa kanpe" -- a loaded donkey cannot stand still, a reference to the burdened Haitian people and their expectations for democracy. He invoked the same proverb several days earlier at his swearing-in ceremony in Washington. Apparently as a result, Ambassador Adams was turned away at the Haitian Foreign Ministry the first time he tried to present his credentials, on November 28, and General Avril feigned a cold the same day to avoid meeting Adams (although Avril reportedly met the same day with the Taiwanese ambassador to receive a check for $1 million in aid). The government newspaper, L'Union, also responded to Ambassador Adams by declaring: "Chaj trò lou bourik kouche" -- an overloaded donkey lies down, thus echoing General Avril's view that Haiti's economic problems would have to be solved before elections could be held. Ambassador Adams was ultimately permitted to present his credentials and to meet with General Avril in early December.

This greater U.S. outspokenness on abuses in Haiti parallels an apparently firmer resolve not to deliver additional aid to the Avril government until significant progress is made in respecting human rights and inaugurating an elected civilian government. For fiscal year 1990, the Bush administration has budgeted $41.4 million in humanitarian and development assistance, which is directed through private voluntary and non-governmental agencies. The administration has also budgeted some funds for the Haitian government to combat drug trafficking. Neither form of aid was suspended following the November 1987 elections. In its November 9, 1989 statement, however, the State Department made clear that any further government-to-government assistance "will be contingent on tangible evidence of progress on a transition to democracy and respect for human rights." Congress took a similar position in its aid bill on Haiti.

One important deficiency in U.S. policy toward Haiti has been the failure to press vigorously for prosecution of those responsible for past abuses. For example, following the September 11, 1988 attack on St. Jean Bosco church in which 12 were killed and 77 wounded, the Reagan administration called on the military government to "investigate, apprehend and punish" the attackers. But there has been no public follow-up to this appeal. The Reagan administration said nothing when, during the night of December 31, 1988 and January 1, 1989, the Avril government granted a safe conduct out of the country to Franck Romain, the former mayor of Port-au-Prince and the alleged mastermind of the massacre, who had taken refuge in the Dominican embassy. Nor did the Bush administration comment when, on November 18, 1989, Dominican President Joaquin Balaguer said that he would not grant an extradition request by the Haitian government for Romain. The silence on the treatment of this alleged murderer contrasts with the Bush administration's insistence that the Papal Nuncio in Panama turn over Manuel Antonio Noriega for prosecution.

Nor has the Bush administration issued calls for the prosecution of those responsible for gross abuses in Haiti over the past several years, including the Jean Rabel massacre of July 1987, the murder of presidential candidates Louis Eugene Athis in August 1987 and Yves Volel in October 1987, the election day killings of November 1987, the murder of four members of the Labadie Youth Movement in August 1988, the killing of two Cité Soleil residents who denounced participants in the St. Jean Bosco massacre in November 1988, and the above-mentioned murder of the three Manigat supporters in November 1989. While such notorious murderers remain at large, it will be difficult for the Haitian people to feel secure enough to venture to the polls for the next elections.

HONDURAS

The Bush administration placed little emphasis on human rights in its relations with Honduras, a major recipient of U.S. military and economic assistance and a country with a troubling human rights record. Apart from the annual Country Reports on Human Rights Practices, State Department officials were unable to cite a single instance in which the Bush administration issued a statement on human rights in Honduras.

Vice President Dan Quayle visited Honduras on June 13, where he met with then-President José Azcona, then-U.S. Ambassador Everett Briggs, and leaders of the anti-Sandinista insurgents, the contras, based in Honduras. But according to the State Department desk officer for Honduras, Quayle did not discuss human rights. Instead, Quayle's meetings focused on the fate of the contras, and the U.S. effort to unite its regional allies against the governments of Panama and Nicaragua. This practice recalled that of the Reagan administration, which consistently sacrificed human rights concerns in Honduras to the maintenance of warm relations with the Honduran military, its strategic ally against Managua.

Among the human rights issues in 1989 that Washington should have raised with its close ally were several cases of disappearances attributed to the military, including the November disappearance of two Salvadoran refugees from the Colomoncagua refugee camp who are believed to have been detained by Honduran soldiers. Cases of torture by the military were also reported in 1989, and a string of political assassinations remain unsolved, including two in July in which military involvement is suspected.

We are particularly concerned by the Bush administration's failure to lend support to the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, the judicial arm of the Organization of American States ("OAS"), which has undertaken its first adversarial proceedings in three cases against Honduras for the disappearance of four individuals in the early 1980s. In a July 1988 decision, the Court found Honduras in violation of the American Convention on Human Rights for the 1981 disappearance of Angel Manfredo Velásquez Rodríguez. In January 1989, the Court again held Honduras responsible, this time for the 1982 disappearance of Saúl Godínez. A March 1989 decision found insufficient evidence to hold Honduras responsible for the disappearance of two Costa Rican citizens. In July, the Court ordered Honduras to pay damages to the families of Velásquez and Godínez. The October deadline for payment was disregarded by Honduras, which has expressed extreme reluctance to comply. When the matter was about to be raised at the OAS General Assembly, Honduras announced that its president had submitted a bill to the Honduran legislature to appropriate the necessary funds. By year's end, however, Honduras had still not complied with the Court's order for payment, nor with its obligation (also spelled out in the Court's judgments) to investigate the disappearances and disclose the findings to the relatives of Godínez and Velásquez.

Throughout the proceedings, which opened in 1986, U.S. officials acted as apologists for Honduras rather than as defenders of the nascent Inter-American judicial system. In their Country Reports on Human Rights Practices, the Bush and Reagan administrations disparaged the Court and its decisions, while seeking to shield Honduras from blame. In a May 1989 panel discussion sponsored by the Association of the Bar of the City of New York, an official of the State Department's Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs reiterated this criticism, arguing that Honduras was unfairly singled out by the Court.

The credibility of the Inter-American judicial system depends on the successful completion of the case against Honduras. By making statements that tend to excuse Honduras, the Bush administration gives ammunition to the most recalcitrant elements of the Honduran government, who have advocated an illegal withdrawal of Honduras from the proceedings. Instead, the administration should pronounce its support for the Inter-American legal system and strongly urge its ally to comply with the Court's orders.

For fiscal year 1990, the State Department has requested $60 million in military aid for Honduras, along with $1.2 million for military training, $87 million in economic support funds (balance-of-payments support), and $59 million in development and food aid. In addition, Honduras continues to receive police aid under the Department of Justice's ICITAP program for criminal-investigations training.

This substantial aid commitment grants Washington considerable leverage as well as responsibility to press for an end to human rights violations by the Honduran military. There is no indication that this responsibility is being shouldered by the Bush adminstration.
HUNGARY

Reforms in Hungary proceeded at a rapid pace during 1989, marked by the introduction of a multiparty system and the removal of virtually all obstacles to freedom of expression, association and travel. The Bush administration, eager to emphasize the positive changes underway in Eastern Europe, has given Hungary prominent attention, highlighted by the July 1989 visit to Hungary by President Bush -- the first U.S. president to visit that country. The administration has praised developments in Hungary, focusing on economic and political reforms, but it has not given prominence to the need to secure these reforms in law. In the coming year, the administration should be cautious that its enthusiasm for the reforms not outpace efforts to institutionalize those reforms.

President Bush's visit to Hungary and Poland in July was meant as a demonstration of U.S. support. In a speech he made in Budapest on July 12, President Bush noted some of the recent changes in Hungarian society, particularly relating to freedom of expression:

Voices long stilled are being heard again. An independent daily newspaper is now sold on the streets. Commercial radio and television stations will broadcast everything from the news to the music of Stevie Wonder. And Radio Free Europe is opening its first Eastern European bureau right here in Budapest.

The President also praised the Hungarian government's decision to open its border with Austria, as an example of how Hungary is "leading the way" toward reform in Eastern Europe.

Neither President Bush's statements in Hungary nor later administration pronouncements have adequately addressed an important concern in Hungary, namely, the legal institutionalization of human rights progress. As Hungary drafts a new constitution and new legislation to govern the country, special attention must be paid to bringing these laws into compliance with international human rights norms.

In the case of one new gesture toward Hungary, the Bush administration has shown appropriate concern for such legal developments. After Hungary passed a new emigration law, President Bush promised that it would be the first country to be released from all restrictions under the Jackson-Vanik Amendment to the 1974 Trade Act, which links the preferential tariff policies of Most Favored Nation status to the emigration practices of the recipient country. This practice of rewarding Hungary only after liberalized laws have been enacted should be continued.

The Bush administration has also given more general economic support to Hungary's efforts at reform and democratization. For fiscal years 1990 to 1992 the U.S. has authorized $60 million in enterprise funds for Hungary, in addition to $69 million for Hungary and Poland. While this support for reform in Hungary is welcome, the administration should make clear that further trade and economic benefits will depend on concrete progress in institutionalizing respect for human rights.
INDONESIA AND EAST TIMOR

The closest the Bush administration came to acknowledging the severity of the human rights situation in Indonesia was to have Vice President Quayle meet with three leading human rights activists during his visit to Jakarta in May. That gesture was welcome, as was departing Ambassador Paul Wolfowitz's farewell address, also in May, in which he stressed the need for more political openness. But as an embassy spokesman said when questioned about the human rights issues that the Vice President had raised with the government, "specifics were not discussed." Unfortunately, ignoring specifics meant refraining from pointed criticism, and such criticism is what the Bush administration needs to offer to affect human rights practices in Indonesia.

There was no lack of specific human rights issues to discuss in 1989. Some 450 political prisoners are in Indonesia's jails, most convicted after unfair trials. An increase in student activism led to arrests and detention without charge of several dozen students in Jakarta and in Bandung, West Java. Eleven students in Bandung were held in the local army headquaters by the internal security apparatus for over three months and denied access to counsel before being turned over to judicial authorities for trial. At least two are reported to have been beaten after their arrest. In Yogyakarta, Central Java, two students were convicted of subversion and sentenced to seven- and eight-year prison terms for selling banned books and criticizing the government. A third is currently awaiting trial. All have been forbidden access to newspapers and radio. In Lampung, South Sumatra, an estimated 100 civilians were killed in a military assault on a religious school where an army officer had been taken hostage and slain. In apparently unrelated incidents in the same province, the military torched almost 500 homes of peasants living in a protected forest area, giving them little or no warning of the destruction. Some four dozen Muslim radicals suspected of trying to establish an Islamic state went on trial in West Java, Madura, Sumbawa, Jakarta, Lampung and elsewhere; many had allegedly been tortured after their arrest. Arbitrary detention and torture were reported from East Timor, with close to 100 political arrests between April and June and 40 more following the Pope's visit there in October; most of those arrested in both waves are believed to have been released. Several books were banned during the year, including one describing the military assault on the Lampung school mentioned above. And the Indonesian members of the International NGO Forum on Indonesia ("INGI") were called in by the Minister of Home Affairs and warned about an INGI statement that was perceived as "blackening" the Indonesian government's name. It was a clear reminder of the lack of freedom of expression and association in Indonesia. Censorship also continues: the Indonesian government removed five pages from the November 6 issue of Newsweek which contained an article about opposition to President Suharto.

The Bush administration had two unprecedented opportunities to raise serious human rights concerns with Indonesian officials: when Vice President Quayle visited Indonesia in May and when President Suharto visited Washington in June. Both opportunities were apparently wasted.

Before the Vice President left for Southeast Asia, 26 members of Congress wrote him a letter urging him to raise human rights concerns in Thailand, Indonesia and Singapore. In reply, his office thanked them for their letter and said: "As you know, the Vice President is very interested in humanitarian issues." The failure to distinguish between human rights and humanitarian issues presaged the decidedly mixed signals that the Vice President sent to Indonesian officials during his visit.

Despite his meeting with the three human rights activists, the Vice President "didn't ask anything about human rights" when he met President Suharto, according to Antara, the Indonesian news agency. A White House official said the Vice President had raised the subject by saying there was a great deal of interest in the United States in East Timor and press freedom. But "interest" could mean anything. The Vice President did not explain that the interest of the U.S. Congress was in human rights violations, and the brief invocation of press freedom is hardly the same as raising specific cases of political prisoners. Moreover, the Vice President then undercut any implicit criticism by praising Indonesia's "tremendous progress" in human rights through President Suharto's economic policies. He firmly rejected the suggestion of the three activists that U.S. development aid be conditioned on the Indonesian government's human rights performance.

A similar opportunity was missed when President Suharto visited Washington the following month. Asia Watch and members of Congress sent President Bush letters urging him to raise a wide range of issues, from torture and political arrests in East Timor, to political prisoners and the banning of books by Indonesia's greatest novelist, Pramoedya Ananta Toer. President Bush said nothing about any of these. He addressed only Indonesia's economic situation and the Cambodian question, on which Indonesia has taken a leading role.

Many of the criticisms we raised in last year's report on the Reagan administration's human rights policy toward Indonesia remain valid. There is no indication that the Bush administration encouraged the promotion of labor rights in Indonesia by activating provisions of the U.S. Trade Act that require respect for labor rights as a condition for trade benefits under the Generalized System of Preferences. There is also no indication that the administration raised concerns over the discrimination and harassment of former political prisoners.

It is not as though the U.S. lacks leverage in Indonesia. In fiscal year 1989 the U.S. supplied $2.9 million in military assistance and officials announced in April that this figure would be more than doubled in fiscal year 1990 to $7 million. The U.S. also provided $68 million in development aid, trained 79 members of the military through the International Military Education and Training program, and sold some $18 million worth of military exports to the country. With close military and economic cooperation and mutually supportive positions on regional foreign policy issues, it ought to be possible for the Bush administration to speak out far more forcefully on human rights issues.
IRAQ

State Department officials insist that human rights are a consideration in the formulation of U.S. policy toward Iraq. "We want as good relations with Iraq as are sustainable," one official said, "and human rights are a factor in what is sustainable." The stated intention is laudable, but U.S. actions have fallen far short. Except in the matter of Iraq's use of chemical weapons -- and even then with little consistency -- the Reagan and Bush administrations have paid scant attention to human rights in their dealings with Iraq. Both have put the nurturing of newly friendly U.S. relations with President Saddam Hussein's government well ahead of concerns over the violent and repressive nature of his regime.

In recent years there has been a dramatic turnabout in relations between the United States and Iraq. For more than two decades following the overthrow of the Hashemite monarchy in l958, U.S.-Iraqi relations were marked by suspicion and hostility. By l982, however, the Iraqi government was beginning to rethink its stand toward the United States. Iraq had suffered serious reverses in its war with Iran and was still smarting from the Soviet decision at the beginning of the war to stop supplying heavy arms to it. In l982 and l983, Iraq put out feelers to Washington.

These found ready acceptance, for the U.S., too, was beginning to reassess its view of Iraq. Human rights obviously were not a major part of this reassessment for, even putting aside Iraq's use of chemical weapons, the war brought an intensification of repression at home, including executions, disappearances, torture and widespread arrests of perceived opponents. Instead, geopolitical considerations were the moving force in Washington. Many in the Reagan administration had already begun to look at the Hussein regime as the main bulwark against Iranian domination of the entire Near East and its vital oil reserves. U.S. policy-makers are reported to have concluded that an Iranian defeat of Iraq would not only put Iraq's vast oil resources under the control of the regime of Ayatollah Khomeini but would also threaten the oil-rich, pro-Western governments of Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf emirates. In l984 formal diplomatic relations were restored and the following year ambassadors were accredited in Washington and Baghdad.

The U.S. also weighed in heavily on Iraq's side in the war with Iran, a process that had begun even before diplomatic relations were restored. In the ensuing years, the U.S. led a campaign to cut off the flow of Western arms to Iran (while at the same time secretly providing sophisticated weaponry to Tehran), reportedly gave Iraq access to intelligence on Iranian military dispositions, spearheaded the drive for a U.N. Security Council resolution ordering a halt to the fighting, and provided naval escort for tankers of Iraq's neighbor and ally Kuwait. The naval escort operation led to clashes between U.S. and Iranian forces in the Gulf in l987 and l988.

With the warming of relations, the United States began providing Iraq billions of dollars in credits to purchase agricultural and industrial products. The war with Iran caused Iraq to borrow on a massive scale, which in turn caused Iraq's credit rating to drop. U.S. and other Western banks, concerned over Iraq's mounting foreign debt and increasingly uncertain whether the government in Baghdad would be able to withstand Iran's onslaught, became reluctant to loan to Iraq. In l983, the U.S. government stepped in to ease Iraq's burden by providing credits through the United States Commodity Credit Corporation ("CCC") credit-guarantee program, for the purchase of U.S. agricultural products. Through l988, Iraq acquired more than $2.8 billion in U.S. agricultural products under the CCC credit-guarantee program. In l989, the year following the Reagan administration's public rebuke of Iraq for using chemical weapons against its Kurdish population, the Bush administration doubled the CCC program for Iraq, raising credits to a level exceeding one billion dollars in 1989. In addition to credit guarantees, the CCC program has also included some interest-free loans and some direct sales at prices subsidized by the U.S. government, according to U.S. Department of Agriculture officials.

In l984 the U.S. Export-Import Bank began extending short-term -- up to one-year -- loans to Iraq for the purchase of U.S. manufactured goods. In the 1970s, the Export-Import Bank had been authorized to do business with Iraq, but that authority was terminated when, in l979, the U.S. State Department placed Iraq on the list of countries found to be sponsoring terrorism. In l983, the State Department removed Iraq from this list after Iraq expelled the Abu Nidal Black June terrorist group. By then, however, the Export-Import Bank shared many of the commercial banks' reservations about lending to Iraq. It resumed operations only at the insistence of the Reagan administration, under what one Bank official described to Middle East Watch as "political pressure." In l984 and l985, the Bank made some $35 million in short-term loans to Iraq but discontinued the program after Iraqi borrowers failed to meet repayment schedules. In l987, again as a result of administration pressure, the Bank resumed short-term lending to Iraq. In July of that year a $200 million revolving fund was set up, out of which approximately $235 million in short-term credit was made available in the next two years for the purchase of U.S. products, at U.S. government-subsidized interest rates. This time as well, the Bank found the Iraqi government delinquent in meeting some of its repayment schedules. The United States has long maintained an embargo on the sale of military equipment to Iraq. The ban appears to have been strictly enforced on weaponry itself. Around the periphery, however, there have been at least occasional breaches. In l985, Washington approved the sale of 45 Bell helicopters to Iraq, a $200 million deal. The sale was conditioned on Iraqi government assurances that the helicopters would be used only for civilian transport. In September l988, it was learned that some, if not all, of the aircraft had been transferred to the Iraqi military. A group of U.S. reporters who visited the Kurdish areas of Iraq that month at Baghdad's invitation were flown in one of these helicopters. The craft was painted in military colors and piloted by an Iraqi military officer who, reporters noted, was clearly familiar with the terrain. The reporters saw another six to ten U.S.-made Bell helicopters parked on the aprons of military airfields in northern Iraq.

The State Department's annual country report on human rights practices in Iraq have, with minor exceptions, been candid and accurate since l979, when reporting on Iraq began. The report on l988, drafted by the Reagan administration and issued in February l989, stated forthrightly: "Iraq's abysmal human rights record remained unacceptable in l988." It pointed out that political killing, torture and disappearance were routinely practiced by the Iraqi government.

With regard to Iraq's actions against its Kurdish minority, the report noted "the grave human rights violations when the Iraqi armed forces moved to crush a longstanding Kurdish rebellion.... The campaign was marked by the use of chemical weapons against guerrillas and civilians alike." The report also pointed out that in l988 the Iraqi government intensified its destruction of Kurdish and Assyrian villages in northern Iraq and its relocation of their inhabitants.

The report failed, however, to provide significant information on the conditions in which the estimated 500,000 displaced Kurds now live. Nor did it discuss the serious ramifications of their expulsion from their native homes and their resettlement in unfamiliar surroundings where few opportunities for regular employment exist. The country report also failed to mention the proliferation of Iraqi laws that call for the death penalty, many of them for crimes clearly of a political nature or of insufficient gravity to warrant capital punishment under generally accepted international standards.

In a few instances, the report resorted to understatement. For example, political and individual rights were described only as "sharply limited" when in fact they are nonexistent. The same misleading term was used to describe the right of peaceful assembly and association. In the section on workers rights, the report merely noted that "no strikes have been reported for almost 20 years," rather than acknowledging that strikes are prohibited.

Despite the abuses described in the country reports on Iraq, the Reagan and Bush administrations have fallen disappointingly short when it comes to matching words with action. It is almost as though, having issued its annual report on Iraq, the administration considers its duty done and the matter dropped for the rest of the year, unless particularly egregious new violations take place.

During interviews with Middle East Watch, State Department officials, both in the Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, which has direct operational responsibility for relations with Iraq, and in the Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, showed themselves keenly aware of the abusive and repressive nature of the Iraqi regime. One senior State Department official described the Iraqi government as "possibly the worst violator of human rights anywhere in the world today." Yet, when asked, these same officials expressed considerable reluctance to press Iraq on human rights issues. Some argued that the Iraqi government is "uniquely impervious" to criticism or pressure on human rights grounds. Others argued that despite the substantial political support and trade credits extended by the United States in recent years, there is little or nothing Washington can do that would make a difference.

As a result, the United States has failed to act, or has acted only inadequately, on a series of issues:

Despite the forthright statement in the most recent country report that Iraq's record is "abysmal" and "unacceptable, the Bush administration did not raise with Iraqi authorities the report's findings of murder, extra-legal detention, torture and disappearance of political opponents and government critics, according to State Department sources.

Although the U.S. government has repeatedly denounced forced internal relocation in Nicaragua and Ethiopia, for example, there has been no public expression of concern over the Iraqi government's relocation of at least 500,000 Kurds and Assyrians, although State Department sources said that the U.S. ambassador in Baghdad privately discussed this issue with Iraqi officials during l988 and l989.

So far as it has been possible to determine, no formal consideration was given to human rights criteria in the U.S. government's decision to provide CCC credit guarantees and Export-Import Bank short-term credits to Iraq. Section ll2 of the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act provides that human rights practices should be taken into account in decisions on financing the sale of agricultural commodities. Evidently this provision of the law was ignored.

The State Department chose simply to ignore and to excuse Iraq's prima facie breach of faith in transferring U.S.-supplied helicopters to military control, despite U.S. law barring military sales to "any country the government of which engages in a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights." State Department officials took the position that the transfer was not a violation of the conditions of sale because there was no evidence that the craft had been used in combat. When the issue became public, Representative Howard Berman pointed out that the painting of the helicopters in military colors clearly suggested military use. The State Department, however, did not file a protest with the Iraqi government over the transfer or seek to investigate it, according to officials interviewed by Middle East Watch.

Iraq's use of poison gas against its Kurdish citizens in late August and early September l988 drew a vigorous protest from then Secretary of State George Shultz. During a visit to Washington on September 8 by Iraqi Minister of State Saadoun Hammadi, a member of President Saddam Hussein's inner circle, Shultz made known publicly, in extraordinarily candid and undiplomatic terms, his and the Reagan administration's dismay over Iraq's action. In the end, however, Shultz acceded to pressure from the State Department's Middle East professionals and approved a recommendation that the administration oppose Congressionally mandated sanctions against Iraq. A sanctions bill, which at first seemed assured of passage, died in the House.>

The U.S. took no other concrete step to manifest displeasure. The administration did not recall the newly arrived U.S. ambassador in Baghdad, By contrast, on August 29, l989, the State Department recalled Ambassador Sol Polansky from Sofia in protest of Bulgaria's mistreatment of its ethnic Turkish minority. and U.S.-government trade credits and guarantees were not eliminated or reduced, but instead were doubled the following year.

Nonetheless, Shultz's protest to Hammadi, the September 8, 1988 press statement and the momentary threat of Congressionally mandated sanctions succeeded in capturing the attention of the Iraqi government. On September l7, 1988, Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz, speaking in Baghdad, declared that Iraq respects and abides by all provisions of international law, including the l925 Geneva Protocol prohibiting the use of poison gas. Three days later, the State Department called this "a positive step" and added: "We take this statement to mean that Iraq foreswears the use of chemical weapons in internal as well as international conflicts." Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Richard Murphy told Congress on October l3 that Tariq Aziz had personally confirmed to Shultz that Tariq Aziz's September l7 statement meant that Iraq intended to renounce the use of chemical weapons against domestic and foreign enemies.

In the closing months of 1989, the State Department began an effort to show greater concern over the human rights situation in Iraq. In September, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs Richard Schifter met in Washington with the legal advisor to the Iraqi Foreign Ministry for a discussion of human rights. While information available to Middle East Watch suggests that the outcome of this meeting was far from satisfactory, it has been billed by State Department officials as a "broadening" of the U.S. "human rights dialogue" with Iraq. At the end of November, Schifter met with Iraq's ambassador to the United Nations for further talks on human rights issues. But in a major address on U.S. policy in the Middle East delivered on October 27, 1989, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs John Kelly ignored entirely the matter of Iraq's human rights violations. He stated simply: "Iraq is an important state with great potential. We want to deepen and broaden our relationship."

Despite the defeat of the sanctions bill in the fall of 1988, Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chairman Claiborne Pell and other legislators have continued to press the case for sanctions. In June l989 Senator Pell presented an amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act that would require the President to make a determination whether Iraq consistently commits gross abuses of human rights. Aware that such a determination, if honestly made, would have to be in the affirmative, the Bush administration opposed the amendment, arguing once again that Iraq is "impervious to leverage." The State Department's Iraqi desk officer, Philip Remler, lamented that "Congress is not very protective of our relationship with Iraq."

At the end of September 1989, Senator Daniel Inouye put a rider on the Foreign Assistance Appropriations Act that barred the bank from further dealings with Iraq. The Inouye amendment, itself later amended to allow a Presidential override of the ban, became law in November. At year's end, the fate of the Pell amendment was still uncertain.

Having escaped penalty in its relations with the United States, the Iraqi government managed also to escape censure in international fora. Its success was due at least in part to slack U.S. efforts to secure international condemnation.

Iraq's use of poison gas against the Kurds prompted President Reagan in a September l988 speech before the U.N. General Assembly to call for an international conference on chemical weapons. French President Mitterand, who went so far as to propose an international embargo on weapons sales to any country using poison gas, immediately picked up the Reagan proposal, and it was agreed that France would host the conference. It quickly became apparent, however, that neither the United States nor France intended to use the conference to condemn or even censure Iraq. Instead, the French decided and the United States agreed that the conference would aim for an international consensus in principle against chemical warfare and for the strengthening of the l925 Geneva Protocol barring the use of chemical weapons.

The conference was held in Paris at the beginning of January l989. Its closing declaration, issued January 11, reaffirmed "the importance and continuing validity" of the l925 Protocol and stated that the participating states were "determined to prevent any recourse to chemical weapons by completely eliminating them." Iraq was not mentioned by name but did receive an indirect slap on the wrist, in a passage that recalled the conferees' "serious concern at recent violations as established and condemned by the competent organs of the United Nations." This, however, was a reference only to Iraq's -- and Iran's -- use of poison gas in their war against each other, not to Iraq's chemical attacks on its own Kurds. The U.N. never had the opportunity to "establish and condemn" the attacks on the Kurds because both Iraq and Turkey rejected the Secretary General's request to send a U.N. investigative team.

The final irony is that the Kurds were barred altogether from the Paris conference because one of the ground rules laid down by the French specified that only states could attend. The United States failed, during and after the conference, even to take up the issue of amending the l925 Protocol to bar states explicitly from using chemical weapons against their own citizens. Jurists interpret the l925 Protocol as prohibiting the use of poison gas only in international armed conflict. The Protocol does not address itself to the possibility that a state might use chemical weapons against its own citizens. A letter that Human Rights Watch sent Secretary of State Shultz on December 29, l988 urging that the U.S. delegation raise this matter at the Paris conference went unanswered.
Despite Iraq's record of arbitrary detention, murder and torture, the Reagan administration did not press for action against Iraq at the l988 session of the United Nations Human Rights Commission. Even more surprising, at the Commission's l989 session the Bush administration stood back and let others take the initiative in trying to call Iraq to account for its use of chemical weapons against its Kurdish population and for its other serious abuses. The U.S. did not join in sponsoring the strongly worded resolution put forward by twelve other Western states, which called for the appointment of a special rapporteur to "make a thorough study of the human rights situation in Iraq." The resolution was submitted by Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, West Germany, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Sweden and the United Kingdom. Greece, Ireland, Italy and Spain later joined as sponsors. Of the sponsors, Belgium, Canada, West Germany, Portugal, Sweden, the United Kingdom, Italy and Spain were actual members of the Human Rights Commission. The other sponsors acted in their observer capacity. Commission rules permit observers to sponsor resolutions but not to vote on them.

This resolution was prompted not only by Iraq's use of chemical weapons against the Kurds but also by Western governments' concern over the Commission's dismissal of a series of human rights complaints made against Iraq under the confidential l503 procedure. This is a procedure created by Economic and Social Council resolution l503 under which individuals and non-governmental organizations may submit complaints against U.N. member states for consistent patterns of gross violations of human rights. If deemed admissible by the Subcommission on Discrmination and the Protection of Minorities, these complaints are forwarded to the Human Rights Commission for examination in closed session. The Commission may, however, as it did in the case of Iraq, reject the Subcommission's recommendation<%-20 <%0>. Most Western European delegates felt it important, in light of these developments, that something be done to call attention to the situation in Iraq. The United States, however, evidently did not share this view.

The explanation offered officially for the U.S. failure to sponsor the resolution was that U.S. sponsorship would make the resolution an East-West issue and thereby diminish its chances of success. Behind this unpersuasive rationale evidently lay at least two considerations. One was the fear that too heavy identification with the resolution would detract from U.S. efforts, considered politically more important, to obtain a resolution condemning Cuban human rights abuses. The other had to do with U.S. bilateral relations with Iraq. There was, one official candidly acknowledged to Middle East Watch, concern that U.S. sponsorship of the resolution would be "too confrontational" toward Iraq.

On March 8, the Iraqi delegation moved under the rules of procedure to block the Western resolution from coming to a vote. In the ensuing ballot, the resolution was defeated 13 to 17. The United States joined its Western partners in opposing the Iraqi procedural motion but did not make the serious lobbying effort that might have saved the resolution.

Until such time as the Iraqi government takes steps to show sincere and meaningful progress toward respect of the fundamental rights of its citizens, the Bush administration should publicly condemn serious Iraqi abuses. The administration should sponsor, speak out for, actively support and lobby for resolutions in the United Nations, particularly in the Commission on Human Rights and, to the extent appropriate, in the General Assembly, of resolutions censuring Iraq for its consistent gross violations of human rights. The State Department should seek to engage the Iraqi government in a dialogue on human rights, including discussing with Iraqi officials the findings of the annual country report. All Commodity Credit Corporation and Export-Import Bank credits should be terminated. And U.S. exports to Iraq of any product or technology that could contribute to Iraq's military capabilities, or to the maintenance or strengthening of Iraq's internal security forces, should be banned.
ISRAELI-OCCUPIED TERRITORIES

Only two weeks after President Bush took office, U.S. criticism of Israeli human rights practices became front-page news at home and in the Middle East. The occasion was the publication of the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in 1988, which included a chapter on the occupied territories, prepared by the Reagan administration, that was far more blunt and accurate than in previous years.

The country report represented the strongest public human rights criticism that the United States had made of its ally since the start of the occupation in 1967. A few days after its release, key members of the House and Senate Appropriations Committees warned that Israel's treatment of Palestinians in the occupied territories was unacceptable and could weaken Congressional support for aid to Israel.

The Bush administration, however, made few public comments during the year that approached this level of frankness. As 1989 progressed with no improvement in the human rights picture in the territories, it became clear that the country report did not mark a shift toward more public stances by the administration on Israel's human rights practices. Instead, President Bush has continued his predecessor's policy -- from which the country report was an exception -- of shunning or toning down criticism of Israel's abuses.

Since the start of the intifada, or Palestinian uprising, in December 1987, U.S. policy in the region has focused on reviving the peace process. In their public comments, U.S. officials have generally cast human rights violations as symptoms of the Arab-Israeli conflict, to be addressed most effectively by achieving a negotiated comprehensive peace in the region. They have argued, at the United Nations and elsewhere, that constant criticism of Israel does not serve the search for peace in the region, although they have not explained how even-handed public criticism of rights violations would derail the diplomatic process. While there is an undeniable connection between the state of human rights and the unresolved larger political conflict, what emerges is that the Bush administration has used the goal of a long-term settlement as a pretext to avoid speaking out on the abuses being committed daily against the Palestinians. Even on the few occasions in which the Bush administration has addressed Israeli abuses publicly, it has tended to address them not as violations of human rights but as obstacles to the peace process.

Criticism by the United States, Israel's closest ally, would not be dismissed lightly by Israel. The U.S. commitment to Israel's security and economic well-being is demonstrated annually by a foreign aid package in excess of $3 billion, U.S. aid sought for Israel in the fiscal year 1990 budget consists of $1.8 billion in military grants and $1.2 billion in economic grants. These figures, which were unchanged from fiscal year 1989, represent by far the largest aid program to any country in both absolute and per capita terms. Egypt, the second largest recipient, received a total of $2.3 billion in assistance in the fiscal year 1990 budget.>

The $3 billion figure for 1990 was supplemented by an additional $666.1 million in other forms of economic and military assistance, according to a study conducted by the American Israel Public Affairs Committee. These additional programs include $179.6 million for the development and purchase of Israeli military equipment, $100 million in U.S. military stockpiles in Israel, $183.5 million for the construction of Voice of America relay stations in Israel, and a $55.5 million savings in interest payments because Congress agreed to disburse the entire $1.2 billion in economic grants at the start of the fiscal year, instead of in quarterly installments, as is the case for most countries receiving aid. strategic coordination, preferential trade agreements, and other areas of cooperation.

The Bush administration's diplomacy did give rise to some small progress in the peace process. After beginning his term with a detached approach to peacemaking in the region, President Bush grew more involved in April when he endorsed Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's proposal for elections in the occupied territories. The proposal, approved by the Israeli cabinet on May 14 and based on the framework of the Camp David accords, calls for the one-and-a-half million Arab residents of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, excluding East Jerusalem, to elect representatives to discuss with Israel the future of those territories.

The United States said it backed the Shamir plan not as an end in itself but as a means of setting a negotiating process in motion. The Palestine Liberation Organization ("PLO") and leading Palestinian figures in the territories called the conditions attached to Israel's plan unacceptable, but did not flatly reject the idea of a vote by the Palestinians under occupation.

In July, President Mubarak of Egypt, in consultation with the PLO, proposed a set of conditions for the elections that attempted to bridge the gap between the Israeli and PLO positions. Secretary of State James Baker, working from the Israeli and Egyptian proposals, proposed his own set of clarifications to the plan, which the Israeli cabinet conditionally accepted in November. In December, Egypt, with the PLO's apparent assent, also responded favorably to Baker's plan.

As the diplomacy inched forward, the Palestinian uprising completed its second year with few signs of fading. But the character of the uprising changed somewhat. Confrontations with troops became increasingly the domain of small cells of activists; the mass demonstrations that took place almost daily during the early months of 1988 grew less frequent, although acts of civil disobedience, such as strikes, work stoppages, nonpayment of taxes and peaceful marches, continued.

The most common form of physical confrontation pitted groups of youths hurling stones and occasionally firebombs and other objects at armed soldiers. According to the Israeli Defense Ministry, 85 percent of the violent activity is stone throwing; five percent of the violence involves the use of clearly lethal weapons -- firebombs, knives and firearms. These clashes usually occurred as soldiers of the Israel Defense Force ("IDF") or Border Police moved about Palestinians towns, camps and villages, either on routine patrol or to carry out particular missions: making arrests, collecting taxes or forcing local residents to paint over graffiti, clear roadblocks or remove outlawed Palestinian flags.

The surge in the killing of Palestinians suspected of collaborating with Israel was another trend during the intifada's second year. Activists in the territories threatened and violently punished these suspected collaborators. The number of Palestinians executed on these grounds jumped from 18 during the first year of the intifada to 118 during the second, according to IDF statistics. According to the Associated Press, 22 suspected collaborators were slain during the first year of the intifada and 131 during the second. In many of these cases, it was not possible for outsiders to ascertain the nature of the victim's alleged collaboration or the veracity of the charges.

In trying to suppress the intifada, Israel has relied largely on measures that it had been using, albeit less frequently and intensively, during the first 20 years of the occupation: firing live ammunition at demonstrators and stone-throwers, often in situations where the lives of soldiers were not endangered; deporting or detaining without charge suspected political activists; and imposing collective punishments such as school and university closings, curfews, travel restrictions and home demolitions. During the second year of the intifada, these measures were on the whole imposed in a manner at least as severe as during 1988.

From December 1988 through the end of November 1989, 295 Palestinians were killed by Israeli soldiers, 11 by Israeli civilians and two by Palestinian collaborators, according to B'Tselem, the Israeli Information Center for Human Rights in the Occupied Territories. The total figure of 308 is identical to the number killed during the first year of the intifada. According to B'Tselem, 285 of those fatalities in the second year were caused by bullets of all types, compared with 270 during the first year.

There have been some 50,000 intifada-related arrests during the uprising, according to the Israeli army, and 13,000 Palestinians were in military or civilian jails as of late 1989. IDF figures released in October 1989 showed that approximately 8,400 Palestinians had been administratively detained since the start of the intifada, and 1,889 were then in administrative detention. In late December, B'Tselem estimated the number of administrative detentions during the intifada at 10,000. Administrative detention involves imprisonment without charge or trial. In August 1989, military authorities in the occupied territories doubled the maximum term of administrative-detention orders from six months to one year. The effect of this measure was minor, however, since authorities were able to -- and still can -- renew detention orders indefinitely, subject to review by a military judge. >

The Fourth Geneva Convention Relative to the Protection of Civilians in the Time of War permits occupying powers to detain individuals for "imperative reasons of security" (Art. 78). However, as the State Department's country report observed, "Israel defines `security' very broadly, and in many cases individuals appear to have been detained for political activities which the authorities regard as a security threat. Many individuals, including academics, journalists, and human rights workers, who have not engaged in or advocated violence or other acts threatening security, have been detained<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>"

The U.S. government maintains that the Fourth Geneva Convention applies to Israel's occupation of the West Bank and Gaza. Israel is a party to that convention, but disputes its applicability to the occupied territories on the grounds that those territories were not legally part of Egypt or Jordan prior to their capture by Israel in 1967, and thus are not occupied within the meaning of the convention. Israel has nonetheless stated that it will abide by the convention's humanitarian provisions.

Curfews, which prevented Palestinians from traveling to work or to market, caused severe economic hardship, disruption of schooling, hunger and medical emergencies. Although curfews were on the average of shorter duration than in 1988, there were nevertheless at least 1200 curfews imposed in parts of the West Bank and Gaza Strip during the first nine months of 1989, including 230 that lasted four days or longer, according to Al-Haq, the Palestinian human rights organization. For 1988 data, see Al-Haq's Punishing a Nation: Human Rights Violations during the Palestinian Uprising, December 1987-1988. In June, the entire population of the Gaza Strip was placed under curfew almost continuously for one week.

The State Department's most recent country report reflects an awareness of these and other abuses committed against the population of the occupied territories. But despite their persistence throughout 1989, U.S. officials rarely criticized them openly.

The two exceptions to this pattern of silence were on the issues of deportation and school closings, on which the U.S. spoke out repeatedly and on occasion forcefully. Between August 1985 and December 1987, Israeli authorities deported 42 Palestinians whom it accused of leading and organizing subversive activities in the territories. During the first eight months of the uprising, another 25 were deported.

The U.S. has repeatedly publicized its view, shared by nearly all governments of the world, that Israel's deportation policy violates the Fourth Geneva Convention. On January 5, 1988, the U.S. voted for the first time in seven years in favor of a Security Council measure critical of Israel. The resolution called on Israel to drop plans to deport nine Palestinians from the territories. In late August 1988, after Israeli authorities named 25 more Palestinians whom it intended to deport -- by far the largest deportation since the start of the occupation -- a State Department official privately warned the Israeli embassy that deportations could damage bilateral relations. A furor erupted when an Israeli diplomatic cable describing the meeting was leaked to the Israeli press.

Since this incident, Israeli authorities have issued no new deportation orders, although all but one of the 25 named in August 1988 were expelled during 1989. U.S. pressure appears partly responsible for deportation being one of the few restrictive sanctions employed by Israeli authorities which has been used less frequently during the last 15 months.

The August 1988 incident demonstrated that the U.S. has raised human rights issues with the Israeli government through diplomatic channels, as it so often claims to do when declining to comment publicly on an issue. It does not, however, indicate whether these private communications are effective, since the impact of the rebuke was clearly magnified by its public disclosure.

To its credit, the Bush administration, like the Reagan administration before it, continued to speak out each time that some of the 25 named in August 1988 were deported. When the first 13 were expelled to Lebanon in January 1989, the Reagan State Department called the action "unacceptable" and "counter-productive." When eight were forced out on June 29, a Bush State Department spokesman stated that the United States is "strongly opposed to deportations," and the U.S. abstained on a Security Council resolution "deeply regretting" the deportations, allowing the resolution to pass by a vote of 14-0-1. When the last four were deported in August 1989, a U.S. abstention allowed a Security Council resolution "deploring" Israel's deportations to prevail by an identical vote.

Explaining the vote to abstain in July, U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Thomas Pickering said that while the United States joined in the call on Israel to cease the deportations,

We do not believe...that raising the issue in the Council now, in the form in which it is being presented, will help to reduce tensions or to restore calm. Neither, unfortunately, do we believe a resolution will assist in achieving the cessation of the deportations.... Neither more deportations nor more such resolutions are likely to serve in the efforts in which we all share a responsibility to bring the parties to the negotiating table.

The one other human rights issue that the U.S. publicized in a prominent fashion during 1989 was the closure of schools in the West Bank. On February 3, 1988, after sporadic closures of schools, military authorities on the West Bank ordered all schools closed indefinitely, claiming that they were centers of violent protest. Schools in East Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip remained open most of the time, although pupils in Gaza were forced to miss many days of school due to curfews. On the West Bank, however, from February 1988 until July 1989, with the exception of a few short periods, some 320,000 primary and secondary school students were kept out of classes. As of December 1989, all universities in the occupied territories had been closed continuously since February 1988, and some for longer.

The United States and its European allies have repeatedly voiced concern to Israeli authorities about the school closures. The U.S. plea for their reopening was made most dramatically in a major policy speech by Secretary of State Baker on May 22, 1989, in which he urged greater pragmatism by both Israelis and Palestinians. Addressing the annual conference of the American-Israel Public Affairs Committee ("AIPAC"), he said:

For Israel now is the time to lay aside, once and for all, the unrealistic vision of a greater Israel.... Forswear annexation; stop settlement activity; allow schools to reopen; reach out to the Palestinians as neighbors who deserve political rights.

In a manner that typified U.S. policy, Baker urged the reopening of schools as a good-will measure that might improve the atmosphere for negotiations. While such good-will measures are welcome, the U.S. avoided the human rights dimension of the problem -- Israel's closure of West Bank schools was by its comprehensive nature an act of collective punishment, Article 50 of the Fourth Geneva Convention states: "The Occupying Power shall, with the cooperation of the national and local authorities, facilitate the proper working of all institutions devoted to the care and education of children." Article 33 of that convention prohibits collective punishments. affecting not only those schools where violence had broken out but every classroom in the West Bank, from kindergarten to university. In July 1989, classes were permitted to resume on the West Bank. In November, however, authorities again closed all West Bank schools through January 10, 1990.>

The U.S. position on administrative detentions can be seen in a similar light. The U.S. is on record as opposing "widespread" administrative detention, a characterization that the country report clearly applied to Israel's internment of Palestinians during the intifada. However, during 1989, the issue was raised most frequently as a means of improving the atmosphere for peace talks, rather than as a human rights violation. See, e.g., Thomas Friedman, "U.S. Gives Israel an Outline for Peace: Quick Steps and Long-Range Moves," The New York Times, March 14, 1989.

Typical was the State Department's response to the IDF's decision in early August to double the maximum allowable period for an initial detention order, from six to twelve months. "As we have said many times before," the Department spokesman said on September 11, "we oppose the practice of widespread administrative detention. Extending the use of this practice does not, in our view, further efforts to reduce the confrontational atmosphere in the occupied territories."

Nonetheless, this emphasis on measures that reduce tensions may have yielded some results back in April: on the eve of Prime Minister Shamir's departure for Washington for talks with President Bush and Secretary of State Baker, military authorities released more than 400 Palestinian prisoners, including some administrative detainees, though most of those released were nearing the end of their terms. While denying any connection between the measure and the request from the United States to release some detainees, Israeli authorities informed all foreign journalists of the times and locations of the releases.

The release of some detainees who had been held without charge was welcome. But this isolated gesture did not address the basic problem, which was the widespread use by military authorities of the power to detain individuals without charge or trial for renewable periods, subject to minimal review by military judges.

With regard to the use of excessive force by the Israeli military, which the State Department's country report blamed for "causing many avoidable deaths and injuries," administration officials found little to say publicly during the year. Their preferred response to questions on the subject was to call the violence "counter-productive" and to urge restraint on all sides. In a typical statement, made on April 24 after increasing clashes in the territories had led to the highest number of Palestinian shooting victims in several months, the State Department spokesman said:

We are deeply concerned over the increase in casualties which have occurred in the course of violent confrontations.... The increase in tension in the territories runs directly counter to the cause of peace. We strongly urge all sides to exercise restraint. We remain determined to work with all parties to break out of the current confrontation and to replace violence with political dialogue and accommodation.

Plastic bullets have been responsible for a large share of the fatalities since their introduction in August 1988 as a supposedly nonlethal means of dispersing violent demonstrators. Plastic bullets were at the center of an uproar in January because their liberal use had caused 47 deaths in five months, according to IDF figures. After the Justice Ministry upheld the legality of their use in non-life-threatening situations, soldiers continued to fire plastic bullets at demonstrators throughout the year, inflicting an additional 70 fatalities by late September 1989, according to an IDF spokesman.

A new controversy over open-fire orders broke out in the summer, after the army permitted soldiers to shoot at the legs of anyone wearing a mask who did not heed orders to halt. Throughout the intifada, Palestinian youths and activists have covered their faces with kafiyehs, a traditional headdress, to avoid identification by authorities and informants. The new policy -- which Israeli authorities said was intended to deter the groups of masked youths from allegedly spearheading the campaign of harassment and violence against Palestinians suspected of collaborating with Israeli authorities -- led to dozens of masked youths, or persons in their company, being killed or seriously wounded by army gunfire.

In 1989, as in the previous year, few soldiers were prosecuted for using excessive force in violation of the open-fire orders. As of October 10, 1989, indictments had been returned in only 13 cases of deaths by shooting or beating since the start of the intifada. The stiffest sentence given so far in these cases was two years' imprisonment. As the country report stated, "regulations were not rigorously enforced; punishments were usually lenient; and there were many cases of unjustified killing which did not result in disciplinary actions or prosecutions."

With the implementation of permissive guidelines on firing plastic bullets and targeting masked persons, the character of IDF shootings changed from the early days of the intifada, when troops frequently faced large crowds and authorities claimed that casualties occurred because troops had been caught ill-trained in riot-control techniques. Israeli claims that the task of quelling disturbances caught the IDF by surprise were dubious. For years, the army had been contending with stone-throwers, roadblocks and large, unruly demonstrations in the territories, although on a less frequent basis. Despite the steady rate of killings and the rising number of child casualties, the U.S. hardly raised the issue of excessive force in public.

One exception was the U.S. response to the clash in the West Bank village of Nahalin on April 13. Early that morning, a raid by border police The border police is a paramilitary force of the Israeli police that operates in the occupied territories under the procedures and jurisdiction of the IDF. went awry when the policemen encountered resistance from local youths and responded with indiscriminate gunfire, killing five. At the U.N., Ambassador Pickering said

The Nahalin incident is a particularly serious tragedy.... We trust that necessary corrective actions will be implemented promptly [by Israeli authorities]. In the meantime, we urge that Israel make every effort to avoid the unwarranted use of lethal force in the West Bank and Gaza. A high-level IDF panel investigating the incident found that the Border Police had committed serious errors in the planning and execution of the raid, and that they had opened fire without restraint. The panel recommended that the commander of the Bethlehem region, who had ordered the raid, be transferred from his post. The officer was reassigned to another post of equal stature in the West Bank.>

The administration also made a couple of cautious statements on acts of violence committed by Israeli settlers against Palestinians. Responding to a spate of such violence, the State Department spokesman said on March 30: "We condemn vigilante attacks. We note the Israeli government's view that there could be no justification for people taking the law into their own hands. We certainly agree." And on June 9, Ambassador Pickering called "the recent escalation in attacks by Israeli settlers against unarmed Palestinians<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>an especially disturbing development."

These statements, while welcome, did not allude to one of the reasons such vigilantism was on the rise: Israel's courts treat settlers who use force illegally far more leniently than Palestinians who are convicted of throwing stones or other acts of violence. This point, noted in the State Department's country report, should have been made again.

Other violations catalogued in the country report, including poor prison conditions, inadequate due process for Palestinians suspected of security offenses, and allegations that detainees and persons under interrogation were beaten or mistreated, did not prompt further public comment in 1989. We are also aware of no statements made by U.S. officials on prolonged punitive curfews, which restricted the lives of more Palestinians than any other Israeli policy during the uprising.n the issue of house demolitions and sealings, B'Tselem reported that in the second year of the uprising, Israeli authorities demolished at least 138 houses in the occupied territories belonging to the families of persons suspected of having carried out serious acts of violence. A further 222 homes were completely or partially sealed shut on the same grounds. Almost invariably, the sanctions were carried out before the suspect was convicted; in some cases, the suspect was still being sought. These figures represented an increase over the first year of the intifada, when at least 119 houses were demolished and 40 were sealed because of a suspected security offense by a resident or family member. Ambassador Pickering reiterated the U.S. view, on November 7, that this policy contravened the Fourth Geneva Convention, but the matter was not publicly raised elsewhere to our knowledge.

In April, the Bush administration ruled against a petition by an Arab-American group to revoke Israel's trade benefits under the Generalized System of Preferences ("GSP"). The petition, filed under U.S. law barring GSP benefits to countries that violate internationally recognized worker rights, argued that Israel violated the rights of Palestinian workers. The administration's decision was based on the narrow legal ground that because the GSP legislation mandates a review of labor conditions within countries, it could not be used to evaluate conditions in the occupied territories, where Israeli sovereignty is not recognized by the United States. While this is a colorable argument, it is regrettable that the administration found no occasion during the year to comment on Israel's closure of many trade-union offices in the West Bank and the detention of scores of union leaders and activists. In the case of the office closures, Israel usually claimed that the trade unions were fronts for the PLO but rarely provided evidence to support these accusations.

The administration also had little to say in public about Israel's handling of the Palestinian tax revolt during the intifada. On September 21, a particularly bitter confrontation began that pitted Israeli tax collectors against residents of the West Bank town of Beit Sahour, who had collectively refused to pay taxes. Determined to make an example of Beit Sahour, Israeli authorities sealed off the village for six weeks, cut phone lines, imposed a partial curfew, entered shops and homes, confiscated and damaged personal property worth more than the taxes owed, and jailed individuals for days without charge.

The administration, according to a State Department source, discussed with Israeli authorities its concerns over these actions but said nothing publicly. In November, when the Israeli siege of Beit Sahour was lifted, the State Department spokesman blandly responded: "The end of this particular confrontation is welcome. As we have said, actions which contribute to confrontation and mistrust between Palestinians and Israelis do not advance the peace process."

While trying to make headway on a negotiating process, administration officials made few high-profile trips to the region in 1989. Neither President Bush, Secretary of State Baker nor Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs Richard Schifter visited Israel. In the last year of the Reagan administration, by contrast, Secretary of State Shultz and Assistant Secretary Schifter traveled to Jerusalem. Visits by Dennis Ross, the State Department's Director of Policy Planning, in May 1989, On May 16, the IDF arrested Palestinian professor Ghassan al-Khatib, hours before he and five other prominent Palestinian political figures were to meet with Ross to discuss Shamir's election plan. Al-Khatib was held for ten days and released without charge after being questioned about his political activities. To our knowledge, neither Ross nor any other U.S. official commented publicly on al-Khatib's arrest. and by Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs John Kelly, in early August, gave rise to no significant statements on human rights in the occupied territories.

Israeli officials made several trips to Washington during the year, where they were given a mixed reception, due primarily to U.S. impatience with Israel's conditions surrounding the elections plan. The administration made no public mention of abuses in the occupied territories during these visits.

For example, when Foreign Minister Moshe Arens visited the United States in March, members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee warned him that U.S. public support for Israel was slipping. The administration, on the other hand, said nothing publicly on human rights issues during the visit.

The main event of Prime Minister Shamir's visit in early April was his announcement, with President Bush's backing, of the above-mentioned plan for elections in the occupied territories. Although Bush made no formal public comment on human rights during Shamir's visit, the press reported that the administration had asked the Prime Minister to take steps in the territories to improve the climate for talks. One step reportedly recommended was the reduction of the Israeli military presence in the urban centers of the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Shamir replied that no such gestures were needed.

Differences between the U.S. and Israeli positions on the elections plan and the conditions surrounding it prompted some blunt talk by Secretary Baker. In striking a note that deserves repeating during all talk of elections, Secretary Baker told Foreign Minister Arens in a letter in late April that the administration looked favorably upon certain liberties, such as freedom of speech, assembly and association, which were currently restricted in the West Bank and Gaza but which had a bearing on the quality of the elections. The letter, made public in May, also suggested that Israel create a conducive atmosphere for elections by, for example, releasing some prisoners.

On May 21, Arens and Baker had further talks in Washington on U.S. reservations about Shamir's elections plan. The following day, Baker delivered his above-noted call for greater Israeli pragmatism in the speech before the AIPAC conference. When Israeli Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin visited a few days later, Secretary Baker reportedly reiterated privately the points made in that speech. But Rabin, who has directed the army's response to the uprising since it erupted, escaped any public comment on human rights by the administration. The same was true during visits by Rabin and Arens in September.

The reception was somewhat different when Prime Minister Shamir returned to Washington in mid-November to meet with President Bush, Secretary of State Baker, and Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney. Irked by Israel's conditions on the elections plan, President Bush waited until just before Shamir's departure from Jerusalem to announce that the President would see him. While the administration made no public statements on human rights during Shamir's week-long stay in the United States, the press reported widely that Bush, in his November 15 meeting with Shamir, criticized Israel's abuses in the territories. The specifics were not divulged.

At the United Nations, the U.S. has repeatedly voted against resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly criticizing Israeli human rights violations. While affirming U.S. concern about the abuses cited in those resolutions, Ambassador Pickering and his predecessor under the Reagan administration, Ambassador Herbert Okun, repeatedly voted against resolutions on the grounds that they were one-sided and failed to advance the quest for a negotiated settlement of the political conflict. On these grounds the U.S. voted against:

A February 1 Security Council resolution appealing for Israeli restraint and calling for the Arab-Israeli conflict to be resolved under UN auspices; The other 14 members of the Security Council voted in favor of the resolution.>

A February 17 Security Council resolution condemning Israeli tactics against the uprising; and

A June 9 Security Council draft resolution condemning Israeli tactics against the uprising and acts of violence committed by Israeli settlers.

Although many U.N. resolutions on Israel are one-sided, the administration would have more credibility in voting against them if it used the occasion of its votes to make clear its opposition to Israeli abuses. This, unfortunately, has rarely happened.

While administration officials in Washington and at the U.N. have been generally soft-spoken on human rights in the occupied territories, the staff of the U.S. embassy in Tel Aviv and the consulate in Jerusalem actively monitored human rights in the field, regularly traveling in the West Bank and Gaza Strip and maintaining contacts with Israeli and Palestinian human rights organizations and activists. They are partly responsible for the quality of the reporting in the State Department's country report.

In a November 6 letter to Human Rights Watch, Embassy First Secretary John Chamberlin wrote:

The fact that the Ambassador, Deputy Chief of Mission, Political Counselor, and others at the Embassy regularly take up human rights questions and express U.S. official views on these questions constitutes a public stand in behalf of human rights. One can reasonably include in the domain of public stands or "gestures" the Ambassador's meetings with Gaza figures (and, from time to time, under the auspices of our Consul General in Jerusalem, with West Bank and Jerusalem Palestinian figures) in a context that clearly indicates a concern over human rights in the Territories.

In its first year in office, the Bush administration has demonstrated concern for human rights in the territories but for the most part has shunned public actions. In November, when voting against yet another resolution critical of Israel at the United Nations, Ambassador Pickering said, "I need not reiterate United States policy regarding the human rights situation in the occupied territories.... These positions are well-known."

In fact, administration positions are ambiguous. After taking a giant step forward last February with the country report, U.S. human rights policy toward the occupied territories assumed a low profile again, subordinated to the search for a political solution, despite the persistence of grave abuses during the second year of the intifada.

Progress on the diplomatic front does not necessarily entail improvements in human rights in the territories. While the U.S. believes that liberalizing measures on the ground will improve the atmosphere for the peace process, Israeli authorities seem to view hard-line policies as the appropriate precondition for negotiations. Defense Minister Rabin and others have said repeatedly that the peace process can advance only after Palestinians are convinced that they can gain no further political ground through intifada tactics. In May, Rabin even warned that the army would crack down harder on the uprising if Palestinians rejected "the golden opportunity" being offered to them in the election plan. He explained: "We will use whatever is needed, more force, to put down the violence, and with much greater justification."

For these reasons, the U.S. must not neglect the state of human rights in the territories as it strives toward the still-distant goal of a just and durable settlement. Furthermore, the United States made an undertaking under international law to promote compliance with humanitarian law in the territories. The Fourth Geneva Convention, which the U.S. maintains is applicable to Israel's occupation of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, requires high contracting parties to "undertake to respect and to ensure respect for the present Convention in all circumstances." The U.S. has stated that many of Israel's practices in the territories, such as deportations, house demolitions, widespread administrative detention and other measures, violate the convention -- but, as shown, the Bush administration has not made vigorous efforts to curtail these violations. As we stated on these pages last year, the protection of basic human rights deserves heightened attention when political rights are not enfranchised and a population is living under long-term military occupation. In such a situation, quiet diplomacy is not enough. The U.S. should draw on its credibility as Israel's staunch ally to speak frankly on the subject.
JAMAICA

The Bush administration's human rights policy toward Jamaica has not yet been clearly articulated. The State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in 1988, drafted by the Reagan administration and issued in February 1989, presented an understated but fairly realistic picture of current human rights abuses. But there is no indication that the Bush administration has used its influence to persuade the Jamaican government to end the abuses described in the report.

Jamaica is a democratic society with a Constitution and laws that protect its citizens. The country has a parliamentary system with free elections, competing political parties, a free press and established institutions to check abuses of power. Jamaicans openly criticize their government, and the government publishes statistics on crime and reports on fatal shootings by the police. The independent Jamaica Council for Human Rights monitors human rights on the island.

Despite its free institutions, Jamaica continues to abuse the human rights of its citizens in three areas: a high rate of fatal shootings by police officers, the detention of suspects without charges for long periods of time, and inhumane conditions in prisons and police lock-ups.

In 1988 the police shot and killed 181 civilians, according to the Jamaican police. During the ten-year period beginning January 1, 1979, the Jamaican police force, according to its own figures, shot and killed an average of 208.3 civilians a year. This figure is extraordinarily high for a country with a population of about 2.3 million. In the United States, with a population about 100 times the size of Jamaica's, police are estimated to shoot and kill about 700 people a year. In South Africa, with a population about thirteen times the size of Jamaica's, police shot and killed 585 people in 1987.

We believe that this extraordinarily high rate of killings by the police is due in part to the permissive climate created by the Suppression of Crime Act, a state-of-emergency law enacted in 1974 which suspends warrant requirements and other procedures that protect Jamaicans' rights. Many young police officers have never worked without the extraordinary powers given to them by the Suppression of Crime Act, and this lack of structure appears to have encouraged some to discharge firearms too freely. In July the Act was lifted in some portions of the country, but it remains in effect in the most populous areas. We believe that the Act should be repealed. We also believe that the Gun Court Act, enacted at the same time, should be repealed. It established a special court for offenses committed with guns. Suspects in that court are tried without juries, and other procedural guarantees are waived.>

The only U.S. statement on human rights in Jamaica made in 1989 was in the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in 1988, written by the Reagan administration but released in the early days of the Bush administration. The report acknowledged the problem of fatal shootings by the police by stating that "excessive lethal force" by the police is "the country's most persistent human rights problem." This approach continued the more realistic views expressed toward the end of the Reagan administration. Before that, as recently as 1986, the Reagan administration had minimized the problem and attributed fatal shootings to "poorly-trained police." The Bush administration has simply said nothing about the killings by police.

At least through the time of our last investigative mission to Jamaica in March 1989, Jamaicans continued to be detained for long periods without charge. Of the cases handled by the Jamaica Council for Human Rights ("JCHR") in 1987 and 1988, two-thirds of the detainees were released without charges ever having been filed. The average time spent in detention before charges were filed was 21 days; the longest period of detention of a JCHR client against whom no charges had been filed was 166 days.

The State Department's country report for 1988 referred to this problem but in understated terms:

Police must record detentions and are responsible for ensuring that detainees appear before a member of the judiciary within 24 hours of detention. However, there have been instances of detainees being held for two weeks or longer without being brought before a judicial officer.

The Bush administration has said nothing further on this issue.

Again, at least through March 1989, conditions in Jamaican lock-ups continued to be inhumane. The lock-ups are overcrowded, filthy, unsanitary and bug-infested, with inadequate light and ventilation, no provision for exercise, and no bedding, soap, towels or other toilet articles. According to the Parliamentary Ombusdman, conditions in prison are also inhumane. The Bush administration has not commented on these conditions.

In February 1989, elections were held in Jamaica and Michael Manley, of the People's National Party, replaced Edward Seaga, of the Jamaica Labor Party, as prime minister. At this writing, it is too soon to know whether the Manley administration has significantly decreased the number of fatal shootings by the police, reduced detention periods, or improved prison conditions.

The lack of public protest about rights abuses in Jamaica contrasts with efforts by the U.S. embassy staff in Jamaica to collect information on abuses. The embassy's human rights officer has attended trials and maintains contact with the Jamaica Council for Human Rights and the Parliamentary Ombudsman. Another staff member has visited prisons on the island. A new ambassador, Glen Holden, took office in November; his approach to human rights in Jamaica is not yet clear.

PAGE = For fiscal year 1989-1990, the Bush administration asked Congress to provide $72,900,000 in economic assistance and $5,350,000 in military aid to Jamaica, a total of $78,250,000. Total U.S. aid provided in fiscal year 1988-1989 was $79,800,000. In light of this significant financial assistance, as well as the long U.S. friendship with Jamaica, the Bush administration is in a position to encourage the Jamaican government to end human rights abuses, should the administration decide to do so.

A good place to begin would be in urging the Jamaican government to take the following steps:

Repeal the Suppression of Crime Act. As well as the Gun Control Act.>

Establish independent investigative bodies to investigate police abuses, particularly fatal shootings, and provide easy and well-publicized access to these investigative bodies.

Provide adequate disciplinary measures, ranging from suspension and dismissal to the filing of criminal charges, for police officers who improperly shoot and kill civilians, detain suspects without charges for longer than 24 hours, arrest people without reasonable cause to believe a crime has been committed, or assault detainees.

Transfer to desk duty, without a weapon, every police officer who kills someone, during the time the matter is under initial investigation.

Permit the use of automatic or semi-automatic weapons only under stringent supervision by senior officers.

Release from detention anyone against whom charges have not been filed within 24 hours.

Reduce the number of people held in lock-ups and prisons.

Provide decent, clean, insect-free cells with adequate bedding in lock-ups and prisons.

Provide at least one hour of exercise daily outside cells for all inmates.
KENYA

In 1989, the Bush administration avoided public criticism of human rights violations under the government of President Daniel arap Moi. Most of the eight Reagan years saw the same U.S. silence, but twice, in 1986 and 1987, the Reagan administration publicly condemned Kenyan abuses -- the torture of political detainees -- in a manner that significantly contributed to an improvement in the human rights climate in Kenya. The success of these public statements should have served as an important model for the Bush administration. Instead, the new administration reverted to the virtual silence of the earlier Reagan years.

In 1989 the Kenyan government continued to abuse its ethnic Somali population. The repression was harshest in the North Eastern Province, where the government used state-of-emergency laws to harass, detain and torture civilians. The state of emergency, in effect in that area since independence, restricts trade, residence and movement, overriding civil rights guaranteed in the Kenyan constitution. The situation is a legacy of colonial days, when the area was separated from Somalia by an artificially imposed border, resulting in a war of secession from Kenya until 1967.

A newly introduced "screening" procedure compelled all Kenyans of Somali origin to report with identity documents to Kenyan authorities. The procedure led in mid-December to the forcible expulsion to Somalia of some 400 Somalis, mostly from the Harwiye and Majerteen clans. Many of those expelled were Kenyan citizens. The Somali government refused them entry and forced them back to the Kenyan border. The Kenyan government, for its part, refused to allow their return. In late December, they remained stranded in the bush between the two countries, without adequate food or water. Scores of others were being held in army barracks prior to expulsion.

Kenyan authorities have also beaten and harassed refugees fleeing the war in Somalia and, until recently, denied the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees access to them. These refugees are in danger from the Kenyan government's "shoot to kill" policy -- instituted in September 1988 to stop the poaching of wildlife -- which has resulted in at least 30 deaths, all described as "Somali."

The Bush administration has remained silent in the face of these abuses, without publicly condemning them. Nor have we received any information indicating that private diplomacy has been used.

In contrast to its harsh repression in the north, the Kenyan government took an important positive step in June 1989 by freeing seven political detainees who had been held without trial, although the Preservation of Public Security Act under which they were held remains in force. Three of those released -- two lawyers and a university professor -- had sued the government for torture and false imprisonment. They were represented by Gibson Kamau Kuria, an attorney who had himself been detained for several months in 1987. Kuria was later awarded the Robert F. Kennedy human rights award but was prevented from traveling to accept it when the government confiscated his passport. His lawyer, Paul Muite, also had his passport confiscated after he accepted the award on Kuria's behalf. Neither passport has been returned. Although the government later allowed a delegation from the Kennedy Memorial to come to Kenya and present the award to Kuria, the government's intolerance of criticism was highlighted when government officials, including the president, publicly attacked the delegation for statements made at a press conference.

Despite the welcome release of the detainees, human rights groups continue to be concerned about at least 40 persons who remain in prison after having been convicted in 1986-87 on charges of belonging to Mwakenya, a clandestine group of government opponents. At the time, over 75 were convicted, after trials lacking the most basic judicial safeguards. There were frequent allegations of coerced confessions, torture and ill treatment, and several reported cases of death in police custody. In response to public expressions of concern about torture by the Reagan administration, Congress and human rights groups, reports of torture have declined. However, the passage of a constitutional amendment in August 1988, which increased from one to fourteen days the period of time that police can hold incommunicado a person accused of a capital offense, vastly increases the possibility of physical abuse. A second amendment empowers the president to dismiss judges and members of the Public Service Commission, which is responsible for the appointment and discipline of civil servants. Even before this change, the judiciary was not seen as an effective check on executive and police power -- concerns which were underscored by the Mwakenya trials. The constitutional amendment only heightens judicial vulnerability to pressure in politically sensitive cases.

Sensitivity to political criticism was at the center of frequent clashes between the Moi government and its critics which led to a new government offensive against freedom of expression. Over the past 18 months, the government has banned three magazines and threatened similar action against the country's largest selling daily newspaper.

The first casualty of this crackdown was the monthly Beyond, published by the National Christian Council of Churches and banned by the government in March 1988. Beyond had been a vocal critic of the controversial 1986 constitutional amendment requiring all future parliamentary elections to include a preliminary stage at which voters must queue openly for the candidates of their choice. The amendment, though widely criticized as intimidating, potentially divisive and open to easy manipulation by those in power, was forced through parliament in time for the February-March 1988 general elections. Beyond published findings showing how the system has been used to rig results in several constituencies. Two weeks after its March issue reached the newsstand, Beyond was banned and its editor, Bedan Mbugua, was jailed on charges of failing to submit annual sales returns to the Registrar of Books and Newspapers. At least three people have been arrested for possessing copies of Beyond.

The second victim of this crackdown was Financial Review, originally a financial weekly, which began to undertake political analysis and reporting on abuse of power by government officials and corruption in high places. The journal was banned in April 1987, and its editor, Peter Kareithi, was detained in December 1988. Kareithi and the editor of another publication, the Nairobi Law Monthly, were also charged with failing to file financial returns.

In June 1988, the government began harassing and ultimately banned another publication, Development Agenda, a relatively obscure monthly business journal with only two issues to its name. The government gave no explanation for the banning but the journal's fate is probably linked to one of its sponsors, Charles Nyachae, who is the son of Simeon Nyachae. In 1988, the senior Nyachae was refused permission to contest a parliamentary seat by the Kenyan African National Union ("KANU," the only authorized political party in Kenya) and later alleged publicly that he has been the victim of a vicious campaign to ostracize him politically.

In June, the government continued its crackdown on the press, prohibiting the largest-selling daily newspaper, the Daily Nation, and its sister publications, from covering parliamentary proceedings. Members of the KANU-controlled parliament vied to condemn the paper, accusing it of disrespect for Kenya's leadership and tribalism in its employment policies. The Daily Nation's real crime, however, appears to have been its reporting on corruption and the decline of freedom of expression within parliament. Four months after the ban, the Daily Nation was readmitted to parliament.

Systematic harassment of the press and consistent efforts to suppress freedom of expression have compounded the difficulty faced by the judiciary and parliament in attempting to operate effectively in a one-party state. The government's intolerance of dissent has also had a chilling effect on the ability of church leaders to voice concern about issues of national importance. Independent student political activity has been severely curbed through the banning of student organizations and the frequent closure of institutions. In 1987, Nairobi University was closed after clashes with the police, following the arrest of student leaders for statements that the government deemed critical. The University was closed again on November 9, 1989, after students rioted over poor facilities and the banning of their organizations. In addition, outspoken academics have been harassed and jailed, with several forced into exile.

Despite these abuses, the Bush administration has failed to condition significant economic and military aid to Kenya on an improved human rights climate. Nor did it issue any public protest. In contrast, Congress was an important factor in the release of detainees earlier in 1989 when it threatened a cut in aid if human rights did not improve.

In fiscal year 1989, the administration provided $44 million in development assistance, $10 million in economic support funds and almost $7 million in food aid. Military aid was sizeable, with $15 million given under the Military Assistance Program and $1 million for the International Military and Educational Training program.

The amount of aid reflects the perception of Kenya as an important strategic ally. Under a 1980 defense agreement, the United States has access to Kenyan airports and naval facilities on the Indian Ocean. And the U.S. regards Kenya as an important part of the Central Command, previously known as the rapid deployment force.

Strategic considerations have unfortunately been paramount in the formulation of policy toward Kenya. Despite the considerable financial and diplomatic leverage, the Bush administration has continued to address rights violations with only friendly encouragement, and limited results.

We urge the Bush administration to make respect for human rights an integral part of its policy toward Kenya. We renew our call for public representations on the need to reform laws and procedures that provide for prolonged detention without charge or trial as well as the denial of prompt access to judicial authority, legal counsel and family members. We also urge the administration to protest restrictions on freedom of expression and restraints on the independence of the judiciary.
MONITORING VIOLATIONS OF THE LAWS OF WAR

One of the distinguishing characteristics of Human Rights Watch is that we attempt to monitor violations of humanitarian law -- or the laws of war -- in internal military conflicts. As the laws of war apply equally to both sides in such conflicts, Human Rights Watch assesses the conduct of government forces and insurgent forces according to the same criteria.

We began monitoring violations of the laws of war in El Salvador in the early 1980s and subsequently monitored such violations in Afghanistan, Colombia, Nicaragua, Peru and Sri Lanka. The establishment of Africa Watch has led to a major expansion of this aspect of our work. In 1989, Africa Watch published a report on violations of the laws of war by both sides in Angola based on an investigative mission in October and November 1988; a report and several newsletters on Somalia, focusing on the war in the North that has principally victimized the country's Isaaq population; and several newsletters on Sudan, some of which deal with the war in the south. Africa Watch is publishing a major report on Sudan in March 1990. Africa Watch also made plans in 1989 for an investigation of violations of the laws of war in Ethiopia to be conducted in 1990.

Asia Watch also expanded its emphasis on war-related abuses. An investigation of abuses in the Cambodian war was undertaken early in 1989 and a report was published; further efforts were planned early in 1990 in an effort to make certain that gross abuses are addressed in any political settlement of the Cambodian conflict. In addition, Asia Watch undertook an investigation during 1989 of violations of the laws of war by both sides in the Philippines, with a report scheduled in Spring 1990. Asia Watch also continued its monitoring of Afghanistan and Sri Lanka.

Middle East Watch, launched in 1989, is also undertaking such efforts. Its first report, published in early 1990, dealt with Iraq. This included an investigation of the war with the Kurdish population, including poison gas attacks.

Also during 1989, Americas Watch continued to monitor closely war-related abuses in the four countries where it has long conducted such investigations. At the end of 1989, another war broke out -- though of brief duration -- when the United States invaded Panama. An Americas Watch mission visited hard on the heels of the U.S. forces and, at this writing, a report is being completed. Americas Watch's most intense engagement in these issues during 1989 was in El Salvador during and immediately following the offensive launched by the FMLN guerrillas in November; and in Nicaragua where the reduction in combat during the year was not accompanied by an end to war-related abuses.

Monitoring war-related abuses tends to be far more draining of the resources of Human Rights Watch than just about anything else that we do. We consider the investment worthwhile because of the gravity of the abuses -- which include deliberate massacres of civilians thought to be supporters of the other side in various conflicts; indiscriminate attacks (aerial bombardment and strafing; shelling; the use of land mines; and ground attacks on areas inhabited by civilians); forced displacement, often by deliberate starvation of the civilian population; the large scale use of practices such asdisappearances, extrajudicial executions and torture against suspected combatants or their civilian supporters; and even such practices as, in Iraq, the use of poison gas.

Though the severity of the violations in the context of war is obvious, what is less apparent is whether the investment can be justified by the results. In the experience of Human Rights Watch, in most military conflict situations, the anwer is a resounding yes. In conflicts from Afghanistan and Angola to El Salvador and Nicaragua, the parties are vitally concerned with their international reputation. Indeed, their prospects for prevailing often depend on that reputation. Well-documented accounts of abuses that are not partisan because both sides are assessed according to the same criteria can help to curb some of the worst savagery that marks such conflicts. This is not always the case. Sendero Luminoso in Peru gets no external assistance and seems not to care about its international image. There is little chance, therefore, for a human rights report to affect the conduct of this particular guerrilla group. Another circumstance that has proved intractable so far has been when there are several parties to a conflict that have engaged in severe violations of the laws of war -- as in the case of Sri Lanka. In such a war, it is difficult to generate pressure to end abyses.

Those in the forefront of Human Rights Watch's efforts to monitor violations of the laws of war include: Jemera Rone, the Director of Americas Watch's office in El Salvador for the past five years, who has monitored the war in that country and in nearby Nicaragua, on a day-in-day-out basis, often getting to the scene of killings within hours to interview survivors, witnesses and others and to attempt to piece together what took place. In addition, the other Watch Committees have called on Rone to undertake investigations of the wars in Afghanistan, Angola and the Philippines. Robert Goldman, Professor of Law at American University and a member of the Board of Americas Watch, has taken part in several investigations and has been the author of the sections in many reports of Human Rights Watch on the laws of war. It was also Goldman's advocacy within the Watch Committees starting in the early 1980s that led to the special emphasis that Human Rights Watch has given to these issues. Professor Theodor Meron of New York University Law School, a member of the Boards of Americas Watch and Helsinki Watch, has also frequently been called on by the staff of Human Rights Watch for guidance in dealing with legal questions involving the laws of war.

One of the most gratifying consequences of the attention that Human Rights Watch has devoted to the laws of war is that several human rights groups in war-torn countries have themselves begun to monitor the practices of government and guerrilla forces according to these norms. Their work complements that of Human Rights Watch and enhances the possibility that we may be able to reduce or end grossly abusive practices.
LIBERIA

In 1847, Liberia declared itself an independent state. Founded by freed American slaves, Liberia was the brainchild of the American Colonization Society, some of whose members were looking for a solution to the "problem" of having large numbers of free black people in the United States. Since then, Liberia has had a "special relationship" with the United States, with many Liberians looking to the U.S. for their political and educational systems and for many of their cultural values. In 1980, a military coup overthrew the government of William Tolbert, ending the hegemony of power held for 133 years by descendants of the "settlers" and those who had adopted "settler" values and mores. The initially popular coup makers soon displayed many of the same qualities as the government they had overthrown. Violence, which attended the coup, became a prominent feature of Liberian political life.

During its eight years, the Reagan administration missed many opportunities to promote human rights in Liberia. In 1987, during a whirlwind visit to Africa, then Secretary of State George Shultz visited Liberia and credited the government with "progress in human rights," adding that the 1985 elections had been "quite open." The Secretary's comments shocked Liberians, as they appeared to reflect willful ignorance about past and ongoing abuses by the regime of President Samuel Kanyon Doe, the former sergeant and member of the People's Redemption Council, which shot its way to power in 1980. Then Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Chester Crocker echoed these sentiments in a 1987 letter to Human Rights Watch, in which he stated:

We believe there has been movement in a positive direction. If you take a moving picture, it shows a trend which we think is a good one. If you take a snapshot, then in that snapshot you can see problems. Problems are not absent, but the situation has improved.

Both statements reflected a close identification with the Doe regime, and a desire to obfuscate ongoing abuses as well as the fraud and strong-arm measures used by Doe to ensure his victory in elections staged in 1985.

Despite the Reagan administration's stance, Congressional pressure during the final Reagan years yielded a drastic decline in U.S. aid to Liberia. From 1980 to 1985, the U.S. poured $500 million into Liberia, contrasted with the fiscal year 1989 figures of $9.28 million in development assistance, $11 million in Economic Support Funds and $7.1 million in rice shipments under the P.L. 480 program. Another $500,000 was spent in fiscal year 1989 under the International Military Education Training program. The decline in assistance was due to growing Congressional concern about human rights abuses as well as increasing awareness of rampant corruption under the Doe regime. Another important factor was the failure of the OPEX (operational expert) experiment: one year into a two-year contract, the 17-member economic management team, sent by the U.S. Agency for International Development to address concerns about the diversion of U.S. assistance, was withdrawn because of the Liberian government's refusal to extend adequate cooperation to the team in curbing extra-budgetary expenditures.

In our 1988 report, we urged the incoming Bush administration to reverse the discredited policy of quiet diplomacy by publicly speaking out against abuses and by using available U.S. leverage to press for a halt to abusive practices. One year later, the Bush administration has done little to break with Reagan policy toward Liberia. Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Herman Cohen visited Liberia in October 1989 and reportedly said that he was looking forward to the next elections, which he hoped would be a model for the rest of Africa in its demonstration of true democracy on the African continent. The statement amounted to little more than wishful musing in light of Cohen's failure to call for the release of political prisoners and freedom of the press and association -- all key elements of meaningful elections.

By contrast, both Houses of the U.S. Congress declared the 1985 elections fraudulent. And the harassment and intimidation of candidates and opposition members during the year-long campaign has been amply documented, including the jailing of opposition figures Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf and Amos Sawyer for extended periods without charge, the banning of the United People's Party and the Liberian People's Party, and the jailing and flogging of journalists.

Doe's continued suppression of independent political activities throughout 1988 and 1989 bode poorly for meaningful elections in 1991. The continuing imprisonment for treason of Gabriel Kpolleh and Caephar Mabande, both leaders of a banned political party, is an example of Doe's efforts to crush all opposition and to impose a de facto one-party state. In March 1988, thirteen persons were arrested in connection with another alleged coup plot. Shortly after his arrest, Joseph Kaipaye, one of the alleged co-conspirators, died under mysterious circumstances, reportedly by being thrown off the balcony of the Executive Mansion. And in October 1989, two arrested for yet another alleged coup attempt died in custody. The government attributed their deaths to natural causes, but held no inquest to substantiate this claim. Doe has frequently charged opponents with treason and often has had them executed after summary trials. In August 1981, Major General Thomas Weh Syen and four other members of the People's Redemption Council were executed after secret military trials for plotting to assassinate Doe. In November 1983, a general and four enlisted men were executed in connection with another alleged coup plot, purportedly led by Gen. Qwiwonkpa, then Commander of the Armed Forces. Qwiwonkpa fled the country, in fear for his life, but the charges were never substantiated. Alleged coup plots have continued to be uncovered by Doe and his security forces, but reliable sources suggest that Doe often concocts these plots as a pretext for eliminating or intimidating political opponents.>

The government also continued to crack down on the press, revoking in June the license of Radio ELCM, the Catholic station, for a story on several people who were crushed to death at a football stadium. The Ministry of Information revoked the license without an administrative hearing as required by the Ministry's guidelines.

Congress has continued to pay close attention to the human rights situation in Liberia. The foreign aid bill, which passed the House, requires the Liberian government to take "significant steps to increase respect for internationally recognized human rights, including the removal of all restrictions on the right of political parties to operate freely; the lifting of restrictions on freedom of the press; and the restoration of an independent judiciary."

In May 1989, Rep. Mervyn M. Dymally, chairman of the House Subcommittee on International Operations, paid a fact-finding visit to Liberia. While there, he spoke at a "Rule of Law" forum sponsored by the U.S. National Democratic Institute for International Affairs. In his remarks, which he repeated in meetings with Doe and high-level officials, Congressman Dymally stressed the link between respect for human rights and U.S. assistance. He spoke of Congressional interest in reforms to promote freedom of speech and press, multiple political parties and the rule of law. During his visit, the Congressman also visited Gabriel Kpolleh and Caephar Mabande in prison and expressed his concern about the conditions under which they were being held.

Such Congressional activism contrasted sharply with the Bush administration's quiet diplomacy. The U.S. ambassador to Liberia, James Bishop, issued several strongly worded public statements, but these have usually addressed fiscal issues, missing several opportunities to raise human rights concerns. There was no public condemnation, for example, of the failure to investigate the October 1989 deaths in custody. The lack of direction on human rights issues was manifested in a conversation that Africa Watch had in November 1989 with the embassy's human rights officer, who declined to say whether the embassy would be calling on the Liberian government to conduct an investigation into the deaths in custody because he did not "know the ground rules."

PAGE = The Bush administration's unwillingness to engage in forceful public advocacy is unfortunate because U.S. leverage in Liberia is considerable. Despite the decline in assistance since 1985, Liberia remains one of the largest recipients of U.S. aid per capita in sub-Saharan Africa. Moreover, most Liberians are strongly aware of the historical ties between the U.S. and Liberia and look to the United States to act as a moral arbiter -- a standing which makes U.S. silence all the more disappointing.

Like its predecessor, however, the Bush administration continues to permit other considerations to censor its public commentary on rights abuses. Liberia is the only nation in West Africa where the U.S. has landing and refueling rights for military planes on 24-hours' notice. The Voice of America broadcasts to West Africa through its transmitter outside Monrovia, the capital. And much of United States intelligence for West Africa passes through the Monrovia Embassy. We believe that such factors cannot justify funding and silently condoning abuses by the Liberian government.
MALAWI

The 25 years of Life-President Hastings Kamuzu Banda's rule in Malawi have been synonymous with torture, extrajudicial killings, detentions without trial and severely circumscribed civil and political liberties. Despite the gross abuses under Banda's rule, the United States has remained an important ally and has failed to make human rights an integral part of U.S. policy toward Malawi. Under the Reagan administration's policy of "constructive engagement" with South Africa, Malawi's close ties to the South African government ensured it uncritical U.S. support. (Malawi is the only southern African nation with full diplomatic relations with South Africa.) The policy of "constructive engagement," which opposed the isolation of South Africa by the international community and sought a pragmatic approach to South Africa by the southern African nations, has undergone some welcome changes under the Bush administration. The changes, which include an acknowledgement of the positive impact of sanctions, provide an opportunity for a reassessment of U.S. policy toward Malawi.

A reassessment is crucial to prevent U.S. identification with the abuses of the Banda regime. An important place to begin would be the State Department's country reports on human rights practices in Malawi for 1989. The 1988 report was fairly accurate as far as it went -- describing, for example, human rights in Malawi as "widely circumscribed" -- but it failed to identify the central issue of ethnic discrimination behind the abuses.

The U.S. should also begin to protest abuses. In 1989, Banda waged a campaign against alleged opponents, with special emphasis on those from northern Malawi. At least one political detainee was either starved or tortured to death as part of this purge, while many others continue to be held without charge. Despite the deaths in custody of suspected dissidents, credible reports of severe torture of detainees, and the jailing of hundreds of northerners, the U.S. made no public protest of Malawi rights practices. This policy of public silence is particularly unjustifiable because, as should be clear by now, traditional diplomacy has not been effective in preventing or correcting human rights abuses in Malawi.

The ethnic dimension of abuses has been central to political developments in Malawi despite its absence from public U.S. analysis. Since shortly after independence in 1964, political power has been held by Chichewa-speaking leaders from the central region, notably Life-President Banda himself. The hegemony of these leaders has been to the exclusion of other groups, particularly northerners, who are educationally privileged because of the favoring of the north under British rule. (Another group, the Yaos, have also been excluded, but as a result of their educational underprivilege, which continues to this day.) Because of their educational advantge, northerners were represented in disproportionate numbers in the civil service and in teaching. In the mid-1970's, hundreds of northerners were detained by the Banda government and later fled into exile. Memories of the events of the 1970s were revived by the 1989 crackdown. In a recent speech to the Party Congress, Banda called for an end to regional bias. Malawians read this to be a call for an end to alleged northern domination, rather than a commitment to end ethnic discrimination. Their interpretation is supported by the government's failure to release any detainees, most of whom are from the victimized groups.

Among other developments in 1989 that warranted expressions of U.S. concern was the mysterious October 13 firebombing of a house in Zambia which killed ten persons. The target of that assassination, Mkwapatira Mhango, a journalist and member of the exiled Malawi Freedom Movement ("MAFREMO"), died, along with his two wives and five of his children. His death follows the arrest and detention of his brother, Goodluck Mhango, who has been held since 1987, apparently in reprisal for Mkwapatira's critical writings. A month before the firebombing, President Banda had been quoted in Malawi's Daily Times stating that false reports about the misuse of official funds by Cecelia Kadzamira -- Banda's official escort and, with her uncle, John Tembo, widely considered to be vying for power upon Banda's death -- were being supplied to foreign publications, including Africa Watch, by the Mhango family. MAFREMO has alleged that the killings were carried out under orders from the Banda government.

Mkwapatira's death is the most recent entry in a long history of repression of Malawian journalists. In 1981, Francis Pollock Mhango (no relation to Mkwapatira), a northern journalist who worked for Malawi's ruling party's newspaper, was detained and beaten severely. Since his release in 1988, he is reported to be mentally unstable, due to his beatings. In 1985, three journalists, two with the Malawi News Agency and the other with the Daily Times, were detained for about one year without charge. In 1988, four jounalists were reportedly detained without charge and severely tortured.

The Malawian government has denied responsibility for the Zambia firebombing, attributing it instead to internal feuding within the Malawian opposition, but the available evidence reveals a history of government attacks on opposition figures, and nothing to support the government's alternative explanation. In 1983, Attati Mpakati, the leader of a dissident group, was killed in Zimbabwe, apparently by Malawi security forces. A previous attempt had resulted in several of his fingers being blown off by a parcel bomb. That same year four persons, including three cabinet ministers, died in unexplained circumstances within Malawi and were widely believed to have been assassinated. All four had been arrested just before their deaths; while the government attributed the deaths to a car accident, eyewitnesses reported seeing bullet wounds in their bodies. In addition, Orton Chirwa, the leader of MAFREMO, is currently serving a life sentence for treason.

By contrast, there is no known instance of violence by Malawi's opposition. Given the history of repression of Malawian journalists, MAFREMO and Mhango's own family, including Banda's recent verbal attacks against the family, it seems probable that the murder was committed by agents of the Malawi government.

Banda's presidency has been marked by severe repression. Political rivals have been eliminated through exile, imprisonment and extrajudicial killing. Three successive secretary-generals of the Malawi Congress Party (no other political party is permitted to operate) have been either killed or, in the case of Aleke Banda, held for nine years without charge. Their fates are linked to the question of succession since, according to the Malawi constitution, the secretary-general becomes interim president on the death of the president.

Orton and Vera Chirwa, two of the best-known political prisoners in Malawi, have been imprisoned since they were abducted or lured across the Zambia-Malawi border in 1981. Orton was a founder of the Malawi Congress Party and Malawi's first Minister of Justice, until Banda expelled him from the Cabinet in 1964 and he fled into exile. The Chirwas were tried in a "traditional court," The "traditional courts" are not courts based on the customary law of Malawi, but rather courts created by President Banda to ensure the outcome of political trials. The judges are appointed by Banda and are not required to have legal training. The courts are part of Banda's extensive use of pseudo-traditional ritual in many aspects of official life. without legal representation or permission to call witnesses, and sentenced to death. This sentence was commuted in 1984 to life imprisonment, after intense international pressure. The two are being held in Zomba Central Prison, where they apparently have not been allowed to see each other for the last four years. The couple has been relentlessly tortured, periodically deprived of food and refused access to medical care, despite being in poor health.

Jack Mapanje, the country's best known poet, is also in detention. He has been held since September 1987, apparently because of the increasingly political nature of his poetry. Under the 1965 Public Security Regulations, the president can order the indefinite detention of anyone "for the preservation of public order." It is not clear whether Mapanje has ever been served with such an order. What is known is that he and other detainees are held at Mikuyu Prison. Those detained under the regulations also include Machipisa Munthali, who has been held without charge for more than 20 years.

Despite this history of repression, the U.S. government has never paid much attention to Malawi. There was a brief spurt of interest in Malawi in 1989, when Senator Paul Simon introduced an amendment to the appropriations bill that would have provided $5 million to the Malawi government to shore up its military capacity so that it could protect the on-going renovation of the Nacala railroad, which links Malawi to the port of Nacala in Mozambique. Human rights groups expressed concern about any form of military assistance to a government engaged in gross abuses, and the amendment was withdrawn.

In fiscal year 1989, Malawi received $19.7 million in development assistance, $24.6 million in food assistance under the P.L. 480 program and $60,000 under the military assistance program. In addition, $238,000 was spent under the International Military and Educational Training program. The increased amount under the P.L. 480 program ($18.9 million was provided in fiscal year 1988) reflects emergency assistance provided to the 750,000 Mozambican refugees now in Malawi. The total amount of assistance, though small in comparative terms, is important to a landlocked country with few natural resources; Malawi will spend $100 million in scarce foreign exchange this year to transport its tea, tobacco and sugar to South African ports. The lack of a discernible policy linking this aid to respect of human rights in Malawi has prevented the effective use of this financial leverage. We urge the Bush administration to treat the human rights situation in Malawi as a high priority in its bilateral relations and to use its leverage to address this serious situation.
MALAYSIA

The Bush administration by and large ignored human rights in Malaysia in 1989 with one important exception -- the forcing back to sea of Vietnamese boat people attempting to land on the Malaysian coast. This brought vigorous criticism from the State Department. But with regard to restrictions on the independence of lawyers and the denial of worker rights, the administration preferred to pretend there was nothing amiss. Its silence on these issues was particularly unfortunate given its unprecedented opportunities to raise them during a visit by Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad to the United States in May and a visit by Vice President Quayle to Malaysia in September. Mutual security interests and the fear of offending a valuable trading partner appeared to override human rights considerations.

In 1988, the major human rights issue in Malaysia was the continued detention of dozens of political activists arrested in late 1987 under the Internal Security Act ("ISA"). In April 1989, the last two detainees of that group were released, and post-release restrictions on other former detainees' freedom of movement and association were later dropped. But the potential for abuse inherent in the ISA, which provides for indefinite detention without charge or trial, did not cease with these developments. Some 70 people, many of them suspected criminal offenders, were believed in custody under the ISA in mid-1989, and in June, the Malaysian parliament passed amendments to the ISA that eliminated judicial review. Judicial review was also eliminated in the case of two other laws permitting administrative detention -- the Emergency Ordinance on Public Order and the Prevention of Crime and the Dangerous Drugs Act. The administration made no comment on these restrictions.

In 1988, the independence of the Malaysian judiciary was severely weakened by the dismissal of the Lord President of the Supreme Court and two other Supreme Court judges and the temporary suspension of three others. In 1989, the independence of lawyers came under attack. Manjeet Singh, secretary of the Malaysian Bar Council, faces contempt-of-court charges relating to statements contained in an affidavit he filed in April on behalf of the Bar Council against Abdul Hamid Omar, the new Lord President of the Supreme Court appointed after Prime Minister Mahathir dismissed his predecessor. Hamid was deeply involved in the series of events leading to that dismissal, and Singh had challenged the propriety of Hamid's actions. In return, the Attorney General Abu Talib Othman issued contempt-of-court charges against Singh in what appears to be an attempt to silence legitimate criticism.

Worker rights continued to be restricted in Malaysia despite the April 1989 decision of the U.S. Trade Representative that Malaysia was sufficiently in compliance with internationally recognized labor rights to continue to qualify for trade benefits under the Generalized System of Preferences ("GSP"). According to the Malaysian Straits Times of April 22, 1989, a Bush administration official said that the United States found Malaysia's labor practices, in a broad sense, "relatively good compared with other countries." This is despite what he described as U.S. concern about two aspects of Malaysia's labor practices -- the "lack of ability" to form a national union for its electronic workers, of which there are about 85,000, and the lack of a minimum-wage requirement in its pioneer-industry program for foreign investments in Malaysia. The "lack of ability" to form a national union has its origins in concessions given by the Malaysian government to foreign electronics firms since 1972 which ensure that workers in their factories will not form trade unions.

Under pressure from the International Labor Organization and the imminent GSP review, the Malaysian government dropped its ban on unions in the electronics industry in 1988, but allowed only in-house unions. To date these in-house unions have failed to provide adequate worker protection, and workers continue to be denied the freedom to form a union of their choice.

U.S. pressure in this instance played a significant role in encouraging the Malaysian government to change its labor practices, but the Bush administration has fallen short of ensuring that the Malaysian government in fact affords its workers internationally recognized labor rights. The United States is Malaysia's second-largest export market after Japan. (Two-way trade amounted to $6 billion in 1988, with a U.S. deficit of $1.2 billion, attributable largely to imports of semiconductors manufactured in U.S.-owned plants in Malaysia.) Considerations of commerce thus appear to have outweighed human rights concerns.

The administration has acted more firmly on the issue of Malaysian "push-offs." Between May and November over 2,500 Vietnamese seeking asylum in more than 40 boats were forced from Malaysian territorial waters. At least four people are known to have died as a result of the "push-offs" but the number of deaths could be much higher. The "push-off" policy violates the terms of the Comprehensive Plan of Action ("CPA") for Indochinese refugees negotiated earlier in 1989. Under the CPA, first-asylum countries are to "screen" asylum-seekers to determine whether they are refugees or economic migrants. Only after such a determination are efforts permitted to be made to encourage economic migrants to return to the country of origin voluntarily. The Malaysian government, which ironically chaired the CPA conference and played a key role in the agreement, has turned away large numbers of asylum-seekers under extremely dangerous conditions and before the status of each new arrival could be effectively determined.

Robert Funseth, a senior State Department official for refugee programs, stated in his November 17 testimony before the House Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs that the administration has vigorously protested these actions both in the United States and in Kuala Lumpur. Condemnation of the Malaysian government's policy has also been expressed in two U.S. Congressional reports and by individual members of Congress.

U.S. Ambassador to Malaysia Paul Cleveland, in his confirmation hearing before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in September 1989, praised Malaysia's past role in granting first asylum to Indochinese refugees and its role in the formulation of the CPA. Although he did not mention the recent "push-offs," he did stress the need for Malaysia to continue its support of the CPA, and he vowed to make that support one of his top priorities.
MAURITANIA

Since April 1989, some 40,000 to 50,000 black Mauritanians -- members of the Peul, Wolof, Soninke and Bambara ethnic groups -- have been expelled from their own country on orders of their government. Most now live in squalid conditions in refugee camps in northern Senegal. The Bush administration issued no public criticism of these abuses.

The expulsions took place in the context of an April dispute between Mauritania and Senegal over grazing rights at the border, which erupted into communal violence in the capitals of Dakar and Nouakchott. Despite efforts by the Mauritanian government to present the conflict as a purely international affair, there is abundant evidence that the resulting exile and violence suffered by black Mauritanians are only the latest and most serious example of the repression long directed against the country's black population by an Arab- and Berber-dominated government. The tension dates from the colonial era, when blacks who led a more settled life were able to take greater advantage of educational opportunities and thus dominated the administrative structure. Since independence, political power has remained in the hands of Arab and Berber Mauritanians, called "beydanes," who have sought to purge blacks from major institutions and to effect the arabization of the country.

The current crisis erupted over the question of land in the fertile Senegal River valley. The Mauritanian government has sought to dispossess blacks of their land in the valley by instituting policies that favor the purchase of land by beydanes, in conflict with the traditional system of tenure. Blacks who spoke out against these practices have been jailed and savagely tortured.

The expulsion of black Mauritanians began immediately after clashes in early April between Mauritanian herders and Senegalese farmers, which brought the two countries to the brink of war. Each country then agreed to repatriate the other's citizens as a precaution against further bloodshed. The Mauritanian government took advantage of the repatriation process to begin a systematic expulsion of thousands of black Mauritanian citizens to Senegal, with the aim of minimizing the political significance and clout of Mauritania's black population.

Among those targeted for expulsion were black civil servants, employees of private institutions, trade unionists, former political prisoners and, in some instances, the wives of political prisoners. Many were summoned by the police, interrogated, forced to relinquish their identity cards and then transported in trucks, with or without their families, to the edge of the Senegal River, where canoes discharged them to Senegal. Two people are said to have died when they suffocated in a small van carrying 30 people -- twice its proper capacity -- for deportation from Nouakchott to Rosso on the border.

The expulsions have torn apart families and separated parents from their children. Anguished parents fear that their children may have been sold into slavery -- a real possibility since slavery, despite officially having been abolished many times (most recently in 1980), continues to be a fact of life in many parts of Mauritania. In a statement submitted to an expert of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights in 1984, representatives of the "El Hor" (freedom) movement testified that there were "still slaves who are held in total servitude and who have never heard of the abolition of slavery." Even emancipated slaves, or "haratines," often remain economically and culturally dependent on their former masters.

Prior to expelling black Mauritanians, security forces are reported to have beaten many until they lost consciousness and to have denied food to others for several days. Bands of "haratines," organized by the authorities, massacred hundreds of mostly Senegalese blacks in cities such as Nouakchott and Nouadhibou. Security forces intervened as a rule only when blacks sought to defend themselves.

Although the expulsions now have ceased, thousands of Mauritanians are languishing in refugee camps in Senegal. And the Mauritanian government has taken no steps to end the pattern of discrimination or to ensure a more secure environment for its black citizens.

The U.S. ambassadors to both Senegal and Mauritania have conducted high-level discussions with government officials, but their private remarks have not been publicly revealed. And despite the magnitude of the crisis, the administration has yet to issue a public protest. At an October press conference in Senegal, Assistant Secretary of State Herman Cohen maintained a position of neutrality without assigning responsibility for the abuses. He said:

I wish to emphasize that we have had friendly relations with both countries for a long time. We are very sad to witness the conflict and above all, to see the human suffering on both sides.

In fiscal year 1989, the U.S. provided $5.8 million in food aid to Mauritania and $2.2 million in development assistance. Another $150,000 was provided for Mauritania's coastal-security program and $100,000 under the International Military and Education Training Program. Aid figures for fiscal year 1990 had not been finalized by the end of 1989.

We urge the administration to protest publicly the Mauritanian authorities' policies and practices of racial discrimination and to call on the Mauritanian government to allow independent human rights organizations to gather information and monitor compliance with international agreements and standards. We also call upon the administration to correlate financial assistance to Mauritania with a marked improvement in the human rights climate and the return, with guaranteed safety, of those citizens expelled during the conflict.
MEXICO

Violations of human rights in Mexico include extra-judicial killings, "disappearances," violence and intimidation associated with rural land disputes and state and municipal elections; torture and mistreatment by the police of those recently arrested; and prison conditions that range from barely adequate to deplorable. In addition, Mexico has failed to address its substantial legacy of past abuses. While the June 1989 arrest of former director of the Federal Security Directorate Jose Antonio Zorrilla Perez, who is accused of the 1985 murder of journalist Manual Buendia, is a positive step, government and former government officials accused of human rights abuses are almost never prosecuted. The same is true in many rural areas of caciques (local political bosses) and their agents who take part in rural violence. In addition, human rights groups claim there are more than 500 unresolved cases of persons who "disappeared" in Mexico.

The prevailing attitude toward these problems among Mexican government officials is that if ignored they will go away. This attitude was mirrored by the Bush administration. The administration made many statements saluting its close economic and political ties to Mexico (Mexico is the third largest U.S. trading partner) but made no statement on human rights in Mexico. Indeed, the only U.S. commentary on Mexican rights practices made in 1989 was contained in the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in 1988, which while published in February 1989, was written by the Reagan administration.

One area in which the Bush administration's silence was surprising, given the priority the administration has placed on promoting free and fair elections, was election-related violence. Like its predecessor, the Bush administration placed no pressure on Mexico to ferret out those who murdered Francisco Ovando, a congressional candidate and close aid to Democratic Revolutionary Party presidential candidate Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas, and Román Gil, Ovando's assistant, four days before the federal elections in July 1988. Nor has the administration shown concern about the killings and other episodes of violence associated with state and local elections in Michoacan, Guerrero, Oaxaca and elsewhere.

The Bush administration's silence on human rights in Mexico can be attributed in part to its desire to highlight positive developments in U.S.-Mexican relations, including Mexico's renegotiation of its foreign debt and cooperation in "the war on drugs," and in part to President Bush's desire not to tarnish his close personal relationship with Mexican President Salinas de Gotari. But these factors should not prevent public protest from the administration on serious Mexican abuses.
MOROCCO

During its first year in office the Bush administration continued its predecessor's policy toward Morocco, in which strategic considerations were paramount and public expressions of concern about human rights violations were limited. Rather than commenting on abuses in Morocco, U.S. officials tended to emphasize the two countries' special relationship, Morocco's strategic importance to the United States, and King Hassan's pro-Western stance and moderate voice for Arab-Israeli peace. U.S. officials pointed to Morocco's strategic location facing the Atlantic and the Mediterranean at the Strait of Gibraltar; the King's support of joint military exercises and his signing of the 1982 base-access agreement which grants U.S. forces access and transit during emergencies; his willingness to host Voice of America facilities; and his offer to make Morocco an alternative landing site for the space shuttle in the event of an emergency. While the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in 1988, produced by the Reagan administration and issued in February 1989, provided a remarkably candid appraisal of Moroccan rights practices, the Bush administration has not repeated these observations in the form of public criticism of Moroccan abuses. According to the U.S. embassy in Rabat, "[s]pecific human rights cases are discussed in high level private meetings," but these discussions have not taken public form.

Despite Morocco's strategic value to the United States, U.S. economic aid to Morocco provides the opportunity for administration influence on human rights issues. In fiscal year 1989, the U.S. gave an estimated $120 million in foreign assistance to Morocco. Approximately $41 million was military aid (mainly under the Foreign Military Sales Financing Program, with a small amount under the International Military Education Training Program) and $27.5 million was economic assistance (development aid and economic support funds). For fiscal year 1990 the administration has requested roughly the same amounts. But the Bush administration has made no move publicly to use this aid as a tool to end abuses in Morocco.

In connection with the 1990 Foreign Assistance Bill, by contrast, the Senate Appropriations Committee suggested that "decisions concerning U.S. foreign assistance levels and programs must take into account the human rights record of recipient governments." With regard to Morocco, the committee expressed concern about "reports of severe human rights abuses in Morocco and the lax enforcement of existing statutes protecting the civil and human rights of citizens."

It is not as if the Bush administration is unaware of Moroccan abuses. The discrepancy between King Hassan's often-expressed support for democratic reforms and Morocco's actual human rights practices was made apparent in the State Department's Country Reports, which noted that "constitutional freedoms are frequently ignored in practice" and that "the human rights situation did not improve significantly in 1988 and may have deteriorated."Among the numerous violations cited in the Country Reports was the continued incommunicado detention of suspects for purposes of interrogation beyond the limit established by Moroccan law. The State Department commented: "These legal requirements<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>are widely ignored, and detainees are often held for up to several weeks or longer before being brought before a judge, frequently without notice or access to their families or attorneys." While the King himself has consistently denied that Morocco holds any prisoners on political grounds, Amnesty International and the Moroccan Human Rights Organization (which received official permission to function in December 1988) have identified hundreds of prisoners held for political offenses, some since as far back as the early 1970s. Among their "crimes" were belonging to illegal organizations and propagating material and opinions hostile to the government. The Country Reports similarly reported that "some Moroccans were in prison and in exile solely because of their political beliefs."

The Country Reports further noted that "other reliable reports have confirmed the use of torture and other forms of cruel treatment by police authorities to extract confessions from detainees and punish prisoners accused of both ordinary and political claims." Recent reports of incidents of torture also disturbed the Senate Appropriations Committee, which formally noted that "the number of incidents of torture is high and increasing and most frequently involved detainees accused of politically related offenses."

The Country Reports went on to explain that "prisoners are held in degrading conditions." Inmates are held in overcrowded, poorly ventilated cells, with appalling hygienic conditions and inadequate medical care. These conditions have propelled several groups of prisoners to start indefinite hunger strikes, the earliest of which was begun in 1985. The three remaining hunger strikers from that era have been force-fed for the past four years. In the summer of 1989, all three fell into a coma. While two of the hunger strikers regained consciousness after a few days, the third took several weeks to do so. More recently, a group of four men, in protest against grossly inadequate medical conditions, launched a hunger strike which, after 64 days, led to the death of one, Abdelhaq Chbada, on August 19. Thus far prison authorities have consistently broken their promises to improve prison conditions. Instead, in October 1989, one month after two Moroccan human rights groups raised the issue of prison conditions with officials from the Interior, Justice and Health Ministries, the government warned the groups that they had violated the law.

Another major area of concern is the continued disappearances of Saharans and other detainees. According to Amnesty International, some 80 Saharans "allegedly `disappeared'" after having been arrested by Moroccan security forces in 1976. An investigation into these disappearances requested from and allegedly carried out by the Moroccan Justice Ministry has not produced any further information. Amnesty International also mentioned several hundred people arrested in November 1987 whose whereabouts and legal status remain unclear.

The Country Reports also referred to the increasingly frequent seizing and banning of publications critical of the country's political and socioeconomic conditions. Article 9 of the Moroccan Constitution guarantees freedom of expression, and the Moroccan government has declared its respect for the similar guarantee contained in Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. But as the Country Reports aptly noted, this freedom is limited in reality: "Criticism of the monarchy and Islam is not tolerated, and, in the opinion of most observers, foreign policy is also not fully open to free discussion. King Hassan has made clear that any challenge to Morocco's claim to the Western Sahara is not to be the subject of public debate." Government actions such as placing journals under prepublication censorship and threatening publishers with defamation suits or the suspension of the right to publish have succeeded in intimidating the press and discouraging investigative reporting. These government pressures have led to several publications disappearing from the market. For example, on April 25, 1989, the French-language women's magazine Kalima, known for reporting on such controversial subjects as male prostitution, abortion and the absence of a free press in Morocco, announced that it was shutting down operations because yet another of its issues had been seized. Similarly, Al Massar, an opposition weekly, was ordered to suspend operations on December 9, 1988, five months after its owner was slapped with an $18,500 fine and a two-month suspended prison term for defamation in connection with an article published in 1985 on abuses by a local official.

The Bush administration's silence in the face of these well-documented abuses seems to reflect a decision to downplay human rights in relations with Morocco. We urge the Bush administration to reverse that decision. Limited public comment, quiet diplomacy and closed-door meetings are clearly not enough to ensure that the Moroccan leadership supplements its pro-Western foreign policy with a domestic policy of respect for human rights. The use of U.S. economic influence, coupled with public expressions of concern over Moroccan abuses, are also needed.
NICARAGUA

Under the Reagan administration, U.S. policy toward Nicaragua's Sandinista government was marked by constant hostility. This hostility yielded, among other things, an inordinate amount of publicity about human rights issues. Almost invariably, U.S. pronouncements on human rights exaggerated and distorted the real human rights violations of the Sandinista regime, and exculpated those of the U.S.-supported insurgents, known as the contras. In 1989, under the Bush administration, U.S. policy toward Nicaragua has experienced one major change, in that it appears that the contras have ceased to be regarded as a viable military and political option. The White House has managed to keep the contras alive -- against the wishes of the Central American presidents as repeatedly expressed in the agreements that are part of the peace process -- but the contras have not been a significant fighting force, and they are unlikely to be turned into one after the Nicaraguan elections scheduled for February 1990.

This is an important change from a human rights perspective, because the contras were major and systematic violators of the most basic standards of the laws of armed conflict, including by launching indiscriminate attacks on civilians, selectively murdering non-combatants, and mistreating prisoners. In 1989 the number of contra abuses has been greatly reduced in comparison to the beginning of the peace process, largely because, at least through September, they were entering Nicaragua less frequently. To the extent that the contras have continued to operate, however, they have continued to commit these violations, and toward the end of 1989, abuses by the contras appeared to be on the increase. The Bush administration is responsible for these abuses, not only because the contras are, for all practical purposes, a U.S. force, but also because the Bush administration has continued to minimize and deny these violations, and has refused to investigate them seriously. As in the Reagan years, the Bush State Department has continued to make too much of monitoring mechanisms within the contra movement that have been wholly unsuccessful in prosecuting those responsible for abuses.

In all other respects, U.S. policy toward Nicaragua under the Bush administration is no different than it was throughout the Reagan years. The peace process in Central America has taken hold in Nicaragua, albeit with difficulties, but largely because the Central American presidents who devised it have been able to overcome U.S. objections. The process initiated in Esquipulas, Guatemala in August 1987 has resulted in 1989 in an electoral process in Nicaragua that is well under way. The Sandinista government has offered several concessions to the opposition, whose candidates are openly supported by the United States. There is extensive ongoing international observation of the election campaign by large, independent teams sent to live in the country on behalf of the United Nations and the Organization of American States. By all accounts, this international presence is helping to reduce frictions that might arise during a highly polarized and emotional campaign.

In contrast, the Bush administration has found only negative remarks to make about the electoral process. It has echoed contra complaints about the composition of the electoral tribunal, chaired by an independent person appointed by the government, and including two members of the Sandinista party and two members of different factions of the opposition in proportion to their results in the 1984 elections. By contrast, the Bush administration complimented the government of Paraguay for its 1989 elections, even though all members of the electoral council were appointed in accordance with their parties' showings in the elections held under the Stroessner dictatorship. The Sandinista government agreed to allow Nicaraguans living abroad to register, but did not yield to the demand that they be allowed to vote in Miami and Honduras. The State Department considered that a blatant flaw in the elections, although most Latin American countries do not offer polling places abroad and, most notably, the Salvadoran elections, hailed by the State Department as models of fairness, were closed to Salvadorans residing abroad.

In November 1989, the State Department circulated a "Nicaraguan Human and Civil Rights Update," in which it quoted selectively from a report of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. It cited the Commission's comments on the need for full freedom of expressions, as well as mechanisms to guarantee it, and on the problems posed by the fact that the Ministry of Interior was responsible for enforcing the newly amended Media Law. The State Department omitted the Commission's acknowledgment that, under the August 1989 agreement between President Daniel Ortega and the opposition, jurisdiction to enforce the Media Law during the electoral campaign had been transferred to the Supreme Electoral Council.

This posturing by the Bush administration leaves the impression that it will find the elections to have been clean and fair only if the U.S.-supported opposition candidates win. If the Sandinistas prevail, the groundwork has been laid for the State Department to claim that the elections were illegitimate.

In a related matter, the Bush administration has continued to press its predecessors' long-standing but indefensible position that the number of prisoners held in Nicaragua for security-related offenses is much larger than it really is. The November "Update" mentions 6,000 such prisoners, when in fact there were no more than about 1,300. This insistence on unsupportable figures is bad enough as an exaggeration, since effective human rights advocacy depends on accuracy, but as the peace process slowly progresses, the U.S. figures may also become an obstacle to peace. The Sandinista government has agreed to release all political prisoners once the contras are completely demobilized. The State Department's figures thus may become a tool to impugn the completeness of an eventual prisoner release.

In 1989, for the first time in many years, the State Department spoke about Americas Watch with words of praise. Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Bernard Aronson, appearing on national television, called Americas Watch "an independent human rights organization." Even contra leader Adolfo Calero quoted approvingly from an Americas Watch report, released in April 1989, which he waved in front of the cameras. The reason for this praise was that Americas Watch had taken the lead in documenting and publicizing killings in remote, war-torn areas of Nicaragua, where Sandinista military and state-security agents had summarily executed peasants whom they considered contra supporters. In an October 1989 report, Americas Watch added to the murders documented in the April report and also analyzed the Nicaraguan government's actions in response to complaints by Americas Watch about the killings. Those actions included investigation, prosecutions and, in some cases, punishment of government agents for the abuses described. The State Department has not commented on the October report. The State Department's November "Update" mentioned references by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights to the pattern of summary executions, but did not mention, as the Commission did, that the Nicaraguan government had investigated and prosecuted some of those responsible for these killings.

The contras have continued to operate in Nicaragua and have increased their operations there since September. Talks between the Nicaraguan government and the contras have not resumed since they broke down in June 1988, although in November 1989 talks were held in New York and Washington for the limited purpose of reaching a cease-fire agreement, after President Ortega abruptly announced the end of the unilateral cease fire his government had established the year before. Ortega's decision had been prompted by two large contra attacks, one an ambush against demobilized militias who were traveling to register for the elections. In the succession of claims and counterclaims that followed Ortega's announcement, the State Department admitted that in October, contra contingents had crossed into Nicaragua from Honduras, offering the disingenuous explanation that the purpose of the infiltration was to encourage registration for the elections.

The policy of keeping the contras alive, through so-called "humanitarian" or non-lethal aid, sustains a force that has shown itself incapable of operating without consistently committing gross abuses in violation of the laws of war. The policy also has placed in jeopardy the holding of elections by encouraging contra attacks on the electoral process. Thus, while the Bush administration proclaims its support for human rights and free and fair elections in Nicaragua, it persists in sabotaging both.

PANAMA

In the early morning hours of December 20, the Bush administration dispatched tens of thousands of U.S. troops to oust Panamanian head-of-state General Manuel Antonio Noriega, who days before had declared that a state of war existed with the United States. Guillermo Endara, whose apparent victory in Panama's May 7 elections was stolen when the elections were annulled on May 10, was inaugurated president at a U.S. military base about 45 minutes before the first troops landed. The fighting was intense for a few days, and U.S. forces tried to capture Noriega, who went into hiding. On December 24, General Noriega entered the premises of the Apostolic Nunciature (the Embassy of the Vatican) in Panama City, and was granted protection. At year's end, the United States had requested that Noriega be turned over to U.S. forces, and intense diplomatic negotiations were under way. Cuba and Peru had offered to grant Noriega asylum.

The administration offered several reasons to launch an armed invasion of a sovereign country, including danger to U.S. citizens and interests, as well as rights allegedly created by the Panama Canal Treaty. Also high on the list of reasons were the drug-running charges against Noriega pending in U.S. federal court. It is beyond the mandate of Human Rights Watch as an organization that monitors the observance of human rights to assess the validity of these justifications under international law.

During the year before the December invasion, the Bush administration's statements and actions on human rights in Panama raised our concern that this administration, like the Reagan administration before it, was suffering from a myopic focus on the fate of one man: General Noriega. The overwhelming message sent by President Bush throughout the year, like that sent by his predecessor, was that the United States wanted cosmetic change in Panama, and that it was satisfied with removing Noriega but leaving intact his main source of power, the Panamanian Defense Forces ("PDF"). In our view, the troubling human rights situation in Panama would not change meaningfully with a change of faces at the top, and should be addressed by means of a broad assault on the excessive influence of the military on all aspects of Panamanian government and society.

As a series of crises kept Panama in U.S. headlines in 1989, Bush administration officials went out of their way to express their support for the status quo in Panama -- minus General Noriega. In a May 11 statement issued one day after Panama annulled the elections apparently won by the opposition, President Bush affirmed his conviction that "[a] professional Panamanian Defense Force can have an important role to play in Panama's democratic future." Similarly, U.S. Ambassador to Panama Arthur Davis stated, "I do not want my words of condemnation of Noriega<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>to denote condemnation of the entire Panama Defense Forces<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>" More to the point, President Bush said on May 13: "The problem is Noriega. If Noriega were to leave, we'd have good relations with the Panamanian people and the PDF." The President reiterated this point the day after the U.S. invasion: "We have no continuing axe to grind with the institution the PDF."

These words of reassurance to the Panamanian military reflected the Bush administration's desire that the PDF organize the ouster of Noriega. They understated the depth of the human rights problems in Panama and, we fear, set the stage for a short-term change of administration rather than a long-term development of democratic institutions and the rule of law. Among the endemic problems that are not addressed by simply ousting General Noriega are the de facto subordination of the executive and judiciary to the military; severe restrictions on freedom of expression; and the lack of judicial review over administrative-law courts and other judicial-like powers of the executive branch.

In addition, the PDF has been directly involved in serious abuses which ought to dim Washington's enthusiasm for it. The PDF crackdown on the civic opposition movement which sprouted in June 1987 included beating, jailing and deporting of opposition leaders, destroying their personal property, shutting down the opposition press, firing birdshot into crowds, and releasing tear gas in enclosed spaces. When opposition forces appeared to have won the May 1989 general elections, the PDF and allied paramilitary groups launched an even tougher response, arresting dozens of oppositionists, killing a foreign cleric and an opposition bodyguard, and badly beating the opposition candidates for president and vice president. The PDF also killed a university student during an August protest.

Repression worsened following an unsuccessful October 3 coup attempt by Major Moisés Giroldi Vega, formerly a close supporter of General Noriega. Although the government reported only ten deaths -- which it asserted were combat deaths of rebels -- and 37 arrests, these figures are believed to understate the scope and nature of the violations. Days after the coup attempt, The New York Times reported that only three or four rebels were actually killed in the fighting, while the others -- including coup leader Giroldi -- were tortured and executed hours after combat ceased. Mark Uhlig, "Noriega Reportedly Orders Executions of Coup Figures," The New York Times, October 9, 1989. Later analyses cited far greater numbers of executions: the U.S. Southern Command in Panama reportedly estimated that from 70 to 100 rebel officers and soldiers were killed, Associated Press, "Noriega Reportedly Executed 100 Rebels," reprinted in The Washington Post, November 22, 1989. while the Panamanian Human Rights Committee has alleged that 233 military men were executed and 600 arrested.

The December invasion resulted in the formal destruction of the PDF, and at year's end, U.S. troops were exercising police functions in Panama. However, Endara has created a new military and police force, called the Public Security Force ("PSF"), and has called on members of the PDF to join it.

The first appointments to senior leadership positions in the PSF are hardly encouraging. Colonels Roberto Armijo and Eduardo Herrera Hassan, two former high-ranking PDF officers, were named the top- and second-ranking commanders of the PSF. Herrera Hassan had been a member of Noriega's inner circle until he lost out to Noriega in an internal power struggle. He participated in one of several botched covert attempts to dislodge Noriega, sponsored by the U.S. government, and then spent the few months before the December invasion in exile in Florida. He was flown to Panama by U.S. military forces to take up his new job. Two other high-ranking appointments have fallen on Armando Palacio Góndola, a close Noriega associate implicated in serious abuses in the 1970's, and Lieutenant Colonel Moisés Correa, who was the head of the notorious Modelo prison until he fell out of grace with Noriega on account of the failed October 3 coup attempt. The Bush administration has shown no interest in exploring the responsibilities of these officers for past violations committed by the PDF. As one senior U.S. embassy official commented, the PSF "is basically the same officers, the same men, the same structure" as the PDF "except that they say they support democracy where before they said they supported Noriega." Larry Rother, "It May Prove Difficult to Let Panama Get on With Its Life," The New York Times, December 31, 1989.>

These appointments are consistent with the administration's prior actions toward Panama. Despite the history of PDF violations, human rights have not been the driving force behind the Reagan and Bush administrations' hostility toward the Noriega regime. Washington turned a blind eye to abuses in Panama for many years until concern over drug trafficking prompted indictments of the general by two grand juries in Florida in February 1988. Noriega's drug trafficking was known to the U.S. government for a long time while he was still acting as an asset of the Central Intelligence Agency ("CIA") (he is said to have served in that capacity for twenty years, including the period when the CIA was directed by George Bush) and more recently while he assisted the White House's covert efforts to arm and finance the Nicaraguan contras.

The pre-invasion campaign to oust Noriega included maintenance of Reagan-era economic sanctions prohibiting payments of Panamanian taxes owed by U.S. companies, as well as blocking the payment of fees from U.S. government agencies and the $10 million annual fee payable to Panama under the Panama Canal treaty; dozens of exceptions to the sanctions were permitted, however. The Bush administration announced a tightening of the sanctions on November 30, 1989, stating that beginning on February 1, 1990, Panama-flagged ships would be banned from U.S. ports. The sanctions policy sparked considerable controversy, as it was opposed by the Catholic Church and opposition leaders in Panama for ruining the economy and causing tremendous hardship to the population, without diminishing Noriega's power. With Endara's inauguration, the sanctions have been lifted, paving the way for release of nearly $300 million escrowed in the United States.

The Bush administration also undertook several covert actions designed to remove Noriega before launching an invasion. The administration sought to support the opposition in Panama's May 7 elections through the reported provision by the CIA of $10 million to finance opposition activities, including clandestine radio broadcasts, printing, and other election expenses. A second $10 million installment of election-related funds was not released because some of the initial funds had reportedly gone to a Panamanian suspected of corrupt activities. Although Human Rights Watch has not taken a position on foreign funding of local parties as such, we opposed the CIA's secret aid to the Panamanian opposition during the elections as susceptible to misuse by virtue of being hidden and unaccountable. We are also opposed to foreign funding of political parties if it is in violation of local law, as it is, for example, in the case of the funding of U.S political parties.

After the Panamanian government annulled the elections, the Bush administration began sending loud signals that it wanted the PDF to revolt against its commander. An attempt by dissident PDF officers and soldiers was launched and quashed on October 3. In response to a rebel request, U.S. troops blocked two roads by which troops loyal to General Noriega were expected to pass. However, the loyalist troops took another route, and their arrival caused the coup to fail.

Blame for the failure of the effort to remove Noriega was debated on the front pages of U.S. newspapers, and lawmakers and editorial writers lambasted the Bush administration for failing to intervene more heavily on the side of the plotters. In its defense, the administration pointed to an executive order which provided that "[n]o person employed by or acting on behalf of the United States Government shall engage, or conspire to engage, in assassination." Administration officials claimed that this order, originally issued in 1976 by the Ford Administration, prevented the Bush administration from supporting the plotters because the plotters might have killed Noriega.

In the debate over the executive order, the administration failed to address the important distinction under the laws of war between assassination and combat-related killing. The laws of war prohibit violence against persons taking no active part in hostilities, including one-time combatants who are no longer engaged in combat because they have been captured or injured. The laws of war also require combatants to distinguish between civilian and military targets and, even when firing upon military targets, to make every effort to minimize civilian casualties. Thus, while engaging in violence against combatants may well be consistent with U.S. obligations under the laws of war, assassination of noncombatants is clearly prohibited.

Within six weeks of the failed coup, a secret memorandum relaxing the interpretation of the executive order was approved by the White House and the House and Senate Intelligence Committees. Under the new interpretation -- the text of which is classified -- the CIA is reportedly permitted to assist some operations in which the killing of foreign leaders is a possibility, so long as the killing is not an explicit purpose of the plotters. A presidential finding consistent with the new interpretation of the Executive Order was reportedly approved by President Bush, authorizing the CIA to spend up to $3 million to recruit Panamanian military officers and exiles to overthrow General Noriega. Michel Wines, "U.S. Plans New Effort to Oust Noriega," The New York Times, November 17, 1989; David Ottaway & Don Oberdorfer, "Administration Alters Assassination Bar," The Washington Post, November 4, 1989.>

We are concerned by this new interpretation, which appears, judging from news accounts, to weaken the ban on assassinations. Without regard to the advisability of U.S. entanglement in coup attempts, CIA involvement in or support for assassinations, whether they be the stated or covert purpose of plotters, violates international law. In addition, we fear that the "reinterpretation" of the assassination ban signals to coup plotters around the world that Washington is not genuinely opposed to assassinations.

The laws of war are also applicable to the U.S. invasion of December 20. Preliminary news accounts of the fighting in Panama indicate that scores of civilians died. To what extent U.S. troops and Panamanian forces may have engaged in violations of the laws of war remains unclear at year's end. The occupying forces had produced abundant material for the press on military aspects of the operation and on the generally sympathetic response of the Panamanian population, but there was still no count of civilian casualties or any serious exploration of the circumstances in which civilians died. Great destruction of civilian homes is clearly observable, and yet there has been no serious inquiry into whether aerial, artillery and ground fire was directed strictly at military targets and, if so, whether the firing was in accordance with the duty to minimize collateral civilian casualties.

U.S. troops apprehended as many as 5,000 persons. News photographs showed them being interrogated while blindfolded. By year's end, officials said that some 1,300 remained in detention. But there had been no effort to provide full lists of those captured, and despite earlier requests, the International Committee of the Red Cross was not given access to prisoners until December 31. According to some reports, civilian officials of the old Panamanian government have been arrested by U.S. troops. Apart from stating that these arrests had been carried out on the request of the new Panamanian government, the United States had offered no explanation of the reasons for the arrest of non-combatants, or under what legal authority those arrests were ordered.

It was too soon at year's end to tell what shape the new Panamanian government would take and what role the Bush administration would play in encouraging the government to respect human rights. However, the role played by the Bush administration in setting up that government gives it an extraordinary responsibility to press for full respect for human rights, rather than settling for a simple change of administration. The Bush administration should begin to fulfill that responsibility immediately, by providing full and open access to all information available about the manner in which the December military operations were conducted.
PARAGUAY

General Alfredo Stroessner was overthrown on February 3, 1989, in a violent coup that abruptly ended his 34-year rule. He was replaced by General Andrés Rodríguez. It is notable that in Paraguay, a long-time U.S. ally governed until the coup by a right-wing dictatorship, the Reagan administration had a strong record of criticizing Stroessner's abysmal human rights practices. In 1989, a year that saw a dramatic improvement in the human rights situation in Paraguay, the Bush administration showed continued interest in human rights in that country.

Gen. Rodríguez launched his government with an inaugural speech pledging to restore human rights and democracy. He stated, "I believe that for human rights to be a reality and not simply wishful thinking, an authentic democracy must exist -- not just a facade or simply laws -- in which a strong and independent judiciary exists, in which the right to express opinions is respected, as is the right to organize peacefully, so that all Paraguayans have the same opportunities, without privileges of any kind." Rodríguez promptly announced that elections would be held on May 1, and then was easily elected president.

The Bush administration deserves credit for pressing Rodríguez from the start to respect human rights. On the day of the coup, a Bush administration official told Reuters, "We are watching it carefully and note that General Rodríguez has indicated a desire to move toward democracy. We hope he carries through." State Department spokesman Charles Redman said, "We would welcome any genuine movement toward a more democratic form of government in that country." A week later, when the U.S. recognized the Rodríguez government, U.S. Ambassador Timothy Towell said, according to The Washington Post, that the quality of the U.S. relationship with the new government would depend on the degree to which it moved forward in opening the political system, guaranteeing human rights and fighting drug trafficking."

Within weeks, Paraguay was transformed from one of the more repressive countries in Latin America to a much more open society preparing busily for its first free and relatively fair elections in decades. The Rodríguez government began to respect freedom of association and assembly and legalized opposition political parties that had never been formally recognized -- with the exception of the Communist Party. Prominent opposition leaders began to campaign for the presidency. When press freedom was announced, news organizations that had been banned, such as ABC Color, Radio Nandutí and Radio Caritas, resumed operations. Laws applied in political cases were repealed. The last remaining political prisoners were released. Many Paraguayans returned from exile.

The Rodríguez government was criticized in Paraguay for its rush to organize elections in only 90 days. The opposition had little time to recover from three decades of repression. Election authorities were appointed in accordance with the parties' results in previous highly restricted and fraudulent elections, which also gave an unusual advantage to the Colorado Party. And there were also credible allegations of some irregularities and fraud on election day. Despite these problems, the May 1 voting took place in a climate free of fear and violence and the elections were widely accepted as a success both within and outside Paraguay. It was generally agreed that any fraud that may have taken place would not have affected the outcome. Opposition figures, including long-time human rights activists, won a significant number of seats in the Congress. The Bush administration provided the indelible ink used to mark the voters' fingers to prevent repeat voting, but made no comment on the irregularities that emerged. President Bush congratulated Rodríguez on his victory, saying that he was "happy with the elections held on May 1 as a first sign of hope."

Free elections, of course, do not by themselves guarantee respect for human rights, and Paraguay is still in a period of transition in addressing violations. The violent evictions of peasants who occupy lands in the countryside and other abuses that arise from land conflicts persist. The judiciary continues to be slow and inefficient -- perhaps deliberately -- at a time when victims of human rights abuses at the hands of the military and police are for the first time able to seek justice in the courts and when former Stroessner officials are being prosecuted for crimes of corruption. There has been no pardon or amnesty for past abuses, but it is clear that the Rodríguez government is not interested in promoting a full airing of the facts or punishing those responsible. The victims then are left to their own devices in mobilizing the courts, and so far the judiciary has been slow and unresponsive. Human rights organizations have started campaigns against impunity.

As in other countries, the Bush administration has remained silent on the question of redress for past abuses, as well as on the matter of violent rural evictions. We believe that the administration could make a significant contribution to promoting accountability for past abuses by stating clearly its support for restoring truth and justice by means of the judicial process. Likewise, the Bush administration should use the leverage it now has, by virtue of its friendly relations with Rodríguez and the previous administration's principled stand in Stroessner's last years, to express concern about rural violence against the poor.
PERU

Peru is in the tenth year of its return to elected government, and in the tenth year of the guerrilla war carried on by Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path), perhaps the continent's most vicious and intractable insurgent organization. This is also President Alan García's fifth and last year in office, and his administration seems to have given up trying to control the armed forces to ensure that the fight against Sendero is conducted within the rule of law. Sendero has now grown well beyond its initial enclave of Ayacucho, in the South-Central Andes, and is now present in almost every part of Peru. Despite serious setbacks, it continues to appeal to many young, poor Peruvians and has solidified its grip over peasants and slumdwellers in many regions and cities. Sendero also launched an attack on the November 1989 elections, targetting for assassination elected and appointed candidates and officials from across the political system.

Democracy is thus in serious difficulty in Peru. The armed forces are much less inclined to follow directions from an inefficient and paralyzed government, and the counterinsurgency campaign is increasingly waged as a "dirty war." The armed forces methodically cause persons to disappear in the emergency zones, and frequently resort to indiscriminate attacks on civilians. From time to time, public opinion is shaken by the news of another grisly massacre, usually in retaliation for an attack by Sendero. Government institutions have been unwilling to cope with these abuses. Members of the governing party, Partido Aprista Peruano, who occupy key positions in the National Assembly have systematically obstructed congressional inquiries into abuses. And independent officials, such as judges and prosecutors, have failed to live up to their responsibilities to investigate abuses, at times after governmental interference.

The U.S. government has accurately and fairly described the human rights picture in the State Department's annual Country Reports on Human Rights Practices. But U.S. policy toward Peru has been completely dominated by concern over drug interdiction, to the detriment of what could have been constructive efforts to promote human rights.

Peru is a major grower of coca and, as such, a supplier of the Colombian drug cartels. Vast areas of the country are now dedicated to the coca crop, and peasants are increasingly attracted to the crop because of its high market price in relation to alternative crops. The cocaine industry, however, is controlled by Colombian mafias, which buy their product in Peru. Peru thus has experienced little of the violence that in Colombia results from disputes among members of the cartels over control of operations and from efforts by those members to find a permanent place in Colombian society and politics.

The Bush administration's interdiction plan calls for military aid and training and the placement of U.S. advisors in the field. Most of this activity is directed to the Upper Huallaga valley, in the central jungle of Peru, where Sendero Luminoso has established a strong base. Speaking off-the-record, administration officials have acknowledged that military activity in the Upper Huallaga will have to be directed, at least in part, against Sendero. This view stems from the mistaken assumption that guerrillas and drug traffickers in the Upper Huallaga are allied. In fact the situation is much more complex. Sendero has established itself as the representive of growers, who are on the lowest rung of the cocaine ladder. On behalf of the growers, Sendero requires dealers and buyers to pay higher prices for raw coca. In return, Sendero guarantees protection for these middlemen and purchases weapons from them. Sendero thus does not so much have an alliance with the drug traffickers as it maintains an uneasy working relationship with them, in an area where the authority of the state is almost non-existent.

The Peruvian government has declared a state of emergency in the upper Huallaga Valley, where it has established a Political-Military Command as the supreme authority, headed by General Alberto Arciniegas. Gen. Arciniegas has combined some of the abusive tactics already used in Ayacucho -- there are credible reports of disapperances and extra-judicial executions -- with "civic action" initiatives designed to break the support that Sendero enjoys among growers and peasants. He has stated publicly that it is not his job to fight drug traffic, which is technically a police function. His counterinsurgency strategy consists of striking deals with local economic and civic powers to forge a common front against Sendero, and in Upper Huallaga these powers happen to be heavily involved in drug trafficking. This policy has made U.S. officials very suspicious of Arciniegas. In late September, according to The Miami Herald, Melvin Levitsky, Assistant Secretary of State for International Narcotics Matters, accused Arciniegas of having been bought by the drug traffickers. True or not, the accusation created quite a stir in Peru, where observers commented that the Bush administration does not realize the seriousness of the threat posed by Sendero, and that Peru cannot shift its priorities to accomodate U.S. interests.

There have been reports in the Peruvian press that U.S. advisors have occasionally ventured out of their quarters and risked confrontation with the guerrillas. In June, Drug Enforcement Agency personnel, using helicopters and machine guns, took down a flag left by Sendero on an island in the Huallaga river. The U.S. embassy in Lima disciplined the agents for breaching their rules of engagement. White House and Pentagon officials have gone to great lengths to deny that there is any risk of U.S. troops becoming involved in combat, but U.S. military publications and skeptical members of Congress have insisted that U.S. Special Forces, in a supervisory role, have gone out on a variety of reconaissance patrols with the forces they are training. These suspicions are fueled by a fortified base being built by the DEA in Santa Lucía, 70 kilometers inland from Tingo María, which will have the capacity to hold up to 400 troops.

The Bush administration all but acknowledges that in Peru, its drug-interdiction policy is in effect a counterinsurgency policy. If that is the case, there is no clear debate in Washington about the implications of involving U.S. aid and forces in a local counterinsurgency effort when that effort has increasingly taken on the characteristics of a "dirty war." As in Colombia, a more sound policy in Peru would be to establish strict conditions on aid to ensure that both drug interdiction and counterinsurgency are conducted in strict compliance with fundamental human rights standards.
THE PHILIPPINES

The Bush administration continued its predecessor's policy of praising President Corazon Aquino's human rights achievements while downplaying ongoing serious human rights problems and permitting U.S. economic and security interests to take priority over human rights concerns. The administration was preoccupied during the year with paving the way for renewal of the agreement on Clark Air and Subic Naval Bases and with securing a $10 billion aid package for the Philippines called the "Multilateral Assistance Initiative," or MAI. A key meeting on MAI took place in Tokyo in July 1989, and negotiations on the bases agreement, due for renewal in 1991, were to begin in December 1989, although they appear to have been postponed in the aftermath of the December coup attempt. The gravity of that attempt, and the use of U.S. planes to keep rebel air power grounded, are likely to reinforce the posture of praise for Aquino and dismissal of human rights criticism as an effort to undermine her government.

At a state dinner for President Aquino in Washington in November, President Bush said that a long-term security agreement would preserve bipartisan support for continued economic and military aid. He said nothing about human rights. The administration continued to provide substantial military aid for the country's counterinsurgency efforts, and Vice President Quayle even urged that a Congressional ban on U.S. aid for internal security forces be waived for the Philippines, despite the poor human rights record of the Philippine military and police.

Both sides in the 20-year conflict between government forces and the communist-led New People's Army ("NPA") were responsible for grave human rights violations during the year. Neither the government-appointed Commission on Human Rights nor independent monitoring groups had reliable statistics, but numerous cases of politically motivated killings, torture, disappearances and unfair trials were documented.

Allegations were legion of abuses by members of the government-trained paramilitary force, Citizens' Armed Forces -- Geographical Unit ("CAFGU"), suggesting that its recruitment and screening measures were little changed from those of its discredited predecessor, the Marcos-era Civilian Home Defense Forces. The abuses included several beheadings in Negros and Mindanao of suspected NPA supporters, in collaboration with anti-communist "vigilante" groups, and politically motivated killings elsewhere. Army regulars were reportedly responsible for several summary executions of suspected rebels in Negros during military operations there in April and May. Prosecutions of soldiers continued to be rare, and 24 were acquitted by a military court in July 1989 in the so-called "Lupao Massacre" case. Seventeen civilians in Lupao, Nueva Ecija, including an elderly couple and several children, died when the army opened fire on a village from which an NPA attack was believed staged in February 1987.

For its part, the NPA stepped up attacks on U.S. citizens believed engaged in the war effort, continued to kill members of the police and military, and in some regions undertook a purge of its own ranks, assassinating suspected informers.

The U.S. response to these abuses was to underscore the NPA threat to the Philippines' stability while refraining from public criticism of abuses by government-backed forces, despite U.S. military aid used to equip the latter. Throughout the year in different forums, Bush administration officials stressed the importance of the paramilitary organization CAFGU as a counterinsurgency force and emphasized the difference between it and earlier abusive civilian militias. The State Department's country report on the Philippines, written by the Reagan administration and issued in February, implied that abuses by "vigilante" groups would end with the establishment of CAFGU, which is supposedly highly trained and disciplined. This line was echoed by Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, David Lambertson, in testimony before the House Foreign Operations Subcomittee on February 8. Lambertson stated that CAFGU was formed in part to stop the abuses attributed to "vigilante" groups and that it would have a "more formal relationship" with the military than the latter had. He acknowledged that U.S. aid would probably be used to equip the CAFGU.

In April, the State Department submitted a special report to the House Appropriations Committee entitled "Citizens' Self Defense Groups in the Philippines." The report typified the administration's approach. Noting the "dramatic positive transformation" of the human rights situation under President Aquino, it cited legal and administrative reforms which were intended to protect human rights. It then outlined the characteristics of CAFGU which make it different from earlier paramilitary groups: screening of recruits in consultation with civilian officials and rejection of abusive or criminal elements; human rights and values training; deployment in the community from which the recruits are drawn; and careful supervision by the Armed Forces of the Philippines. The report acknowledged isolated instances of abuse but without citing examples. It then stated: "[These reports of abuses] suffer the same distortions present in any argument which relies on an accounting of individual cases to make broader generalizations. Further, as noted above, there is credible evidence that some individual cases are fabricated by the [Communist Party of the Philippines]."

What the country report, Lambertson's testimony and the April report all did was to focus on the Aquino government's commitment to reform on paper while downplaying or discrediting clear evidence of actual abuses. Abusive elements have not been screened out of CAFGU; there is forced recruitment in some areas; civilian officials in many areas have had no say in the selection process; and human rights abuses go unpunished. Moreover, a "Special CAFGU Active Auxiliary," established in early April 1989 and composed of employees of private companies trained by the military but funded by the companies to protect their property, amounts to privatization of the counterinsurgency effort. In Zamboanga del Norte and elsewhere, Special CAFGUs have reportedly been used by private businesses to clear peasants off land needed for logging. The Bush administration has an obligation to ensure that U.S. military aid is not used by groups or individuals who violate human rights. Careful monitoring of CAFGU performance is essential, but nothing the Bush administration has said or done indicates that such monitoring is taking place.

The implication that CAFGU has somehow replaced "vigilante" groups is wrong. In 1989, new vigilante groups, called "Greens," "Whites," "Reds" and "Blacks" after the color of their headbands, appeared in southern Negros Occidental together with members of CAFGU and the regular army, and in April and May were reportedly responsible for the murder and mutilation of at least four people in the course of the military's "Operation Thunderbolt."

Lambertson, in his February testimony, insisted that the administration had raised human rights issues both privately and publicly with the Aquino government. But if such statements were made, they were negated by other actions. In an inexcusable honor to a man widely believed responsible for several disappearances of suspected NPA supporters in Manila, the U.S. embassy in July gave an award to Lt. Col. Romeo Maganto of the Western Police District, citing his "assistance extended to the U.S. mission on matters of mutual consideration." Turning a blind eye to his setting up of vigilante groups in Manila to attack suspected front organizations, the award also cited his "professionalism."

Vice President Quayle travelled to the Philippines in September, carrying a letter dated September 19 from 22 members of Congress which urged him to raise the problem of CAFGU abuses in his talks with President Aquino. Just as he arrived, the NPA killed two U.S. technicians and warned of more attacks to come. The Vice President properly expressed outrage and grief, but he then went far beyond the limits of propriety by suggesting that the Bush administration would ask for a waiver of the Congressional ban against U.S. foreign aid being used for police and other internal security forces. "This waiver will help protect American lives," he said. Providing aid to security forces who in the past have shown little respect for Filipino lives will not aid the cause of human rights, and even suggesting such a waiver was misguided.

Upon his return, the Vice President sent a letter to Rep. Ted Weiss, one of the signatories of the September letter, saying:

While it is our duty to hold the democratic Philippines Government to high human rights standards, we must focus our attention on condemning NPA terrorism and providing Mrs. Aquino's government with the material and training required to defend democracy. At the same time, we should and are considering ways to help the Philippines Government in its continuing effort to improve the human rights performance of its military and police forces.

Criticizing abuses by the government is clearly not on the Vice President's agenda.

The Bush administration's loud and clear message to the Philippines is that the administration does not consider Philippine human rights abuses to be a problem. Levels of aid are one indication. In July, the U.S. led a meeting of donor countries in Tokyo to pledge $3.5 billion in aid to the Philippines. Secretary of State James Baker said the U.S. alone would seek $1 billion from Congress over a five-year period to assist the Philippines. Even before the Tokyo meeting, the administration had asked Congress for $481 million, including $200 million in military aid. (In November 1989, the House of Representatives approved a package of $160 million for the Philippines in the foreign assistance bill.) Armed Forces Chief of Staff General Renato de Villa, returned from Washington in early September, saying the U.S. had agreed to deliver $64 million worth of helicopter gunships and patrol boats by mid-1990 to help fight the guerrillas. And in November, during President Aquino's visit to Washington, the U.S. pledged $25 million more in economic assistance. Aid was clearly seen as a carrot for a favorable agreement on the bases. "The base presence and our ongoing security cooperation conditioned the atmosphere for investment," according to Richard Solomon, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and the Pacific, who sat in on the Bush-Aquino meeting.

With such levels of aid, the Bush administration should be far less circumspect about criticizing the human rights record of the Aquino government. Such criticism is necessary if the administration is to avoid underwriting abusive armed forces.
POLAND

In 1989, Poland experienced dramatic political and social changes that have had a strong impact on the human rights situation in that country. These changes, which led to the appointment of the first non-Communist prime minister in post-Yalta Eastern Europe, were first initiated during a series of negotiations between the government and the opposition, held in Warsaw from February 6 to April 5. Most human rights violations in 1989 occurred prior to the April 5 agreement, which re-legalized Solidarity and outlined the plans for profound reforms, including June elections and changes in the political and legal structure.

The Bush administration welcomed the signing of the agreement, calling it "a great day for the Polish people and for freedom." Statements that followed the elections as well as speeches delivered during President Bush's July trip to Poland were similar in tone. But all such statements showed no sign of continued vigilance on human rights issues. The furthest that the administration went in this regard was to send a senior member of the president's delegation to meet with members of the Polish human rights community to be briefed about the state of human rights in Poland.

The administration's only pronouncement on human rights in Poland came on January 31, when the State Department spokesman expressed concern over two murders that month of opposition-linked priests. The administration stated its expectation that "Polish authorities will conduct a thorough and rapid investigation" of these killings, but there was no follow-up statement about the two assassinations or any official reaction to a July murder of another opposition priest.

While the human rights situation in Poland has improved significantly during the past eight months, we urge the administration to remain vigilant, particularly since the police remain in the hands of those responsible for widespread abuses in the past. The administration should not drop the human rights issues from its Polish agenda on the assumption that democratic changes will automatically guarantee the observance of human rights. The political structure in Poland is new and fragile, and many changes that will have a significant and lasting effect on human rights are yet to come, including amendments to the penal code, reform of the judiciary and revisions of the laws regulating prosecutors. The administration should monitor these issues closely and urge Polish officials to adopt legislative reforms to ensure that the freedoms now being exercised as a matter of governmental grace are secured as a matter of right.
MONITORING PRISON CONDITIONS

In the fall of 1988, Human Rights Watch established a special project to monitor prison conditions worldwide in an effort to make these conform to international standards and to curb cruel and abusive practices.

During 1989, Human Rights Watch published reports on prison conditions in Brazil, Czechoslovakia and Turkey; an investigation of Polish prisons was conducted to follow up a report that we published in 1988; investigations that will lead to reports were conducted in the prisons in Indonesia and Mexico; and a mission to India was undertaken to lay the groundwork for an investigation of prisons in that country to be conducted in 1990.

Somewhat surprisingly, Human Rights Watch's investigators have generally been able to secure access to the prisons and jails we sought to see. Where this has not been possible on a first visit, as happened in the case of Poland, the pressure that results from a report compiled largely on the basis of interviews with ex-prisoners has persuaded governments to allow access thereafter. Another country where we did not secure access was Turkey; efforts are underway to secure access to the prisons in a follow-up mission in 1990.

The pressure generated by these investigations has produced some discernible changes in prison conditions. It is too early to tell whether these will prove durable. Also, it is too early to tell whether the project will succeed in its effort to place the question of prison conditions on the international agenda so that a government's claims to respect human rights will be assessed in part on the basis of how it treats its prisoners.

The prison project is directed by American University Law Professor Herman Schwartz. In addition to Schwartz, participants in Human Rights Watch's investigations of prisons during 1989 included Nan Aron, Sidney Jones, Jeri Laber, Ellen Lutz, David Rothman, Ken Schoen, Betty Vorenberg, James Vorenberg and Joanna Weschler. The Prison Project's work is guided by an advisory committee which includes (in addition to some of those who took part in 1989 prison investigations) Vivien Berger, Haywood Burns, Alejandro Garro, William Hellerstein, Howard Hiatt, Edward Koren, Sheldon Krantz, Benjamin Malcolm, Robert McKay, Diane Orentlicher, Norman Rosenberg, Rita Simon, Clarence Sundram and Lynn Walker. The project is funded by a special grant from the Edna McConnell Clark Foundation.
ROMANIA

Romania was the last of the Warsaw Pact countries to throw off its hard-line leadership. Until the tumultuous events of late December, relations with the United States had reached a new low. The repressive regime of Nicolae Ceausescu was intent on proving that it would not be swayed by protests from either its own people or foreign governments. Citizens who dared to criticize government policies were immediately silenced -- at times with extreme violence -- and protests by foreign governments were ignored. As the abusive practices of the Ceausescu regime led to its growing international isolation, the Bush administration generally availed itself of opportunities to condemn human rights violations in Romania.

The Bush administration's criticisms of Romanian abuses reflect a modification of the Reagan administration's policy of "differentiation" toward Eastern Europe. The Reagan administration rewarded those countries that demonstrated independence from the Soviet Union in their foreign policies. The Bush administration, by contrast, has favored those countries that have made progress toward political and economic reform -- a policy more in keeping with the promotion of human rights in Eastern Europe. The new policy has completely reversed the U.S. stance toward Romania. Since 1975 and throughout the Reagan years, Romania was awarded Most Favored Nation ("MFN") trading status for its maverick foreign policy. In February 1988, faced with increasing U.S. pressure on human rights, the Romanian government renounced its MFN status. With the Bush administration's modification of the "differentiation" policy, Romania became a virtual pariah, with no prospect of normal relations until it undertook a process of reform.

As part of this new policy, the Bush administration responded firmly to news of Romanian government crackdowns:

In February, at the United Nations Human Rights Commission, the U.S. voted in favor of a resolution condemning Romanian rights practices and appointing a special rapporteur to investigate human rights in Romania.

In March, when six former Communist officials in Romania were put under house arrest for writing an open letter criticizing the government, the administration cancelled a high-level meeting with the Romanian government, emphasizing in strong language that the arrests were the reason for the cancellation. State Department spokesman Charles Redman warned that further crackdowns "would be an affront to the international community and would have direct consequences for U.S.-Romanian relations."

In November, in protest over Romania's human rights record, the U.S. joined its NATO allies (except Turkey) in not sending observers to the 14th Romanian Communist Party Congress. The administration explained that "attendance [at] any of the activities would be inconsistent with the depth of U.S. concern over the human rights situation in Romania, for which the Romanian Communist Party bears responsibility."

In December, White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater denounced the reported killing of demonstrators in the western Romanian city of Timisoara as "unjustified" and "brutal."

With the downfall of the Ceausescu regime, the administration took an important step in holding the new Romanian government to human rights standards. On December 25, White House spokesman Fitzwater said that "[t]he U.S. Government pledges its support to the new Romanian Government as it struggles to achieve its announced democratic values," but as news emerged that Nicolae Ceausescu and his wife, Elena, had been executed after a summary military tribunal, Fitzwater said that the U.S. "regretted" the manner of execution.

Under Ceausescu, the U.S. embassy in Bucharest deserved credit for sending representatives to criminal proceedings against leaders of the Comanesti Baptist Church. The defendants, who were tried on August 10, September 21 and October 5, faced charges relating to the alleged illegal construction of their church, which was demolished by the government on May 31. The presence of U.S. embassy observers at these hearings may have contributed to sentences of "corrective labor" rather than prison.

The U.S. delegations to the Helsinki review conferences in Vienna, London and Paris (part of the process known formally as the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe ("CSCE")) deserved credit for forcefully raising human rights concerns with regard to Romania. At the Paris conference on human rights, Romania's record was singled out for particularly harsh condemnation. In his opening statement on May 31, Ambassador Morris Abram, the head of the U.S. delegation, strongly criticized Romania:

And what do we make of Romania, where conditions continue to deteriorate across the board? Over 20,000 have fled the country in the past 18 months to escape harsh repression and economic desperation. Intellectuals and journalists -- and for the first time, former Party leaders -- have raised their voices to protest these conditions, and consequently suffer harassment, house arrest, imprisonment and, reportedly, even internal exile. In the meantime, the Romanian government -- one of the moving forces behind the CSCE process 14 years ago -- turns its back on the very commitments it made as recently as Vienna.

Such firm, public condemnations of brutal Romanian rights practices were crucial for maintaining pressure on the Ceausescu regime.
SINGAPORE

Serious human rights problems continued to plague Singapore in 1989. Although some political detainees were released, the virtually one-party parliament passed amendments to the Internal Security Act ("ISA") which effectively removed from judicial scrutiny government powers to detain political opponents indefinitely without trial. ISA detention orders against two political opponents were extended and a third was moved to a form of house arrest. And the government continued its campaign to silence and harass critics of its policies.

The Bush administration responded to these developments with watered-down commentary, generally in the form of broad statements of policy that avoided criticizing Singapore directly in connection with any particular case. State Department officials also claimed that they raised human rights concerns privately with the Singapore government, but there was no indication that these concerns were expressed in any more pointed fashion. Congress, by contrast, publicly and explicitly raised concerns about particular Singaporean rights violations on several occasions.

The failure of the administration to highlight human rights issues can be attributed to its reluctance to offend a valuable ally whose long-standing relationship with the United States is based on mutual economic and security considerations. Staunchly anti-communist, Singapore strongly supports the U.S. military presence in the Philippines and Southeast Asia. Singapore's harbor, airfields and maintenance facilities are open to U.S. military craft with minimal restrictions. The administration also sees Singapore as a key ally because of its active role in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and because of its respected voice of moderation in the United Nations, the non-aligned movement and GATT. Singapore is also seen as playing a crucial role in obtaining a "comprehensive peace settlement" in Cambodia. U.S. Ambassador to Singapore Bob Orr characterized Singapore as "a friend whose importance to the U.S. far outweighs its size."

The human rights situation in Singapore today continues to be shaped by the government crackdown on political dissent in May and June 1987, when the government detained 22 activists without trial under the ISA and accused them of being part of a "Marxist" conspiracy to undermine the government. After releasing 21 of the 22 by the end of 1987, subject to restrictions on their freedom of movement and association, the Singapore authorities rearrested eight in April 1988 after they had signed a public statement denying the accusations against them and describing their mistreatment in detention. The government also arrested two lawyers who had defended the detainees, as well as another former detainee who had not signed the April statement but was accused of helping to draft and distribute it.

The Reagan administration's response to these violations was meak. For example, the State Department responded to a congressional inquiry in September 1988 by noting:

We share Congressional concern about detentions without trial because as a matter of principle the United States Government opposes prolonged detention without trial throughout the world. We have urged the Government of Singapore to either release or try fairly all persons detained under the Internal Security Act and will continue to do so in the future.

This formulation -- which, as noted, avoids linking the critical statement of principle to any of the particular detainees -- became the operative phraseology used by the Reagan administration in late 1988. When four of the detainees were rearrested immediately after the Singapore Court of Appeal had ordered their release on technical grounds on December 8, 1988, the State Department reacted with a similarly indirect formulation.

The Bush administration continued this understated approach in 1989. In January, in response to language in the Court of Appeal's December 8, 1988 opinion suggesting that Singapore courts had the power to review the substantive grounds for ISA detention, the Singapore parliament amended the ISA to limit judicial scrutiny to purely technical grounds. The right of appeal to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London was also abolished for ISA cases, removing the last possibility of independent judicial review. The State Department again reacted with a broad statement of principle: "We also regard as serious the subordination of fundamental liberties for whatever reason just as we are opposed to detention without trial."

At the end of 1989, lawyer Teo Soh Lung and social activist Vincent Cheng remained in prison without ever having been charged or tried in a court of law. They are the only remaining detainees of the original 22 detained in the May-June 1987 government crackdown. Both Teo and Cheng have challenged the legality of their detention in habeas corpus proceedings, which have yet to be resolved. Given the amendments to the ISA limiting judicial review, however, their continued detention is virtually assured.

The Bush administration has articulated no public response to these cases. When Teo's and Cheng's detention orders were extended in June for an additional 12 months, and when Teo's lawyer, Anthony Lester, Q.C., was barred from representing his client in her April habeas corpus petition -- on grounds of "interfering in Singapore's domestic politics" -- the administration was silent. The State Department's Singapore desk officer told Asia Watch, however, that the State Department was working privately to obtain the release of Cheng and Teo, and an embassy official observed most of Cheng's and Teo's hearings.

The Bush administration has also said nothing on the continued restrictions of the civil and political rights of most of the ex-detainees from the 1987 and 1988 arrests. These restrictions were extended for an additional two years in June and July 1989. Nor has the administration commented on the continuing house arrest of Chia Thye Poh, one of the world's longest-serving political prisoners, who was transferred from prison after 22 years and confined to the small island of Sentosa. Chia has never been charged or tried.

The failure to criticize the Singapore government's human rights policy was not for want of opportunity. Vice President Dan Quayle visited Singapore in May. He brought with him a letter from 26 members of Congress urging him to raise human rights concerns, particularly the continued detention without trial of Teo and Cheng, and the Singapore government's strict controls on the press, including restrictions on the distribution of such foreign publications as Asiaweek, The Far East Economic Review and The Asian Wall Street Journal. In Singapore, Quayle vowed to "continue to monitor human rights practices, and to register our concern when we think fundamental freedoms, including the open press, are violated," but his actions fell short of this vow.

In talks with Singapore officials, the Vice President was said to have raised the subject of Singapore's restrictions on the circulation of the Asian Wall Street Journal and the Far East Economic Review. According to a Singapore spokesman, First Deputy Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong told Quayle that the United States had no right to question the Singapore government's decision, since the Journal and the Review "are not even U.S. publications but merely Hong Kong publications which happen to be owned by American companies." Quayle's lack of a public retort to the view that international monitoring of human rights must be limited to restrictions affecting a country's own nationals can hardly be characterized as a vigorous defense of press freedoms. (On December 19, the Singapore government brought criminal contempt of court charges against the editor, publishers, printers, and distributors of the Journal after a statement appeared there by the president of Dow Jones regretting Prime Minister Lee's victory in a libel suit against the Review. The Bush administration has publicly ignored the action.) Moreover, the Vice President proclaimed that "old traditions of authoritarian government are fading fast from the scene" in Asia, without even mentioning the detainees. Instead, Vice President Quayle, as well as Ambassador Orr, stressed the importance of good bilateral relations between Singapore and the United States -- particularly on trade and commercial issues -- with the apparent implicit message that public protests over human rights violations should take a back seat.

PAGE = Another important opportunity to address Singapore rights practices was missed when Trade and Industry Minister Lee Hsien Loong, the son of Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew, visited Washington in May to meet with top administration officials. During his visit the junior Lee stressed the ascendant feeling in Singapore government circles that the U.S. should take a "hands-off" approach on human rights in Singapore. In a well-publicized speech, he said:

It therefore puzzles us that the U.S. human rights groups and government officials should so confidently prescribe for us, as a panacea for progress and stability, U.S.-style press freedoms and "human rights"<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>[I]t is best for the U.S. to leave well alone and not interfere in the internal development of countries, particularly when they are working well and making progress. This is especially so with those countries where the U.S. has had no historical involvement. And when, like Singapore, they have democratically elected governments, the U.S., of all countries, should respect the freely expressed choice of the people.

With this statement Lee rejected the universal application of human rights, but this fundamental attack on the system of international protection of human rights did not draw a public administration response.

In light of the State Department's reluctance to initiate public criticisms of rights violations in Singapore, members of Congress have attempted to publicize abuses on a number of occasions. In addition to the congressional letter requesting Vice President Quayle to raise human rights concerns on his trip to Singapore, 30 members of the House sent a letter to Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew in early August expressing opposition to the issuance of new detention orders for Teo and Cheng. Forty-eight members of Congress also joined an international appeal signed by 150 legislators from seven nations calling on the Singapore government to release or grant fair trials to Teo and Cheng.

The Bush administration's weak reaction to human rights violations in Singapore is in contrast to the substantial influence that the U.S. enjoys. While Singapore receives no U.S. foreign assistance, the United States is Singapore's largest trading partner and the second-largest source of Singapore's imports. Instead of using this influence and close ties to promote human rights, the Bush administration has treated human rights as at best an after-thought, if not an unpleasant and undesirable irritant to otherwise harmonious relations.
SOMALIA

For the past 20 years, Somali president Mohamed Siad Barre has presided over a one-party military dictatorship. His reign has been characterized by vicious discrimination against certain ethnic groups -- currently the Isaaqs in northern Somalia -- as well as political imprisonment, torture and summary executions, in an effort to suppress all dissent in Somalia. A long-simmering war in northern Somalia between the Somali National Movement ("SNM") and government forces erupted in May 1988 when the SNM launched military operations from Ethiopia. The army responded with a savage counterinsurgency campaign. Throughout the rest of 1988 and 1989, the Somali armed forces engaged in extensive efforts to deprive the SNM of civilian support -- members of the Isaaq clam make up most SNM combatants -- by driving Isaaq noncombatants from the country through such means as indiscriminate aerial bombardment, the widespread killings of civilians, the destruction of crops, cattle and food-storage facilities, the poisoning of wells, and the jailing of hundreds of political prisoners. Some 450,000 Somalis fled such attacks for Ethiopia, Djibouti and Kenya, and an additional 600,000 were displaced within Somalia.

Until September 1989, the Bush administration's policy toward Somalia was largely a continuation of that of the Reagan administration. That policy was based on interest in the Berbera port as a strategic location -- it is viewed as an important staging area for the Indian Ocean, the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf. That interest provided the rationale to extend economic, military and diplomatic support to the U.S. ally in Mogadishu. At the same time, paradoxically, the administration went to considerable lengths to investigate the human rights situation in Somalia, and U.S. officials appeared to have no delusions about the ruthlessness of the Barre regime.

By late 1989, the Bush administration appeared to have reevaluated its policy toward Somalia, and took steps to limit U.S. assistance to the government.A factor in this seemingly revised policy was that the confidence of U.S. military analysts in the capabilities of the Somali army appeared to have been seriously shaken in the summer of 1989 when intense fighting broke out between government forces and soldiers from the Ogaden region who had deserted the Somali army. The government forces, despite brutal reprisals against civilians from Ogaden as well as those from the Harwiye clan, have been unable to retake portions of southern Somalia held by the Ogadenis. This erosion of confidence appears to have led to the cancellation of the "Brightstar" military exercises with Somalia this year. These exercises are high-visibility maneuvers, conducted by the United States with a number of countries in the region, and their cancellation was a blow to Barre's stature as a close U.S. ally. Both the Reagan and Bush administrations -- prompted by Congressional interest in human rights violations in Somalia -- have attempted to persuade the Barre regime to take steps to improve its human rights record. According to U.S. Ambassador to Somalia Frank Crigler, he raised the issue of certain political prisoners in private discussions with the government on several occasions.

Both the Reagan and Bush administrations also took steps to investigate gross abuses of human rights in Somalia. In August 1988, for example, the Reagan administration sent Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Refugee Assistance Kenneth Bleakley to investigate human rights abuses by visiting refugee camps in Ethiopia and displaced Somalis within Somalia. Assistant Secretary Bleakley spoke frankly with human rights advocates and Congressional staff about his findings, which confirmed prior reports of indiscriminate aerial bombardment, hundreds of political prisoners and torture. Assistant Secretary Bleakley conveyed his findings in a cable to U.S. Ambassador Crigler, who reportedly gave the cable to President Barre. But when members of Congress asked to see the cable, it was promptly classified, according to Congressional sources. This reluctance to publicize its findings deprived the administration of an excellent opportunity to pressure the Somali government. Moreover, the act of classifying the document suggested that the administration wanted to shelter the Somali government from Congressional criticism. In August 1989, at the request of Congress, the State Department released an investigation by Robert Gersony, a consultant and refugee expert who had investigated the situation of Somali refugees in Ethiopia and those displaced within Somalia. He conducted some 252 interviews with refugees and displaced persons, and concluded that the government had committed extensive abuses, including targeted bombings of civilian structures and fleeing refugees, and extrajudicial executions.

Unfortunately, the potential impact of the Bush administration's decision to investigate and report on Somali abuses was all but nullified by the administration's efforts to persuade Congress to provide military and economic assistance to the very forces responsible for those abuses. At various critical moments over the past two years, when abuses have been at their height, the Reagan and Bush administrations have acted to shore up the faltering Barre regime. Military aid, including arms and ammunition, was shipped to the Somali government in 1988, Included in the military aid provided to the Somali government in 1988 was a $1.4 million shipment of M-16 automatic rifles and ammunition. The shipment arrived on June 28, 1989, and was used to arm Ethiopian refugees living in camps in Somalia operated by the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees. The timing of the aid could not have been worse: it arrived at precisely the moment when government forces were waging indiscriminate warfare against unarmed civilians throughout northern Somalia. To escape government terror, as noted, hundreds of thousands of Somalis fled into Ethiopia. and the Reagan administration requested an additional $38 million in military and budgetary support for Somalia in its request to Congress for fiscal year 1990.

In similar fashion, in mid-July 1989 the Bush administration went so far as to request an infusion of $21 million in additional assistance in the form of Economic Support Funds -- direct budgetary assistance to the government. The timing of the request sent a terrible signal, since it came as the Barre regime was engaging in a massive crackdown in Mogadishu in which hundreds of civilians were executed and many hundreds more were jailed in sweeps through Isaaq and Harwiye neighborhoods.

When members of Congress blocked the additional aid and criticized the Bush administration for the poor timing of its request, State Department officials claimed to Congressional aides that the request had long been pending and that the notification to Congress just days after the July massacres was simply an unfortunate coincidence. The officials did not explain why the request was not reconsidered once the massacres became known.

Moreover, the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Richard Schifter, actively defended the aid request in a letter to The New York Times on September 2, 1989. Rejecting the suggestion that the aid infusion was an attempt by the Bush administration to shore up the faltering Barre regime, Assistant Secretary Schifter defended the aid, stating:

The administration's request to obligate $21 million in economic support funds for Somalia was directly tied to our support for economic reforms in that country. These reforms, worked out with the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, are designed to transfer economic decision-making power from the Government to the people and the marketplace -- to support the very people who are suffering both from poverty and from human rights abuses.

Assistant Secretary Schifter's defense of the balance-of-payments support for the government is highly objectionable. First, despite the claimed economic benefits, the aid violates Section 502B of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, which prohibits the granting of Economic Support Funds to governments such as that of Somalia which engage in "a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights." Second, the notion that Somali citizens can benefit from aid at a time when many are fleeing in the face of summary execution, torture and political imprisonment seems insensitive at best.

We note, however, that Schifter did acknowledge the severe abuses being committed by the Barre regime. He stated:

The United States has strongly protested the latest human rights violations in Somalia, asked for an investigation and insisted that those responsible be brought to justice.... The serious human rights violations in Mogadishu...compel us to give careful scrutiny to assistance to Somalia.

This was a welcome departure from the State Department's prior refusal to condemn the Barre government publicly -- even when the Department's own investigations revealed extensive atrocities. But it is regrettable that this new human rights message was overshadowed by Assistant Secretary Schifter's public support for aid to the abusive regime.

On one occasion, the State Department not only failed to condemn an important human rights abuse, but also rebuked Africa Watch for calling for an investigation of the problem. In 1988 and 1989, the international press carried numerous credible reports that Libyan President Quadaffi had shipped chemical weapons to Somalia. One such report was aired on January 12, 1989 by NBC news, and the British Foreign Office was said to be deeply concerned about the reports. The State Department denied these reports, and when Africa Watch raised concerns about the possible use of chemical weapons against civilians in northern Somalia, then-Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Chester Crocker rebuked Africa Watch. In a January 4, 1989 letter, he stated that he was satisfied with the Somali government's categorical denials, and reminded Africa Watch that "prudence and fairness warrant a heavy burden of proof with respect to charges about willful use of weapons of mass destruction by a government against its own people." In view of the Somali government's campaign of mass destruction in the northern part of the country, which caused the death or flight of hundreds of thousands of noncombatants, the Assistant Secretary's failure to investigate the charges of possible use of chemical weapons and his uncritical acceptance of the government's denial seems unwarranted.

On June 20, 1989, the Bush administration missed an important opportunity to condemn the Somali government's abuses publicly when it refused to send a witness to a hearing sponsored by the House Banking Subcommittee on International Development Institutions and Finance. The hearing was called to examine U.S. human rights policy with regard to multilateral lending to China and Somalia. The administration's failure even to appear at the hearing, after having been invited by the subcommittee chairman, Representative Walter Fauntroy, says volumes about its disinclination to embarrass the Barre regime.

Undoubtedly another factor in the administration's refusal to appear before the subcommittee was the U.S. law barring U.S. support for loans to such abusive regimes as that of Somalia. Section 701 of the International Financial Institutions Act requires that U.S. representatives to the multilateral development banks (such as the World Bank and the African Development Bank) oppose loans to governments engaged in "gross violations of internationally recognized human rights." Far from opposing loans to Barre, the Bush administration reportedly promoted Somalia's cause within the banks. In June 1989, the World Bank approved a $70 million "quick disbursing cash loan" to Somalia, and the African Development Bank supplied an additional $25 million as part of the economic stabilization package. According to World Bank officials and Congressional staff, human rights conditions in Somalia were completely ignored in both the administration's and the World Bank's deliberations on future lending to Somalia. On September 29, Chairman Fauntroy, along with 46 other members of the House of Representatives, wrote a letter to Secretary of State Baker urging him to reexamine U.S. support for loans to Somalia by the World Bank and African Development Bank.

What progress has been made in using U.S. influence to promote human rights in Somalia is largely due to Congressional efforts. In 1989, Congress placed aid to Somalia on a "reprogramming basis," which requires advance notification from the executive branch before aid is disbursed. After Congress requested a hold on the $2.5 million in military aid allocated to Somalia in fiscal year 1989, the Bush administration, apparently so as not to lose the amount completely, reprogrammed the amount to other countries. Beginning in July 1988, the Reagan administration suspended shipment of arms and ammunition, but it and the Bush administration continued to provide non-lethal military assistance left over from previous years, until the Congressional action. In July 1989, as noted, Congress also prevented the administration from providing $21 million in Economic Support Funds which had been authorized but not spent for fiscal year 1988. By September, the administration announced its intention to reprogram the $21 million to other countries in Africa. We hope that this welcome decision, in part in response to Congressional criticism, represents a new willingness by the Bush administration to use aid as a lever for promoting human rights in Somalia.

We urge the Bush administration to continue to limit assistance and to take further steps to distance itself from the Barre government. It is important that the U.S. take the lead and make clear, in forceful terms, that a government which consistently disregards human life and basic rights has no place in the international community and will not benefit from international largesse.
SOUTH AFRICA

Faced with unprecedented local and international pressure, the South African government appears, for the first time in more than four decades in power, to have begun to retreat from apartheid and the repression required to sustain it. The rhetoric of the new president, F.W. de Klerk, emphasizes negotiations, but popular leaders of the disenfranchised majority cannot envisage negotiations under the current restrictive climate. Nevertheless, there are indications of an improving human rights situation, for example, the release, without restriction, of eight long-term political prisoners, including Walter Sisulu, the former secretary general of the banned African National Congress ("ANC"); the dismantling of the feared National Security Management System The National Security Management System, which was developed in response to the widespread protest that first erupted in 1984, was a complex shadow government, essentially controlled by the military, the aim of which was to suppress protest as well as to anticipate and remedy local grievances.>; and the withdrawal of South African troops from Namibia following what has generally been termed a "free and fair" election.

The Bush administration has cited these and other developments to defend its decision to resist, for the present, the imposition of further sanctions against South Africa. To call for further sanctions at this time would be "inappropriate and confusing," according to Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Herman Cohen. However, administration officials, notably Cohen and the U.S. ambassador to South Africa, William L. Swing, have made strenuous efforts to minimize the parallels between current U. S. policy and that of the Reagan administration, which strongly resisted sanctions in favor of a policy of muted criticism and "constructive engagement."

For the first time, U.S. officials have set a remarkably specific timetable for further changes. In the immediate future, Cohen told Congress in October, Washington would like to see President de Klerk release political prisoners and end bans on political organizations. By the end of the February-to-June South African parliamentary session, Washington hoped to see the abolition of such pillars of statutory apartheid as the Group Areas Act, which legislates residential segregation. If very little emerged, Cohen promised, Washington would consult Congress, U.S. allies in Europe, and Japan -- which at present is one of South Africa's largest trading partners -- about further measures. But these warnings were at the same time diluted by hints of an incremental lifting of sanctions.

In September, responding to the results of general elections that returned the ruling National Party to power, albeit with a reduced majority, the State Department declared, hopefully, that President de Klerk had won a mandate for "real change," but urged that promises of reform be followed by "concrete, specific action." The Department repeated widely expressed demands for opening the political process. These demands included the release of all political prisoners and the return of political exiles; the lifting of the three-year-old State of Emergency; and the unbanning of the ANC and other political organizations.

The changed tenor of the Bush administration was set early in the year. In May, President Bush met with three church leaders who are widely perceived as speaking for the disenfranchised black majority and are heartily disliked by the South African government. The three -- Reverend Allan A. Boesak, a minister of the "colored" branch of the Dutch Reformed Church and president of the World Alliance of Reformed Churches; Anglican Archbishop Desmond Tutu; and Beyers Naude, former secretary general of the South African Council of Churches -- said after the meeting that they viewed their reception as symbolically important, and they were further encouraged by the president's close attention to their appeals.

Then, in June, President Bush invited Albertina Sisulu, co-president of the restricted United Democratic Front ("UDF") The United Democratic Front was, until its virtual banning in February 1988, the umbrella organization of about 600 anti-apartheid groups countrywide. In recent months, it appears to have re-emerged in a broad front called the Mass Democratic Movement. and wife of then jailed ANC leader Walter Sisulu. There is evidence that the meeting was calculated to pave the way for an invitation to de Klerk, then leader of the National Party but not yet president. Support for such a visit continues within the administration despite outspoken Congressional opposition to it as an unwarranted carrot. The invitation to Mrs. Sisulu, who was restricted and without a passport, enabled her to leave the country with black leaders under similar bans. The visit gave the administration's implied imprimatur to both the restricted UDF and its alter ego, the ANC.

It should be noted that President Bush has not otherwise taken a high profile on human rights issues in South Africa, appearing to leave the strong statements to his subordinates. To his credit, however, he has also avoided the kinds of statements made by President Reagan that gave the impression that the former president was naively supportive of the South African government or at best ambivalent about apartheid. Responding, for example, to a question about the March 1985 police killing of 20 blacks who were peacefully marching toward a white area of Uitenhage in the Eastern Cape, President Reagan said: "I think that to put it that way<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>that the violence was coming totally from the law-and-order side, ignores that fact that there was rioting going on behalf of others there." He added, "There is an element in South Africa that do not want a peaceful settlement of this, who want a violent settlement, who want trouble in the streets and this is what's going on."

Bush administration officials have been careful to emphasize that the current easing of repression by the South African goverment is spotty and that judicial questioning of political prosecutions is minor though encouraging. Officials have also emphasized that the government has made no major moves to dismantle apartheid. This was made clear in the administration's annual report to Congress in October, as required by the Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act of 1986. Among important points made were the following:

"Despite recent positive signs, we are unable to report tangible progress towards the end of apartheid.... There have as yet been no major changes in the present constellation of apartheid laws despite official suggestions that they may occur...."

Although President de Klerk allowed peaceful political demonstrations to take place the week following the September 6 election, the detention of political activists increased during the same period.

Much petty apartheid legislation has already been rescinded, but there is no indication that the South African government is considering abolishing the Group Areas and Population Registration Acts, which are the legislative pillars of apartheid.

The combination of the white-controlled police and judiciary prejudices the legal system against blacks, and it is "impossible to say that South Africa respects the principle of equal justice for all."

The government's release of detainees in March and April was "mostly undone by restrictions placed on the person freed and by new detentions of many of the same people in the election period." According to the South African Human Rights Commission, 581 people are currently restricted under the Emergency regulations.>

At the United Nations, the Bush administration also appears to be registering a different note. During the previous administration, the United States voted against or abstained on even the most innocuous anti-apartheid resolution. For example, the United States and the United Kingdom were the only countries to abstain on an October 1988 resolution protesting segregated municipal elections which gave rise to vigorous community opposition and a harsh government response. This contrasts with U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Thomas Pickering's speech on December 14, when he called on President de Klerk to move quickly to lift the state of emergency and legalize "all political organizations, including the African National Congress."

In November, in a report to the United Nations on human rights around the world, Pickering repeated U.S. criticisms of apartheid and was explicit in calling for "a democratic electoral system based on a universal franchise." Except for a major statement by Secretary of State George Shultz toward the end of the Reagan administration, U.S. spokesmen have typically talked in generalities about the sharing of political power.

As one of the chief brokers of the settlement in Namibia, as a result of which South Africa has relinquished control of the territory after decades of defying U.N. edicts, the Bush administration has come under criticism for being too accommodating to South African authorities. One of the chief impediments to a peaceful transition to independence in the territory has been the continuing presence of members of a paramilitary group known as Koevoet (crowbar). Koevoet garnered a fearsome reputation for its brutality in the northern zone of Namibia where the vast majority of the Ovambo residents support SWAPO -- the South West African People's Organization -- the guerrilla force which fought a low-intensity war against South African occupation for more than 20 years. Critics contended that the Bush administration did not pressure the South African authorities quickly enough to disarm and remove former Koevoet members from the territory.

Although Koevoet was supposed to have been disbanded in 1988 under quiet pressure from the United States, among others -- Koevoet members were instead incorporated into the territorial police force and were responsible for numerous incidents of intimidation and violence in the weeks leading to the elections. Their continuing presence in the northern region was finally acknowledged by South African authorities, who undertook only in August 1989 to remove 1,200 former Koevoet members from the South West African police force.

In response to widespread criticism, the State Department contended that Assistant Secretary Cohen was "very engaged" on the problem. In July, the administration publicly complained to South Africa that its paramilitary units were intimidating blacks in northern Namibia, imperiling prospects for free elections. Cohen was reported to have called in South African Ambassador Koornhof and told him that intimidation in the North was "unacceptable." And in August, the State Department welcomed the decision by the South African Administrator General of Namibia to remove Koevoet members from duty and said, "we expect the Namibian authorities to implement this action promptly."

In October, however, the United States, Britain and France tried unsuccesfully to bar Jesse Jackson from giving a speech on Namibia to the U.N. General Assembly, claiming that his remarks could jeopardize the planned election. Jackson told the Assembly: "There is a reign of terror<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>in Namibia today -- armed vigilantes are attacking Namibians<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>"

Despite clear evidence of South African attempts at least to mar the electoral process, SWAPO emerged victorious in what U.N. Special Representative Maarti Artisaari certified was a free and fair election. In late November, South Africa withdrew the last of its forces from the territory. There is neverthess need for continued vigilance by the Bush administration to ensure that elements in the South African government do not undertake the same destabilization efforts as have occurred in such other bordering states as Zimbabwe and Mozambique.

Although the Bush administration has been generally responsive to human rights concerns in South Africa, it occasionally has issued fairly routine statements on major human rights violations when stronger statements would have been appropriate. For example, the administration was fairly muted in its response to serious police excesses during the Defiance Campaign leading to and following the September elections. The Defiance Campaign was an unprecedented challege to the State of Emergency and other legislation by anti-apartheid activists, who flouted laws forbidding meetings and demonstrations as well as restrictions placed on activists and organizations. As part of the campaign, activists declared "unbanned" organizations that had first been restricted under State of Emergency regulations in February 1988. In August, for example, hundreds of blacks streamed on to two segregated beaches outside Cape Town. Police used whips and batons to beat them back and several people were seen bleeding from open wounds. Responding to the widepread arrests and beatings, the administration simply expressed "deep concern" about the arrest of Archbishop Tutu and other demonstrators and urged the South African government to allow "peaceful expression of political dissent."

In November and early December, South Africa was shaken when several police officers admitted their involvement in police death squads. These admissions included gruesome details of murders, some of which have been separately corroborated. South African activists have long suspected that such squads exist, According to the Human Rights Commission, at least 45 anti-apartheid activists have been assassinated over the last five years and five have disappeared. In the first 11 months of 1989, there were 11 murders, three bombings and nine politically related burglaries. and the Reagan administration's 1988 annual report on South Africa noted the possible existence of police "death squads, operating completely outside the law, both inside and outside the country." Responding to these revelations, the Bush administration twice released the same statement, calling upon President de Klerk "to ensure a full and impartial investigation." The revelations warranted a much stronger response, including, at minimum, support for widespread calls within the country for an independent commission of inquiry. In early December, President De Klerk announced his decision not to convene an independent inquiry, a move that has been widely criticized in South Africa. The Bush administration has made no public response to this decision.

The administration has also made no statement on the ongoing conflict in Natal, where feuding between supporters of KwaZulu Chief Minister Gatsha Buthelezi's Inkatha movement and supporters of the UDF and the Council of South African Trade Unions ("COSATU") has taken at least 2,000 lives since 1985. Although both sides in the conflict are responsible for excesses, the majority of the victims are aligned with COSATU and the UDF. There have been numerous charges of KwaZulu police support of Inkatha fighters and South African police response that has been complicit or slow. There have also been press reports of the murder of Inkatha opponents who have sought and obtained protection from the courts. It does not appear that many of the Inkatha "warlords," presumed to be behind the murders, have been brought to justice. Since Chief Buthelezi was hosted in Washington by President Reagan, it is possible that strong pressure from the Bush administration would encourage Buthelezi to curb abuses by his forces.

The administration has also been entirely silent on the fragmentation of South Africa into separate bantustans. Some of the most serious human rights violations in South Africa today are being perpetrated in "independent" bantustans like BophuthaTswana and Ciskei. According to the South African Human Rights Commission, there are at present 10 detainees under the State of Emergency and 23 detainees under the Internal Security Act in "white" South Africa. These figures, however, do not include the "independent" bantustans, where the current detainees are far more numerous. In BophuthaTswana, at least 20 people are awaiting trial following violence in a community resisting forced incorporation. One of those charged, Chief Pupsey Sebogodi, is a community leader who was already detained at the time of the violence. In the Ciskei, scores of villagers in Nkqonkqweni, a community that had been incorporated against its will into the so-called independent Ciskeian bantustan, were detained in November in retaliation for their resistence.

We are also concerned that provisions of the Comprehensive Anti Apartheid Act of 1986 ("CAAA") be conscientiously carried out by the Bush administration. In 1988, the Washington-based Lawyer's Committee for Civil Rights Under Law accused the Reagan administration of implementing some provisions of the CAAA in a way that "call[s] into question the administration's faithful adherence to the letter and the spirit of the Act." In late August 1989, Senator Edward Kennedy released a report saying that the General Accounting Office had uncovered "a shocking lapse by top Reagan Administration officials, who failed to apply elementary enforcement procedures in carrying out the anti-apartheid law." As a result, it is suspected that South Africa was able to export gold to the United States through Britain and Switzerland, in violation of the legislation. The report concluded that the main fault lay with the failure of the State Department to provide the Customs Service with a list of the products barred from entering the country. Instead it passed on only a list of the government agencies and state-owned corporations which make the banned products. We urge the Bush administration to rectify these omissions.

The Bush administration's insistence on taking a "wait-and-see" approach to South Africa has its critics. Some activists argue that more intense pressure is precisely what is required at this juncture to speed up the dismantling of apartheid. However, it can be argued that the administration is taking its cue from some South African spokesmen, like Archbishop Desmond Tutu, who have indicated a willingness to give President de Klerk time to prove that he is in earnest. The challenge to the Bush administration lies in the somewhat unpredictable future. It is imperative that the administration continue to monitor carefully the human rights situation in South Africa. If meaningful improvements cease, or if the situation degenerates, the Bush administration should translate its change of attitude into strong and concrete acts of disapproval.

SOUTH KOREA (Republic of Korea)

If 1989 was marked by several high-level visits between U.S. and South Korean officials and ongoing bilateral negotiations on trade and military issues, it was also marked by a sharp deterioration in the human rights situation in South Korea. Over 1,000 South Koreans were detained on political grounds, several dozen of whom were arrested under the National Security Law for non-violent political activity such as advocacy of reunification with North Korea. Freedom of association suffered a major setback with the arrest of two key leaders of the independent National Teachers Union and other measures taken against the union. According to an administration official, human rights concerns were raised at the highest levels throughout 1989, by both President Bush and Vice President Quayle during meetings with South Korean officials. Whatever the nature of these private expressions of concern, however, the administration publicly confined itself almost exclusively to general statements in support of human rights and democracy in South Korea, without addressing specific violations. To the latter, it seemed indifferent.

On February 27, President Bush went to Seoul for six hours, between his visits to Japan and China. South Korea's inclusion on the itinerary of Bush's first major overseas trip as President was seen as recognition of South Korea's importance as a U.S. ally. Before the visit, members of the Congressional Human Rights Caucus sent a letter to the President urging him to raise the case of 49 elderly men being held at South Korea's Chongju Preventive Detention Center. Although the administration made no effort on their behalf, the Public Security Law under which these men were being held was repealed at the end of May, and the men were reportedly released at the end of October. However, it is worth noting that a newly enacted law, the Protective Surveillance Law, contains a number of provisions similar to the Public Security Law. For example, it provides for reimprisonment for up to two years for those who have served their prison terms but fail thereafter to report in detail every three months on their contacts, trips and so on. It is no t year clear how this law will work in practice, but it is fraught with the potential for abuse. These men, many in ill-health, originally had been sentenced to 10 to 15 years' imprisonment, and most appear to have been held in preventive detention for an additional 11 years beyond the expiration of their terms.

During the visit, President Bush met with President Roh and other high-ranking government officials. He also spoke with leaders of four political parties and addressed the National Assembly. At these sessions, President Bush affirmed the U.S. commitment to South Korea's security, saluted South Korea's political achievements, including the emergence of the National Assembly as a forum for free debate, and reaffirmed in general terms the U.S. "commitment to human rights." But there is no indication that President Bush mentioned particular human rights violations such as the case of the 49 elderly men. When queried about this, Janet Mullins, Assistant Secretary of State for Legislative Affairs, resorted to artful dodge. She noted in a March 22 letter that: "[t]his administration is greatly concerned that there are cases such as the 49 men at Chongju Preventive Detention Center who have been detained long after their sentences have been served." She also went on to vow that: "[w]e will continue to make known our concerns over human rights to the Government of the Republic of Korea as it moves towards further democratization." But she never said that the case of the 49 was among the human rights concerns that had been, or even would be, raised with South Korean authorities.

Shortly after President Bush's visit, the democratization process in South Korea went into reverse, with attendant setbacks in respect for human rights. In mid-March, President Roh postponed indefinitely a promised referendum on his performance, citing the unstable political climate and massive labor unrest. On April 3, South Korean authorities formed the "Joint Public Security Affairs Investigations Headquarters," composed of officials from the prosecutor's office, the Agency for National Security Planning, the police and the defense-security command. The ostensible purpose of the new unit was to investigate Reverend Moon Ik-hwan's trip to North Korea and to crack down on "leftists." Reverend Moon, one of South Korea's most prominent dissidents, had traveled to North Korea without government permission, and upon his return was arrested and charged with violating the stringent National Security Law. Although in July 1988 President Roh announced his "nordpolitik" under which South Korea would thereafter consider North Korea as a partner instead of an enemy, the authorities continued to see unsanctioned travel to North Korea as "anti-state" activity punishable by long prison terms. By the time the unit was disbanded in mid-June, the Joint Investigations Headquarters had arrested some 530 dissidents, and seized over 11,000 "leftist-leaning" publications from several hundred bookstores. Publishers and bookstore owners were also arrested as part of a crackdown on "leftists." Allegations of mistreatment by police and members of the Agency for National Security Planning began to resurface.

It was in the midst of this tense political climate and on the anniversary of the May 10 Kwangju massacre of 1980 that the body of Lee Chul-kyu, a 24-year-old student leader from Kwangju, was found in a reservoir near where he had disappeared the week before, reportedly while being pursued by the police. The authorities had sought Lee for allegedly writing a pro-North Korea article in a school publication he edited. An autopsy performed by the government on May 11 concluded that Lee had died of drowning, although dissident groups and the family hotly disputed the finding. Before the autopsy results were even made known, a spokesman for the U.S. State Department's Bureau of East Asian Affairs commented that the death was "a deplorable event" and stated:

We do not know who may have committed this atrocious act. We note that President Roh has called for a full investigation and we hope that the murderers will be exposed and severely punished.

When the South Korean government vigorously protested the accusation that Lee may have been murdered, State Department spokesman Richard Boucher withdrew the statement.

We, of course, do not intend to prejudge the outcome of the investigation.... I'm not taking a position on how the tragic death occurred. [It is] our hope that the facts will be made known promptly.

On May 17, the acting U.S. ambassador in Seoul, Thomas Brooks, issued a formal apology. According to ministry officials cited by Yonhap, the official South Korean news agency, "[d]uring the meeting at the Foreign Ministry, Brooks delivered a U.S. pledge to be more prudent in commenting on Korean affairs." In their press statement of October 18, the Boston-based Physicians for Human Rights reported that the cause of Lee's death still had not been fully investigated. A forensic pathologist sent by the group at the request of the family and Korean human rights organizations was refused permission to perform a second autopsy.>

This experience appears to have made administration officials apprehensive about commenting publicly on human rights in South Korea. As crackdowns and arrests continued, various sectors of South Korean society, the international community and the U.S. Congress urged the administration to discuss mounting human rights violations with South Korean officials. Despite earlier statements of U.S. commitment to political freedom and human rights in South Korea, the administration managed no public expressions of concern, or even a recognition of the setbacks.

On the contrary, William Clark, Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, testified on July 26 before the House Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs that:

Under the leadership of President Roh, and with the constructive cooperation of the main opposition parties, a modern political system is being forged in South Korea, a healthy system of participatory government for which there is no precedent. While there remain some elements of the past yet to be overcome in the way politics is conducted in South Korea, the American people can and do warmly applaud the progress which has been made.

No mention was made of the political crisis that South Korea was undergoing, or of the mounting rights violations.

In late September, Vice President Quayle went to South Korea, and in October, President Roh came to Washington on an official state visit. Before the Vice President left, 46 members of Congress wrote to President Bush, drawing his attention to the deteriorating human rights conditions in South Korea and urging him to take the occasion of the two visits to raise U.S. human rights concerns.

By the time Vice President Quayle arrived in South Korea on September 19, South Korean human rights groups were estimating that at least 1,000 persons were imprisoned for having committed politically motivated offenses, including at least 78 imprisoned solely for their peaceful political activities. Allegations resurfaced of torture and mistreatment by police and security agency personnel. But according to the Washington Post, "[t]he vice president<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>shied away from criticizing a government crackdown on South Koreans who seek to promote independent dialogue with North Korea." The Korea Herald An English-language daily published in Seoul, The Korea Herald is government-subsidized. reported:

Contrary to the expectation that he will raise the question of Korea's poor human rights record, Quayle praised President Roh Tae-woo for his government's efforts to establish democracy and said "Americans also admire the rapid progress of the Korean people to democracy...President Roh Tae-woo has successfully ushered in democratic reforms."

According to the The New York Times, however, unnamed U.S. officials said that "Mr. Quayle had told South Korean officials to respect human rights." State Department officials also pointed to Quayle's meetings with opposition party leaders of the National Assembly as a gesture of support for South Korea's parliamentary democracy. Whatever the value of this gesture or Vice President Quayle's private representations, he could have strengthened his message by, for example, publicly noting the indictments pending against Kim Dae-jung, chairman of the largest opposition party in the National Assembly. Kim had been indicted for allegedly having known about a secret trip to North Korea made by a member of his party but failing to report it to the authorities. Nor was Vice President Quayle's public stance on human rights strengthened by a press conference held in South Korea on September 20 at which he reportedly did not respond to questions on human rights.

The administration also wasted the opportunity to raise human rights issues publicly during President Roh's October visit to Washington. This was especially unfortunate because President Roh's visit had been announced months earlier, and South Korean authorities were reportedly anticipating criticism from the U.S. on human rights grounds. Instead of criticism, President Roh was publicly lauded for reforms and for his July 1988 "nordpolitik," although a State Department official claimed that human rights concerns, including cases, were raised privately.

Throughout 1989, the Bush administration stated that it was committed to continued human rights and democratic reforms in South Korea. But its failure to comment publicly and forcefully when the number and severity of human rights violations increased sent the opposite signal to the South Korean government and people. This weak response is all the more unfortunate because in 1989 the South Korean government went to great lengths to reaffirm its importance as a U.S. ally and to test the rules for its relationship with the Bush administration. The administration lost the chance to make use of the South Korean government's desire for a close relationship to press for greater respect for human rights.
SOVIET UNION

After many years of hard and productive work on human rights for Soviet citizens, the United States is in danger of betraying the very people that it sought to help -- and at a moment when they are nearing victory. The administration has begun to soft-pedal human rights problems in the USSR in the mistaken belief that public criticism of continuing problems would undermine positive trends.

In the past, when relations between the superpowers were strained, we criticized the Reagan administration for at times exaggerating human rights problems in cold-war rhetoric designed to advance geopolitical or strategic interests. Now it appears that there is a reverse side of that coin, that during times of detente, human rights become irrelevant. The administration's failure to address continuing human rights abuses vocally and forcefully may be a tacit admission that it views human rights as a political football.

Just as the Carter administration was credited with making human rights a legitimate element of foreign policy, the Reagan administration was credited with making human rights a legitimate -- and seemingly permanent -- part of summitry with the Soviet Union. The Bush administration, however, has allowed civil rights to slip from the public agenda of the summits.

The treatment of the late human rights defender Andrei Sakharov is illustrative of the three administrations. President Carter personally supported Sakharov at a time when Soviet authorities had accused him of acting as a "tool of imperialism." The Reagan administration, although it noted Sakharov's achievement in symbolic ways at events like the Human Rights Day celebrations in the White House, turned down a request from Mrs. Sakharov for a presidential audience in the United States in the mistaken belief that this would harm "quiet" efforts to free Sakharov from exile. (She did have a meeting with National Security Advisor John Poindexter.) In 1989, when Sakharov had been restored to a position of prominence, he was not, apparently, invited to the White House by President Bush, although he did make a trip to the United States.

Soviet dissidents and establishment figures have expressed alarm to Helsinki Watch that the Bush administration no longer raises Soviet human rights problems publicly. Various U.S. officials have privately assured Helsinki Watch that human rights issues are being raised with the Soviet government in non-publicized meetings. But the lack of public statements significantly weakens the position of U.S. diplomats who engage in quiet diplomacy. And the victims of abuses can never be certain of U.S. support.

The U.S. embassy in Moscow continues to arrange events for Soviet citizens representing various independent movements, and this is important symbolic support for an emerging civil society. Some of these activists praised Attorney General Richard Thornburgh, for example, who listened sympathetically to their problems during a visit to Moscow. Unfortunately, Thornburgh offset his positive contribution by remarking to the press when he returned to the United States that he "sympathized" with Gorbachev's plight at a time when Gorbachev was giving the glasnost press a tongue-lashing. Because of the role of Western broadcasting to the USSR (the BBC, Voice of America, Radio Liberty and others), what U.S. officials say publicly in the United States about Soviet human rights abuse can be far more accessible and important than what they say in small meetings with leading dissidents at the embassy.

Curiously, some Soviet Foreign Ministry officials are now more critical about their country's human rights shortcomings than is the U.S. State Department. But they are hampered in making their case with more conservative colleagues because they cannot cite real U.S. pressure. Despite recent changes, Soviets still often look to foreigners both for a standard and as a "court of last resort" in dealing with persistent human rights abuse. They are now deprived of that bulwark.

Important changes in the Soviet Union are cited as the reason for the U.S. change of course. Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs Richard Schifter, in a December 8, 1988 speech at a Georgetown University symposium, explained this shift:

I have in my days done my share of castigating the Soviet Union for its human rights abuses. I believe it was then useful to do just that, so as to point up that country's failure to live up to internationally recognized standards of human rights. But that was the agenda of yesteryear. Soviet reformers have recognized their problem. They are groping for solutions at this time. I believe that we can play a useful role in that context. What is important under the circumstances is for us neither to minimize nor ignore past or present abuses. But we need not lord it over them. What we can do, in a friendly and cooperative fashion, is work with them on the major task of creating institutional guarantees of the rights of the individual.... In speaking of our future relationship with the Soviet Union on human rights issues, I have stressed the importance of working with the reform elements in helping them create an independent judicial system.

On the face of it, every intention expressed in such a statement is admirable. But problems arise with regard to the phrase "working with" -- which implies that the State Department should play an "insiders" rather than an "outsiders" role, i.e., that it should cooperate rather than criticize. The implication is that the two tracks cannot be pursued simultaneously. In reality, the Human Rights Bureau of the State Department, which ought to be documenting and criticizing human rights abuses, is assuming the role of the Soviet desk, that of diplomacy.

Many in the administration have embraced Soviet reformers in the liberal establishment as the only hope for legal institutionalization of human rights. But they often fail to recognize the limitations of these reformers, their political constraints, and their tendency to make pronouncements in anticipation of reality -- if not to prevaricate. Once administration officials hitch their wagons to these reformers, they become involved in process rather than principle. They become "insiders" instead of outside critics.

There seems to be some disagreement within the administration about how to respond to Soviet changes. The suppression by Secretary of State James Baker of a speech prepared by Deputy National Security Advisor Robert Gates in which Gates analyzed Gorbachev's problems, particularly with the Soviet nationalities, reflects a problem endemic to the administration's human rights policy: the fear that sharp criticism will alienate or endanger Gorbachev. Gorbachev has survived five years of fierce criticism from domestic critics and from within his government and the Supreme Soviet, from both the left and right. Surely he will not wither up and die because of some insightful U.S. criticism.

In the past, the administration spoke out loudly about each political arrest, each visa denial, each instance of psychiatric abuse, and such statements were broadcast over Voice of America and Radio Liberty, which had wide audiences even during the period when they were jammed. Now that the lists of such victims have diminished, there are round-tables, symposia and embassy luncheons -- all mainly involving exchange of professional experience rather than human rights criticism. A conference of experts on the rule of law, for example, is undoubtedly beneficial. But the voices of the victims of Soviet lawlessness remain inaudible beyond the conference hall gates.

The Soviet system contains deeply embedded systemic abuses: a repressive internal passport system, an all-powerful Procurator's Office and KGB; restrictions on public assembly and association based on the content of an organization's programs; and most important, a Communist Party that refuses to relinquish power in the face of public demand for a multi-party system. A resolute condemnation by the State Department of events such as the arrest of the Karabakh Committee and the independent journalist Sergei Kuznetsov, or the freezing of the bank accounts of the parliamentary opposition known as the Inter-Regional Group, would send a signal of support to the victims and disapproval to the persecutors. A conference about due process cannot have the same effect, whatever its merits.

As for efforts to gain the release of the remaining political prisoners in the Soviet Union, the administration has fallen down on the job. This is particularly disappointing in view of the enormous successes of the past three years, during which the U.S. used various fora to gain the release of hundreds of political prisoners. In 1988, the U.S. delegation to the Vienna session of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe ("CSCE") worked hard to obtain release of remaining political prisoners and refuseniks before a concluding document was signed. But with the end of the Reagan administration, there was pressure to end the conference. It was feared that substantial Soviet concessions would evaporate if the conference was dragged on during a transition between U.S. administrations. As a result, the Vienna Concluding Document was signed in January 1989 -- timing that now seems premature.

In the course of some two years of bilateral talks, the U.S. and Soviet governments had arrived at a working definition of "political prisoner," which, while not as broad as some would have wished, did represent progress. Under a compromise definition negotiated by the Human Rights Bureau, prisoners arrested under four articles of the Russian Penal Code The four were: Articles 70 (anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda), 190-1 (anti-state slander), 142 (separation of church and state) and 227 (violating rights under the guise of performing religious rituals). would be unequivocally accepted as prisoners of conscience, while the political status of all others would be negotiated. Under pressure of the Vienna deadline and an upcoming speech by Gorbachev before the United Nations, the Soviets hurried to release labor camp prisoners held under the four "pure political" articles, except for those in psychiatric detention. The rest of the list (some 150 names) was called "disputed" by both sides and was set aside to be negotiated through a "mechanism" whereby each side could question the other on the status of persons believed to be political prisoners.

These disputed cases included persons charged with "treason," "illegal boarder crossing," "disturbance of the peace," and conscientious objection to armed service. (There is no alternative civilian service in the USSR.) A list was presented to the Soviet government in May 1989 during a ministerial-level meeting, but when no answer was forthcoming, it was not re-presented at the next ministerial meeting in September. A Washington Post article at the time quoted Assistant Secretary Schifter as speaking of a list of "80 criminals" -- although the persons were listed by Helsinki Watch and the U.S. government's Helsinki Commission as political prisoners. According to available information, the list was not presented at the Malta summit, despite such new cases as that of Sergei Kuznetsov, an independent journalist sentenced to three years in labor camp for "slandering" security officials.

The administration has thus lost many opportunities to raise the remaining cases publicly and privately, using the already established "summit gesture" whereby a few cases are usually released "for humanitarian reasons" on the eve of a Soviet-American meeting in order to promote good will. Particularly distressing are the cases of prisoners who were accused of "treason" for contacting U.S. diplomats in an effort to emigrate or send out manuscripts. Continuing silence on these cases only serves to reinforce the illegitimate "treason" charge.

While Helsinki Watch recognizes that in fact some of the prisoners on the list may turn out to be guilty of criminal acts, the only way to resolve the matter is through glasnost: all the prosecutor's files must be made public so that a legal determination can be made. Although Assistant Secretary Schifter stated on a number of occasions in 1989 that these files would be opened, to date, Soviet authorities continue to refuse to make public the court records, apparently on grounds of "national security."

Distressingly, the State Department refuses to include in its list of political prisoners those persons who have been imprisoned for conscientious objection to armed service. There are currently about 40 known cases, and with waves of draft-card burning sweeping the Soviet Union, the list is likely to grow significantly in the coming year. Although conscientious objection to armed service is recognized by U.S. law, State Department officials justify their refusal to raise such cases by noting that some U.S. allies, such as Greece and Switzerland, do not recognize the status.

A new batch of prominent political prisoners -- the scholars and scientists who made up the Karabakh Committee -- appear to have been ignored in all of the administration's public statements of 1989, although apparently the case was raised privately. The Karabakh Committee members led the movement to incorporate into Armenia the disputed territory of Nagorno-Karabakh, now under the jurisdiction of neighboring Azerbaidzhan. Without taking a position on the disputed territory, it was certainly possible for the administration to defend the rights of these men to freedom of speech and peaceful assembly. They were arrested during a meeting at the Writers' Union and were not charged with using or advocating violence. They and their families were not informed of the exact charges against them, and they were held for about six months in "investigation isolation" -- essentially preventive detention to keep them from taking part in elections. Two of them were already members of the Armenian legislature, and all were nominated in absentia for the elections to the Soviet Congress of People's Deputies.

President Bush's first test on human rights came even before he was inaugurated, when he was criticized by conservatives for agreeing to an official CSCE conference on human rights in Moscow. Critics called it a "bouquet" to Gorbachev in exchange for his peace proposals. While we support the President's decision to endorse the conference in general, we advocate that conditions be set, including the release of remaining political prisoners and refuseniks, and the establishment of fair working conditions for independent journalists and nongovernmental organizations in Moscow. General statements were made by the administration about withdrawing endorsement of the 1991 conference if the Soviet human rights situation reversed sharply, but strict conditions were not set. The administration should exploit the opportunity to gain concessions before a conference that is still nearly two years away.

Just as economic perestroika has so far failed to put food on the store shelves, so legal perestroika has not yet put good laws on the books or into practice. In fact, in some cases, laws have been passed that further restrict human rights. Drafts of reform laws are frequently issued -- but then languish without ratification for months and even years. Yet the U.S. administration often greets each pronouncement of impending reform with enthusiasm, as if it had already come to pass. For example, Soviet officials announced in November 1987 that they were eliminating the system of exile as a form of punishment, and that certain articles would be removed from the penal code. Officials greeted these announced reforms as if they were established fact. But the statement was based on a draft of the fundamentals of the penal code. While the draft of the fundamentals was eventually approved, the time period for ratification lapsed, and now the fundamentals -- which are still not the penal code itself -- must be redrafted and reissued.

Soviet authorities also claimed that they would move special psychiatric hospitals from the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Internal Affairs to that of the Ministry of Justice. The administration accepted this statement as a fait accompli and continued to repeat it as fact. But in a July report to the State Department from a delegation of U.S. psychiatrists, it became evident that the transfer had not been fully carried out or involved the change of only a few low-level personnel.

The Soviet psychiatric bureaucracy has been particularly recalcitrant in embarking on perestroika and has been attacked by even the official Soviet press. The U.S. psychiatrists' report as well as recent statements by one notorious apologist for psychiatric abuse -- Professor Georgy Morozov, head of the Serbsky Institute of Forensic Psychiatry -- indicate that the administration is wrong in its claim that abuse is "no longer systematic." Morozov and his colleagues continue to advocate the use of the painful and debilitating drug sulphazine; they continue to accept the discredited theory of "creeping schizophrenia," and they claim that the 13 patients found by the U.S. psychiatrists to be competent and not requiring detention were "dubious cases." All of this, as well as the U.S. psychiatric report, is evidence of systematic abuse. Conferences with Soviet psychiatric professionals are important, but not a substitute for resolute condemnation of these despicable practices.

Regrettably, the U.S. psychiatric report was significantly delayed, in part because of technical difficulties but in part because of a reluctance on the part of State Department officials to make such a critical report a priority. When a Helsinki Commission Congressional hearing on the report was finally scheduled in July after several delays, a number of psychiatric associations around the world had already held meetings to decide their position on the Soviet re-entry to the World Psychiatric Association. The critical U.S. report could have informed those decisions.

According to the Moscow Helsinki Group, some 50 persons who were arrested under the "pure political articles" remain in psychiatric detention. The question of their sanity is not the issue; their actions were determined to be "criminal" by prosecutors, and they ended up in psychiatric hospitals because of the decisions of prosecutors and courts -- not psychiatrists. Many people who try to address the issue of psychiatric abuse have failed to grasp this point. The majority of past and present cases of political psychiatric abuse originate first in the criminal justice system -- not the mental health system. The State Department officials negotiating the visit of the U.S. psychiatrist delegation failed to obtain the patients' criminal records, and only received diagnostic sheets at the last minute. These were not enough to assess the cases properly.

For better or worse, the human rights situation in the Soviet Union has often been understood in terms of emigration. It is a simplification to reduce the many complex internal human rights problems that make people want to leave to a single issue of emigration. But rightly or wrongly, the number of people emigrating is linked in the public's perception with Soviet human rights practices in general. There is also a legislative hook -- the Jackson-Vanik Amendment to the 1974 Trade Act, which denies favorable economic ties with non-market economies that restrict emigration. The text of the amendment reads:

To assure the continued dedication of the United States to fundamental human rights, and notwithstanding any other provision of law<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>products from any nonmarket economy country shall not be eligible to receive nondiscriminatory treatment<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>such country shall not participate in any program of the Government of the United States which extends credits or credit guarantees or investment guarantees, directly or indirectly, and the President of the United States shall not include any commercial agreement with any such country, during the period beginning with the date on which the President determines that such country --

(1) denies its citizens the right or opportunity to emigrate;

(2) imposes more than a nominal tax on emigration or on the visas or other documents required for emigration, for any purpose or cause whatsoever; or

(3)imposes more than a nominal tax, levy, fine, fee or other charge on any citizen as a consequence of the desire of such citizen to emigrate to the country of his choice.

In November, Soviet officials unveiled a long-promised emigration and travel bill, which they said would be passed by the Supreme Soviet in time for the Malta summit. As the summit drew near, and the bill was still stalled, they claimed that it would be passed in January 1990. White House, State Department and particularly Commerce Department officials greeted the announcement enthusiastically. Yet no one seemed to have read the actual text of the bill, made available by the Soviet embassy at the time. Regrettably, an opportunity was missed to criticize significant loopholes and obstructions in the draft legislation. For a complete analysis of the Soviet emigration bill and other draft legislation, see Toward the Rule of Law: Soviet Legal Reform and Human Rights Under Perestroika, Helsinki Watch, December 1989.>

Everyone understands the need to institutionalize the proposed reforms of Gorbachev's glasnost campaign in terms of law. Yet this is the area that has been least permeable to real change. The administration has missed countless opportunities to remind Soviet reformers of their pronouncements -- especially after their stated deadlines elapsed without progress -- and to criticize flawed legislation.

At a briefing in preparation for the CSCE London Information Forum, Bush administration officials made clear that their intention was to criticize recalcitrant East-bloc countries resisting reform and to praise those countries that had embarked on perestroika as a way of shoring up their reforms. The point was made that sharp condemnation would undermine the position of Soviet liberals vis-a-vis their conservative critics -- the Soviets needed to bring home diplomatic kudos in order to prove that their foreign policy was a success. The Georgian massacre of 20 peaceful demonstrators took place and a harsh decree on "state crimes" was passed on the eve of the London meeting, both of which should have elicited sharp condemnation by the U.S. delegation. Instead, references to these events at the London meeting and later at the Paris CSCE human rights meeting were merely mild expressions of concern buried with general statements of praise. The U.S. delegates who staffed these CSCE talks were lackluster and uninformed. Those involved in day-to-day human rights work, such as the staff of the government's Helsinki Commission, seemed to be cut out of the process as other diplomatic concerns came to the fore.

Given the rapid pace of Soviet events, more human rights statements should probably be made by the U.S. embassy in Moscow. But given a series of unrelated problems -- a bugged building, flu epidemics decimating staff hours, reciprocity concerns and time-consuming security requirements (all staffers must visit Soviet citizens in pairs) -- the embassy is not able to play a significant role in human rights advocacy or reporting. Its lone human rights officer is frequently bogged down with refugee work and the briefing of numerous Congressional and official delegations. Although there have been discussions about increasing staff, and emigration-application processing has been moved out of the embassy, reciprocity considerations apparently preclude an increase in staff. Human rights work -- especially travel to non-Russian republics -- has been an accidental victim of the policy. For some reason, the negotiations to establish a consulate in Kiev are still stalled. This is very unfortunate -- there was no official window on the coal miners' strikes in the Ukraine last summer, for example.

Although Afghanistan continues to figure in U.S.-Soviet summit talks, the question of Soviet war crimes apparently has not been raised. In December, the Soviet parliament decided to amnesty all veterans accused of crimes. Most of the soldiers who were amnestied had been charged with "treason" merely for having been caught by the enemy. But an untold number of soldiers who committed atrocities against Afghan civilians were not mentioned, and it was unclear whether they had been prosecuted, let alone included in an amnesty. This matter should be addressed by the administration in talks with Soviet officials.

With glasnost and perestroika, the aspirations, frustrations and tensions of Soviet ethnic and national groups -- long submerged by official repression -- are finding public expression in mass demonstrations and new citizens' groups espousing linguistic and cultural demands and occasionally national self-determination. Some demonstrations have involved hundreds of thousands. The vast majority of these demonstrations have been peaceful and were met with official restraint.

However, ethnic tension has also found expression in riots, sometimes resulting in dozens of deaths -- as happened during the summer of 1989 in the Fergana valley of Uzbekistan. The use or threat of force has led Soviet authorities to declare states of emergency since 1985 in six Soviet republics: Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaidzhan, Moldavia, Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan. Although the initial imposition of states of emergency may have been justified, there is reason to doubt the need for continuing restrictions, including curfews and bans on public assembly. But the Bush administration has maintained public silence on this issue.

Although administration officials have insisted privately that official Soviet violence against peaceful demonstrators will mean the end of cordial bilateral relations, Secretary Baker seemed to be preparing a justification for a possible Soviet crackdown at a pre-Malta White House press conference on November 29. Secretary Baker gave a positive gloss to recent dramatic changes in Czechoslovakia and East Germany, which he referred to as an example of "people power." But when he turned to the Soviet Union, Baker mentioned only Azerbaidzhanis and Armenians "killing each other," thereby giving the false impression that most national protests in the USSR are violent. Baker said that martial law would "restore peace" in such situations, without noting that it might also have other less positive effects on human rights.

Evidence of this approach can be seen in the administration's response to the biggest blot on the Soviet human rights record in 1989 -- the April 9 killing of 20 peaceful demonstrators by troops in Georgia. Soldiers used sharp shovels, as well as toxic and tear gas, to attack protestors. Most of the victims were women. Despite eventual condemnation -- by the Soviet government and several commissions of inquiry -- the issue of official responsibility has not been settled. The major unresolved question is who -- and at what level -- ordered troops to use violence.

The official U.S. response to the tragedy was muted. Although in April the State Department urged the Soviet government to investigate "fully" the events and "strongly condemn[ed] the use of any chemical agents against peaceful protesters that cause serious injury or death," it never addressed the issue of responsibility. At the Paris CSCE meeting in June, a U.S. representative noted: "Our concern is heightened when peaceful protest leads to violence and death as it did in the still unexplained events in Tbilisi." But she did not make clear that the violence was one-sided -- directed by soldiers against peaceful protesters.

Until recently, U.S. policy-makers have shown less interest in the vast non-Russian areas of the USSR, which have seemed remote and obscure, than in more accessible Moscow. U.S. interest in the non-Russian nationalities has traditionally been in response to pressure from ethnic constituencies in the United States: U.S. Jewry, for example, on emigration issues; the U.S. Baltic community, with regard to Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia; and Armenian- Ukrainian- and Russian-Americans on behalf of their former countrymen. Dozens of other ethnic groups in the USSR which lack ethnic advocates in the United States rarely caught the U.S. government's attention.

The U.S. delegation to the CSCE meeting in Paris continued to reflect these pressures. U.S. representatives mentioned problems faced by Soviet Jews, the Baltic Popular Fronts, and certain ethnic minorities who continue to suffer from Stalin's deportations. But there was no public concern expressed over difficulties encountered by such grassroots groups as Birlik in Uzbekistan and the Moldavian and Belorussian Popular Fronts, which espouse democratic solutions for the Soviet nationalities they represent. As the Soviet ethnic situation evolves, the administration will need to devote attention to the increasingly complex, important and difficult nationalities issue across the span of ethnic and national groups in the Soviet Union.
SUDAN

The human rights crises in Sudan over the past several years have been extremely grave. The Bush administration has taken a few positive steps in recognition of this crisis, but as a rule it has maintained public silence in the face of ongoing government abuses and it has sought to maintain close ties with the two governments that ruled Sudan in 1989. Former Sudanese President Sadiq al-Mahdi, who was elected in 1986 following the ouster of President Jaafar Nimeiri and ruled until a June 1989 military coup, began his presidency with welcome human rights improvements, including an expansion of civil and political liberties in parts of the country. But these gains paralleled seriously deteriorating conditions in the southern part of the country, which has been torn by intermittent civil war for over 30 years. President Sadiq continued the abusive policies of his predecessor by discriminating against the black ethnic groups of the south (particularly the Dinka) and by arming militias from other ethnic groups historically opposed to the first. He also added a serious new abuse -- the use of starvation as a counterinsurgency technique. In part due to Khartoum's efforts to cut off delivery of food and aid to the south, an estimated 250,000 Sudanese died of starvation in 1988 and as many as two to three million fled their homes to other destinations in Sudan. Over 400,000 fled the country altogether.

The United States has long been an important ally of Sudan, but until recently it has failed to use its considerable leverage to press the government to improve its human rights practices. The Reagan administration deferred to the Sadiq government and failed to provide aid directly to the south. The New York Times reported on February 17, 1989 that until the first cross-border shipment of food to Sudan from Kenya in early February, "Washington had restricted its relief food to government-held towns for fear of affronting Sudan's government, a strategic ally."

The Bush administration appeared to take a different approach and commenced shipments directly to southern Sudan, despite Khartoum's resistance. In a conversation with Africa Watch on July 27, officials in the State Department's Bureau of African Affairs insisted that the policy of providing aid directly to the south actually had been set in place by the Reagan administration, although Congressional sources have stressed that the Bush administration deserves credit for abandoning the policy of complete deference to President Sadiq. In either case, it is clear that extensive Congressional pressure played a large role in helping persuade the executive branch to assume a new aid policy.

Unfortunately, the new position on aid did not signal an increased willingness to speak out more frankly about the appalling abuses of the Sadiq government. In his February 23, 1989 statement before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Kenneth Brown complained that, in part because the United States had been so critical of the Sadiq government, U.S. access to the government was increasingly limited: "[O]ur privileged access is beginning to show wear as a result of extensive public criticism of Sudan, our declining assistance levels and the repeated hard messages we have delivered to Khartoum." The complaint is off point. With the exception of a serious and comprehensive chapter on Sudan in the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in 1988 -- written by the Reagan administration and issued in February 1989 -- we are not aware of any occasion on which the U.S. has taken the Sadiq government to task publicly.

We were not privy to whatever private protests may have been made by Norman Anderson who, until October 1989, was U.S. ambassador to Sudan. But journalists familiar with Ambassador Anderson portray him as having been all but mute in the face of Sudan's gathering human rights crisis. According to Ray Bonner, who published an extensive article on Sudan in The New Yorker in March, Ambassador Anderson was extraordinarily wary of speaking with journalists because of his deference toward the Sadiq government.

Prior to the last months of the Sadiq government, Sudan had been the largest recipient of U.S. foreign aid in sub-Saharan Africa. (The administration's request for aid to Sudan for fiscal year 1989 had been $74.4 million.) When in 1989 the Sadiq government fell deeply behind in its loan payments to the West, U.S. aid was reduced pursuant to U.S. legislation prohibiting assistance to governments that default on their debt. The legislation, the so-called "Brooke amendment," went into effect in January 1989 and prevented $32 million from being disbursed to the Sudanese government. While the amendment prohibited new aid to Sudan, it allowed money "already in the pipeline" to continue flowing. The U.S. Agency for International Development had planned to downgrade its projects gradually through 1991. On June 30, 1989, however, President Sadiq was overthrown in a military coup headed by Omar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir. The coup yielded further restrictions on U.S. assistance to Sudan pursuant to Section 513 of the Foreign Assistance Act, which prohibits aid to military governments that overthrow elected civilian governments. According to administration figures available in late October, the application of the Brooke amendment and Section 513 to Sudan resulted in a cutoff of $33.5 million in aid, and the phasing out of all projects by February 1990. The Defense Department also halted $21 million in non-lethal military assistance which, because it was "in the pipeline," had not been affected by the Brooke amendment. The items suspended included assistance in repairing C-130 aircraft, as well as trucks, communication gear, and spare parts. Neither Section 513 nor the Brooke amendment applies to food aid under the P.L. 480 program, assistance through private voluntary organizations, or disaster relief, of which the government still received approximately $62 million in 1989.

By the end of 1989, the Bush administration was consulting with Congress to inquire whether Section 513 might be waived to allow the provision of additional assistance to the Bashir government. Congressional sources reported that in making the case for waiving the provision, the Bush administration pointed to areas of alleged "progress" by the government, including improvements in train and barge deliveries of relief, the demobilization of militias, and the release of some political prisoners.

Unfortunately, the administration's optimism on humanitarian aid appears to have been misplaced. While several additional train deliveries were indeed made following the June coup, "Operation Lifeline" (the massive feeding program organized by UNICEF and the U.N. World Food Program) was suspended on November 8. In a meeting with Africa Watch in November, Jack Davison, the director of the State Department's Office of East African Affairs, discussed the possibility of waiving Section 513 to keep Sudan's C-130 aircraft in repair. He suggested that while C-130s are used to transport troops, they are also used to transport food. While this may be theoretically correct, Congressional sources insist that, to date, no food has been transported by Sudan's C-130s. The feeding program was suspended as the result of the bombing by an "unidentified" plane of Yirol and Waat, both held by the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA). The SPLA has been fighting the Sudanese government and government-backed militias since 1983, when North-South tensions erupted in civil war. The civil war stems from a series of actions by President Nimeiri in violation of a 1972 national accord in which Nimeiri reinstated Arabic as the official Sudanese language, redrew agreed-upon boundaries and revived sharia law. The government denied responsibility and announced that it was necessary to suspend all relief flights to southern Sudan to prevent them from being attacked. In perhaps a more candid moment, Sudanese Foreign Minister Ali Sahlul stated in November that any relief going to the south without first passing through government-held towns posed a security threat.

The Bush administration's praise for human rights improvements under the Bashir government was also premature. While some political prisoners have been released, approximately 300 remained incarcerated at year's end. In addition, ten medical doctors were arrested in Khartoum soon after a doctors' strike began on November 26. The strike was to protest the arrest and dismissal of a number of doctors and the banning of the Sudan Doctors' Union. Four doctors were later tried in military courts, without legal representation, on charges including "waging war against the state." One doctor, Mamoun Mohamed Hussein, was sentenced to death, and a second was given a 15-year jail sentence. The other two were acquitted for lack of evidence. In addition, two businessmen, one charged with illegal currency trading and the other with drug trafficking, were sentenced to death and executed on December 17. Moreover, many of those prisoners arrested in the early days of the Bashir government and later released have found themselves returning to press outlets, labor unions, and professional associations that have been declared illegal. In early December, the Bashir government also announced its intention to implement a strict interpretation of Islamic sharia law, a measure frozen since the overthrow of President Nimeiri in 1985. Islamic Law has been in force in Sudan since September 1983, but no huddud (punishment) sentences of execution, amputation or stoning have been carried out since April 1985. At least 200 prisoners are in prison awaiting the implementation of such sentences. The measure is one of the root causes of the civil war between the government and the non-Muslim SPLA. Government officials have also made statements calling for the dismissal of all women from government service, except teachers and nurses.

The Bush administration's praise for the alleged demobilization of militias is also premature. President Bashir apparently made a decision to demobilize certain groups associated with government rivals, but at the same time it upgraded certain militias to a paramilitary force. Since its creation, this force has been implicated in some of the worst abuses in the south. One incident occurred in early November, when over 100 ethnic Nubas were slaughtered for being alleged SPLA sympathizers. The government denied involvement, but reliable reports put the blame on its paramilitary force.

In December, the administration became quite concerned about these recent developments in Sudan. On December 13, the new U.S. ambassador to Sudan, Jim Cheek, made the strongest representation to date in a private (though later leaked) message to Gen. Bashir. According to Congressional sources, the message implicitly warned that relations between the two countries would be seriously jeopardized if Gen. Bashir allowed any death sentences to be executed. However, despite the above noted execution of two businessmen four days later, this strong private protest has not yielded public condemnation or a change in the administration's policy toward Sudan.
SYRIA

The Bush administration, like the Reagan administration before it, has adopted a paradoxical position on Syrian human rights abuses. It has maintained a number of sanctions "in response to Syria's evident support for international terrorism." But apart from the State Department's annual Country Reports on Human Rights Practices -- which was drafted by the Reagan administration and issued in February 1989 -- the Bush administration has taken no public action on the serious human rights situation within Syria or within Syrian-conrolled areas of Lebanon.

The United States imposed sanctions on November 14, 1986, after a British court implicated Syria in the attempted bombing in London of an El Al airliner. The U.S. also withdrew its ambassador to Syria, William Eagleton. At the same time, the British government broke diplomatic relations with Syria, and other members of the European Economic Community ("EEC") adopted sanctions as well. On September 2, 1987, however, the Reagan administration decided to return its ambassador and to cancel a key sanction -- the ban on U.S. oil-company activity. Of the sanctions still in force, the most important are: export controls on security-related goods, a ban on Export-Import Bank loans, and a ban on subsidized wheat purchases. Most EEC countries have now also lifted their sanctions, even though there has been no visible change in Syrian policy.

The State Department claims that it has raised domestic repression and related human rights matters privately with the Syrian government, arguing that Syria would not respond to a more public campaign. It is not known what issues have been pursued privately or what results have been forthcoming. But in light of the gravity of Syrian abuses amply documented each year in the State Department's country report, it seems far from justified to have ruled out public diplomacy.

During 1989, the human rights situation in Syria remained grim. The government of President Hafez al-Asad maintained a State of Emergency (in force since 1963) which abrogates virtually all legal and constitutional protections. During the year, a dozen major security agencies are estimated to have arrested hundreds of political prisoners, many of whom remained in custody at year's end. Those arrested included government officials, military officers, security personnel, and those suspected of membership in the Muslim Brothers and the secular opposition. Since 1971, virtually no such prisoners have been formally charged, tried or sentenced, so nearly all are incarcerated without time limits. About 20 prisoners, including a former president, a former foreign minister and a number of other former government officials, have been held in custody for over nineteen years -- since November 1970.

In late April, the Syrian government released three lawyers who had been jailed for nine years. They had been arrested in April 1980 when a number of Syrian professional associations called for an end to the State of Emergency, the release or prompt trial of all prisoners, and other democratic reforms. The government reacted by arresting several hundred professionals, including at least 100 lawyers. Because of a campaign by the Arab Lawyers' Union, all the lawyers have now been released, but some 90 health professionals and 70 engineers are still in custody.

Syria now is estimated to hold over 7,000 prisoners, of whom at least 2,500 are held in Tadmur Military Prison and over 2,000 in Syrian detention facilities in Lebanon. Hundreds of other prisoners are also known to be held in al-Mezze Military Prison, al-'Adra Prison, Saydnaya Prison, Kafr Sussa Detention Center, Military Interrogation Branch, and other facilities in Syria.

The Syrian security services continue to use torture during interrogation, and it is believed that virtually all interrogation in Syria includes either torture or severe mistreatment. During the past two years there have been a number of reports of prisoners dying under torture or suffering from permanent disabilities. Among the reported deaths are: Ishan 'Izzo, Muhammad al-'Arraj and 'Abd al-Razaq 'Abazied. Musa Khaife, a teenager who was tortured, is reportedly confined to a wheelchair due to partial paralysis. Other prisoners are suffering from loss of sight and hearing, kidney problems, spinal injuries, heart conditions and other serious health problems.

Torture and mistreatment is facilitated by the security forces' practice of holding most prisoners incommunicado during their interrogation, which may last for weeks or even months.

There are several legal political parties in Syria, but all are allied with the ruling Baath Party, within the National Progressive Front. These parties are not permitted to circulate newspapers openly or to organize among students and other sectors of the population, so their independence is marginal. All other parties are illegal, and membership in the Muslim Brothers is punishable by death.

The government and party own all the mass media and impose strict censorship on book publishing, filmmaking, writing and virtually all other areas of cultural expression. In 1988, the government detained a Syrian poet for reading a poem of which it did not approve, and in 1989 it banned a Syrian film that won international awards. The cult of personality of President Asad is a centerpiece of national life, and no criticism of him is tolerated.

Among Syria's many minority communities, three in particular face serious problems at the hands of the government. Kurds number 900,000 out of a population of about eleven million. They cannot freely express their Kurdish identity or publish in their language. Over 100,000 Kurds were deprived of their Syrian citizenship in the early 1960's. They still live in Syria, in difficult and marginal conditions, and are often denied access to schools, employment, social services and travel.

Syria's Jewish community of 3,800 faces an absolute ban on emigration and a number of other restrictions on travel and property, mostly related to emigration. Of seven Syrian Jews arrested in 1987 for alleged infringement of travel restrictions, four remain in custody without charge or trial. In November, the U.S. State Department announced that the Syrian government had said that it would take "a more flexible approach" to its Jewish population, including a trial for those imprisoned and a partial relaxation of the emigration ban. Such statements remain to be tested in practice.

The Palestinian community, which numbers some 300,000, faces serious risks. There are currently an estimated 2,000 to 3,000 Palestinians in jail and the government continues to make new arrests. In late 1988, the Syrian government spoke of 1,700 Palestinians in detention. At about the same time, Palestinian sources spoke of 4,000 prisoners and The New York Times referred to 3,000. There have been a few releases and some additional arrests since that time, so the overall numbers probably remain about the same today. Two special security services carry out this repression, which is linked to Syria's foreign policy. Although there have been reported releases in the past eight months, few Palestinians have actually been set free.

Many of the most serious human rights abuses for which Syria has been responsible in 1989 occurred in Syrian-occupied Lebanon. There, Syrian troops and Syrian-supported militias attacked unarmed civilians, carried out summary executions, and abducted Palestinian, Lebanese and other nationals. A number of Syrian security forces have arrested and brutally interrogated many hundreds, and probably thousands, of persons. Agents of Syria's Military Intelligence Agency and its Special Forces are primarily responsible, interrogating prisoners at a number of facilites including al-Mafraza in West Beirut and Madrasa al-Amrican in Tripoli. Many prionsers are held in 'Anjar Prison, near the Syrian border, and the most important prisoners are brought to Damascus, where they are further interrogated and eventually imprisoned.

Because the U.S. government has supported a continuing Syrian role in Lebanon, it has been ready to ignore Syria's violations of human rights in its occupation. The State Department under Henry Kissinger formulated the 1976 "red-line agreement," which sanctioned Syria's original intervention in Lebanon, and that policy has largely continued to this day. Recently, there have been a number of high-level talks, including visits to Damascus by special Presidential emissary (and U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations) Vernon Walters in July 1987, Secretary of State Schultz in late February 1988 and Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Richard Murphy on several occasions in 1988 and 1989. Another State Department specialist, April Glaspie, was also involved in meetings during this time. Throughout the period, the United States, through what is known as the "Glaspie-Murphy Initiative," sought to widen discussions over Lebanon and to develop closer ties to Syria.

During 1989, several Bush administration officials spoke publicly of the importance of Syria's role in Lebanon and its potential contribution to a peaceful solution. This warming of relations came despite alleged connections between the Syrian-based and -supported Ahmad Jebril group and the bombing of TWA Flight 103. The administration has asked Syria to close down Jebril's group, which is headquartered in Damascus, but the Syrian government has refused. In early July, the Syrian Information Minister told a New York Times reporter: "We are quite optimistic in our understandings with the Bush administration and its policy toward the Middle East<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-20 <%0>.<%-25 <%0>The dialogue is proceeding at the highest level between the U.S. and Syria." In September, Secretary of State James Baker met with the Syrian Foreign Minister at the U.N. General Assembly and reaffirmed the warming relations between the two countries. All of this high-level diplomatic dialogue offered ample opportunity for human rights discussions. But there has been no public indication that U.S. human rights concerns were raised.

U.S.-Syrian relations are not those of two allies, but rather those of two parties with different interests that coincide under certain circumstances. In this way, the United States has developed a close working relationship with Syria, despite continuing Soviet aid and arms supplies and the Syrian government's reputation in some quarters as a "Soviet surrogate." In addition to the public diplomatic discussions, there have been many reports of high-level security discussions between Syria and the United States over the past year, especially discussions about Lebanon. The head of Syrian Military Intelligence in Lebanon reportedly visited Washington for unofficial talks with intelligence officials in September. Administration officials would not confirm this report, but they have said such a visit would not be uncharacteristic of the current dialogue. It is troubling that the administration might, as a matter of course, have discussions with the head of an agency known to be so deeply involved in gross human rights violations.

It is not as if the United States lacks leverage over Syria. U.S. oil companies have helped Syria export over $700 million in petroleum in 1989 and there is an important new oil find in the Deir al-Zor area, discovered by U.S.-based Pecten; U.S. Middle East allies, particularly Saudi Arabia, have provided Syria with cash, oil and food aid amounting to over $1 billion per year during the past ten years; and the U.S.-supported Syrian occupation of Lebanon has gained Syria hundreds of millions of dollars in hard currency through drug sales, black-market activities and various kinds of expropriation. Without these revenues, the Syrian economy could not possibly function, nor could it have functioned over the past fifteen years.

Syria's economic vulnerability is underscored by its current debt problems with the World Bank and other foreign lenders. Syria's debt to the West totals at least $6 billion, and it is said to be in arrears to the World Bank for over $100 million. The Soviet Union is also pressing Syria for repayment of loans said to total $15 billion for military hardware. The Soviet government has also made clear to Syria in recent months that it will be restricting arms sales and credits in the future. This financial pressure creates an opportunity for leverage on human rights.

But the Bush administration has oppposed stiffer sanctions on human rights grounds, as demonstrated by its stance before Congress in the fall of 1989. Representative Robert Dorman introduced a bill (H.R. 2797) to embargo trade with Syria, citing human rights violations in Lebanon. This bill was opposed by the administration on the grounds that "effective sanctions are already in place."

Effective demands can and should be made for Syria to respect human rights in Lebanon as well as within its own national territory. But such demands depend on the existence of a policy which gives precedence to human rights. So far, the Bush administration, like its predecessors, has seemed little inclined to adopt this priority in the case of Syria.
TAIWAN (Republic of China)

Although the United States and Taiwan do not have formal diplomatic relations, the Taiwan Relations Act Congress enacted the Taiwan Relations Act to govern U.S. relations with Taiwan in the absence of formal diplomatic relations, which were severed when the U.S. established diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of China. U.S. interests in Taiwan are represented by the American Institute in Taiwan. provides that "the preservation and enhancement of human rights of all the people on Taiwan" are important objectives of the U.S. government. Furthermore, as Taiwan's principal ally, important trading partner and major arms supplier, the United States is positioned to have a strong positive impact on human rights practices in Taiwan. The Bush administration, however, has largely refrained from public comment on those practices. Instead, discussion of trade issues dominated relations between the two countries in 1989.

According to representatives from the U.S. State Department and the American Institute in Taiwan, the Bush administration, like the Reagan administration, raised human rights conerns during private meetings with Taiwanese officials. But whatever critical sentiments may have been privately expressed at these meeetings were overshadowed by the administration's public praise for continuing political liberalization on the island without parallel public expressions of concern over the human rights problems that remain.

Throughout 1989, the Bush administration commented publicly on only one human rights case in Taiwan. Hsu Hsin-liang, a former Taoyuan County magistrate who was granted political asylum and had been living in the United States since 1979, was arrested when he attempted to enter Taiwan in September 1989. He was indicted on sedition charges a month later. The State Department protested the indictment because it was based in part on Hsu's activities in the United States that were protected by the U.S. Constitution. An observer from the American Institute in Taiwan was also present at the first hearing of the case, on November 18.

Apart from the Hsu case, with its special U.S. dimension, the Bush administration refrained from critical commentary on human rights developments in Taiwan. Part of this silence is undoubtedly due to the significant political reforms that continued to take place in Taiwan during 1989. In February, a newly revised Civic Organizations Law permitted for the first time the existence of more than one organization per "function." Before the amendment, for example, the Taiwan Association for Human Rights ("TAHR") was not permitted to register -- a legal requirement for civic organizations -- because the Chinese Association for Human Rights ("CAHR") already existed, even though the CAHR addressed abuses only on the mainland. Since the amendment, the TAHR should be entitled to register, although it has not yet done so because it refuses to meet the separate requirement that all organizations with "Taiwan" in their name add "Republic of China." Amendments to the Election and Recall Law, also enacted in February, legalized opposition political parties. Street demonstrations have been permitted since the lifting of martial law in July 1987, and over 1,000 demonstrations involving a wide range of concerns have taken place since then. But limits to the exercise of civil liberties persist.

Freedom of expression is still restricted in Taiwan, most notably on the highly sensitive topic of independence. In 1989, Taiwanese officials announced their intention to bring sedition charges against an opposition publisher, Cheng Nan-rong, for having published a draft constitution for an independent Taiwan; Cheng killed himself when the authorities attempted to arrest him. In late December, Huang Hua, chairman of the New Nation Movement, which was instrumental in pulling together a slate of 32 candidates who ran on a pro-independence platform in the December 2 elections, was summoned for questioning; he also may be indicted on sedition charges. Although the Bush administration has stated in other contexts that it supports freedom of expression regardless of whether it agrees with the views expressed, it remained silent on these cases because of its reluctance to offend the authorities of both Taiwan and the People's Republic of China, each of which asserts that Taiwan is part of China.

The administration was also silent when Hong Chi-chang, a prominent opposition member of the National Assembly, returned to Taiwan after a six-month stay in the United States to face criminal charges for his role in demonstrations on June 12, 1987 and May 20, 1988. The June 12, 1987 demonstration was to protest enactment of the National Security Law, which replaced martial law. The May 20, 1988 demonstration concerned farmers' rights. Hong's prosecution was one of several against organizers of demonstrations for the violent acts committed independently by some demonstrators. Although we are aware of no evidence indicating that Hong advocated or incited violence, he was sentenced to a 15-month prison term for organizing the June 12, 1987 demonstration and 18 months' imprisonment for allegedly interfering with police duties during the May 20 demonstration.

To bolster their claim to rule all of China, authorities on Taiwan have maintained constitutional and political institutions to govern the mainland. Mainland "representatives" who have not had to stand for election since 1947 make up over half the National Assembly. The National Assembly, in turn, elects the president. Other national bodies as well are dominated by such lifetime members. Only "supplementary" elections take place to fill additional seats allocated to the Taiwan province.

In February 1989, in its Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1988 (produced by the Reagan administration and released in the early days of the Bush administration), the State Department reflected this reality for the first time by stating that citizens on Taiwan "do not have the ability to change their government." Despite this important acknowledgement, and despite a lack of progress in this area throughout 1989, David Dean, director of the American Institute in Taiwan's Taipei office, was reported in August to have praised the "orderly constitutional succession" that occurred when then Vice President Lee Teng-hui assumed the presidency upon the death of former President Chiang Ching-kuo. Dean thus undercut the statement in the Country Reports by failing to note that, despite the orderly transition in conformity with the Constitution, the people on Taiwan were never given the opportunity to vote on Lee as a presidential or vice-presidential candidate.

We note that the Bush administration has not refrained from making frequent public statements on its trade relationship with Taiwan. Human rights concerns warrant a comparably public profile if the strong U.S. ties to Taiwan are to be used to effect improvements in Taiwanese rights practices.

TURKEY

As we have pointed out in the past, Section 502B of the Foreign Assistance Act prohibits military and certain other forms of assistance to a country that "engages in a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights," unless the President submits a written statement to Congress explaining that "extraordinary circumstances exist warranting provision of such assistance." As we detail below, abuses in Turkey clearly add up to a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights. Yet, thus far, the Bush administration has neither submitted such a statement to Congress nor, to our knowledge, made significant efforts to persuade the Turkish government to improve its human rights record.

Among the most pervasive and serious abuses in Turkey, torture continues to be used routinely by police and security forces. Although in 1988 the Turkish government ratified both the United Nations and European conventions for the prevention of torture, and although the government recently announced new reform measures aimed at reducing torture by giving detainees access to attorneys and by shortening detention periods, recent reports show that torture continues to be a routine interrogation tactic. Reliable reports indicate that well over 90 per cent of political prisoners and over half of detainees suspected of common crimes are tortured, usually in police stations, with sophisticated equipment and techniques. And torture sometimes ends in death: Amnesty International reported that three people died under torture between January and August 1989. As for the government's announced reforms, human rights activists report that the ministerial decree assuring detainees access to their lawyers has yet to be carried out. And Parliament has not yet enacted a proposed law shortening detention periods.

Other human rights abuses by the Turkish government include: the incarceration of thousands charged with political crimes, hundreds of whom have been imprisoned only for the peaceful expression of their political views; restrictions on freedom of expression and association; and the continued mistreatment of the Kurdish minority.

In January 1989, the State Department acknowledged many of these abuses in its Country Reports on Human Rights Practices. It reported: "credible allegations of torture and other mistreatment"; several specific cases of torture; the incommunicado detention of suspects; hunger strikes in prisons that resulted from "stringent new prison regulations"; the long-term detention of political prisoners; laws used to "harass newspapers"; restrictions on association and academic freedom; the expulsion of several foreign religious activists; the prohibition of political parties advocating a communist or a theocratic state; the "proscription of publication of any book, newspaper or other material in the Kurdish language"; the denial of materials dealing with Kurdish history, culture and ethnic identity; the banning of political activity by unions, university faculty or students; the denial of passports to thousands of Turks living abroad and the detention of some expatriate Turks who have attempted to return to Turkey.Unfortunately, this candid appraisal did not lead to an invocation of the presumptive cutoff of most U.S. aid to Turkey.

Moreover, apart from the Country Reports, the administration has made no public comment on abuses that clearly would have elicited condemnation if they had not been committed by an ally. In 1989, these uncriticized abuses included the death of an 18-year-old demonstrator, Mehmet Akif Dalci, who was shot in the head by police firing on a crowd of about 1,000 peaceful demonstrators near Taksim Square on May Day, and the later police beating of journalists who covered the young man's funeral on May 4.

Another event which received a great deal of international attention but no Bush administration protest was the death of two hunger strikers under suspicious circumstances in early August. The two men who died, Mehmet Yalcinkaya and Huseyin Husnu Eroglu, were among some 2,000 prison inmates who between June and September 1989 engaged in hunger strikes to protest prison conditions. They died after the transfer of 260 prisoners from Eskisehir Prison to Aydin Prison, following the discovery of two escape tunnels in Eskisehir Prison. During the transfer, 13 groups of 20 men were chained together for 15 hours in metal vans ventilated only through a small hole in the back. On arrival at Aydin Prison, the men were stripped and hosed down, and some were beaten. Yalcinkaya and Eroglu died shortly afterward. At least eight people were detained for demonstrating against the deaths, and 35 women, mostly wives or mothers of striking prisoners, were arrested for leaving funeral shrouds at the Aydin public prosecutor's office to protest the failure of authorities to investigate the deaths. The Bush administration made no statement on the deaths or the later events.

Nor did the administration comment on the Turkish government's continuing restrictions on freedom of expression (41 Turkish journalists and editors are in prison serving very long sentences for their writings) or freedom of association (the Turkish Human Rights Association and the Association of Families of Convicts and Detainees are continually harassed by authorities, with branches closed down, members detained and criminally charged, and some demonstrations forbidden).

The administration fared particularly poorly at using moments of heightened U.S. attention to Turkey to raise human rights issues. For example, it made no public statement on human rights in connection with the visit of then-Prime Minister Turgut Ozal to Washington in June or his visit with President Bush in December.

Similarly, at Helsinki follow-up meetings that addressed human rights issues (part of the process stemming from the Conference for Security and Cooperation in Europe ("CSCE")), the administration, while citing specific abuses in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, has continued the practice of omitting any mention of abuses in Turkey. For example, at the CSCE Information Forum held in London in April, Leonard H. Marks, the chairman of the U.S. delegation, discussed the "rigid controls on information still prevailing in Romania, Czechoslovakia, the German Democratic Republic, and Bulgaria," as well as problems in the Soviet Union, but made no mention of restrictions on freedom of expression in Turkey. Remarks by other members of the delegation followed the same pattern. The only U.S. mention of Turkey was in the context of Bulgaria's mistreatment of its Turkish minority and Bulgaria's jamming of Turkish radio and television broadcasts. In a discussion of discrimination against minorities, a U.S. delegation member discussed the prohibition of the Turkish language in Bulgaria and problems of Hungarian- and German-language publishing houses in Romania, but made no mention of the official prohibition of the Kurdish language in Turkey.

Similarly, at the CSCE conference on human rights in Paris in June, the chairman of the U.S. delegation, Ambassador Morris Abram, cited problems in the Soviet Union concerning emigration, the beating of peaceful demonstrators in Georgia, and the banning of churches in the Ukraine, as well as specific cases of abuses in Czechoslovakia, the German Democratic Republic, Romania and Bulgaria, but made no statements at all about violations in Turkey. Our efforts to persuade the delegation to address Turkey's human rights abuses were unsuccessful.

The one bright spot in the administration's record on human rights in Turkey appears to be the appointment of a new U.S. ambassador to Turkey, Morton Abramowitz. Ambassador Abramowitz has taken a greater personal interest in human rights than his predecessor, and has publicly stated that human rights is an important part of his agenda. He has met with the Turkish Justice, Interior and Foreign Ministers, and has spent time with and listened to the concerns of the Turkish Human Rights Association. His human rights officer has a working relationship with the Human Rights Association, and has met with two people who were tortured by Turkish police. The embassy staff has helped arrange visits and appointments for U.S. citizens looking into human rights -- the Helsinki Watch mission on prison conditions, the New York City Bar Association delegation investigating the legal system's response to torture, and a delegation from the U.S. government's Helsinki Commission, for example. But no one from the U.S. embassy has observed any of the political trials that continue in the military and state-security courts, such as the trial of hundreds of members of the leftist organization Dev-Yol, or the trials of editors and writers for expressing their views.

In the "Congressional Presentation for Security Assistance Programs for [Fiscal Year] 1990," prepared by the U.S. State and Defense Departments, the Bush administration stated: "Turkey is a key country for support of U.S. strategic interests in the European, Southwest Asia and Middle East areas." Because of its strategic importance, Turkey has been a major recipient of U.S. foreign aid for many years. It is the third largest recipient of such aid, after Israel and Egypt. In fiscal year 1989, U.S. aid to Turkey was $563,500,000 ($503,500,000 in military aid and $60,000,000 in economic aid). For fiscal year 1990, the Bush administration has requested $553,500,000 in military assistance and $60,350,000 in economic aid, a total of $613,850,000.

There are, nevertheless, strains in relations between the United States and Turkey. Turkey is not happy with the decreasing level of foreign assistance, with the continuing seven-to-ten ratio of aid to Greece and Turkey, with the attention given to the mistreatment of Turkey's Kurdish minority and, recently, with a new Congressional effort to enact a resolution designating a "national day of remembrance for the victims of the Armenian genocide, which occurred in the Ottoman Empire during the period 1915-1923." Despite these tensions, the United States, because of its significant foreign aid to Turkey, is still in a position to use its influence to encourage the Turkish government to improve its human rights practices. Unfortunately, it has largely failed to do so.

Last year we recommended that the new administration use its best efforts to persuade the Turkish government to take certain specific steps. We repeat those recommendations this year. The Bush administration should urge the government of Turkey to:

acknowledge the pattern of torture in police detention centers and take steps to end it;

enforce the September 1989 decree guaranteeing detainees the right to be represented by attorneys from the moment of detention;

prohibit the use in court of confessions obtained by torture;

prosecute and increase sentences for torturers;

take steps to improve the inhumane and degrading conditions that now exist in Turkish prisons and detention centers;

allow the International Committee of the Red Cross and other international organizations to visit detainees and prisoners on a regular basis;

release from prison and detention centers all those held for the expression of their peaceful political views;

stop all legal actions against the press and against writers and publishers based on the content of their writings;

amend the Penal Code to eliminate Articles 141, 142 and 163, which forbid advocating Communism or the establishment of a religious state, and other Penal Code Articles that are used to deprive Turks of their human rights, such as article 158, which forbids "insulting the President," Article 159, which forbids "insulting or vilifying the Turkish nation," and Article 140, which forbids "publishing in a foreign country untrue, malicious, or exaggerated rumors or news about the internal situation" of Turkey;

acknowledge the existence of the Kurdish minority in Turkey and grant them the civil and political rights held by other Turks; and

end restrictions that deprive Kurds of their ethnic identity, including restrictions on the use of Kurdish language, music and dance.
URUGUAY

Because it is a tiny country which has returned to democracy, a country in which the United States has no large aid program or manifest security interests, Uruguay is not a nation on which U.S. policy is highly visible. But on April 16, 1989, Uruguay held a referendum on an important moral and legal issue, involving the relationship between civilian and military authorities, which deserved U.S. comment. The referendum was to decide whether to preserve or annul a law effectively amnestying military and police violators of human rights responsible for murders, torture and disappearances during the 1973-85 dictatorship. The vote -- an important precedent for transformations from military to civilian rule -- was the result of a two-year effort by victims of human rights abuses, relatives of disappeared adults and children, human rights advocates, and tens of thousands of other citizens who opposed the blanket amnesty. The amnesty law was ultimately upheld by a margin of 52 to 40 percent.

The administration, reasonably, did not publicly take sides in the referendum. It must also be noted that the Bush administration only inherited the amnesty situation, since the law was passed in 1987. But the administration failed to take the high road on the issue. U.S. officials argued privately that amnesty was the only politically sensible course, and one prominent official even privately praised Uruguay's Defense Minister, a general prominent in the military regime, whose public comments about the pro-referendum movement had been intimidating and insulting. U.S. officials also contended privately that the Uruguayan armed forces had genuinely stopped exerting political influence, although the Defense Minister's comments on the referendum were clearly politically motivated. The United States thus left the impression in Uruguay that its allies of the past, the abusive military, remain its principal allies today.

We recognize the political delicacy of commenting on a matter submitted to a referendum in a friendly democratic country. But at the same time it is necessary to keep in mind that the egregious human rights practices of the military regime in Uruguay must be judged under international human rights law and that the Uruguayan amnesty violated Uruguay's obligations under international human rights instruments ratified by that nation. In such circumstances, the U.S. government, like other governments, has not only the right but also the duty to find ways to express support for the civilized resolution of past abuses and the reparation of victims. Forgetting or ignoring the pain and legitimate legal claims of the victims will not resolve the issue and will not promote reconciliation or respect for law.

Uruguay does not confront the same human rights problems today. There is free expression, and a functioning democratic system. But abuses do occur, and when they do, the impunity enjoyed by the military and police makes it difficult for civilian institutions to pursue and secure justice. During August and September, three men died in suspicious circumstances while in the custody of the Montevideo police. In one of these cases, there was some evidence of an attempted police cover-up, and in another, a police defendant received the public support of the military and police hierarachies in a show of defiance of the judicial branch. Meanwhile, young Uruguayans routinely face arrest on "suspicion," under a law that permits police to conduct wide sweeps in search of petty criminals; many of the young detainees have allegedly faced mistreatment and intimidation. While these problems have not yet been fully investigated by human rights groups, complaints of abuse have increased. In a society which, in the late 1970s, had the highest ratio of political prisoners to population in the world, where torture was practiced at a highly sophisticated level, for months or years on certain prisoners -- and where not a single tormentor of a single political prisoner has been punished or even indicted -- the sort of abuse reported today cannot be dismissed as coincidental; it must be seen in the context of the past sixteen years, and taken seriously. The Bush administration appears not yet to have done so.

UNITED STATES POLICY

From the outset, a major aspect of the work of each of the Watch Committee has been an attempt to make the United States use its power, purse and prestige to promote human rights worldwide. Most of the reports that we have published over the years on particular countries include reviews of United States policy as it affects those countries. In addition, for the past eight years, we have published two reports annually that are devoted entirely to United States policy. One reviews the Administration's record during the year worldwide; the other is a critique of the Department of State's annual volume of Country Reports worldwide.

Human Rights Watch expressed disappointment about the Bush Administration's record in its first year in the 295-page report we published at the end of the year reviewing its record in fifty countries that we regularly monitor. Though the extraordinary changes in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, and diminished concerns about national security, had provided an opportunity to give a more prominent place to the promotion of human rights, this opportunity was not seized by the Bush Administration. We criticized the Administration's policies in China as the leading symbol of this failure, but cited many other examples as well.

Our 216-page critique of the Department of State's Country Reports on human rights was published in conjunction with the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights. In general, we found the reports more professional and more objective than ever before, but noted that political considerations had nevertheless shaped the reporting on several countries and that this had diminished the value of the Country Reports.

In 1989, as in the previous two years, Human Rights Watch's reporting on United States policy on human rights was guided by Kenneth Roth; and our efforts to shape United States policy through contacts with the Administration and with Congress, as in the previous six years, were directed by Holly Burkhalter.
THE CALIFORNIA COMMITTEE OF HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH

The California Committee of Human Rights Watch was formed in April 1987. During its first two years, the Committee held periodic meetings to consider human rights conditions in other countries. As members began to participate in and report on Watch Committee missions to investigate human rights conditions abroad, the group's desire to become active at a professional level increased. In April 1989, in cooperation with the national office, the Committee opened an office in Los Angeles and hired Ellen Lutz, an experienced human rights attorney, as Director.

The purposes of the California Committee are: to support the work of all of the Watch Committees by carrying out tasks that are best undertaken from California; to assume responsibility for Americas Watch's research on Mexico1; and to develop an education and outreach program that will enhance awareness of and support for international human rights in the region.

On behalf of Americas Watch, the California Committee has sent delegates on missions to Chile, Guatemala and Mexico. The mission to Chile occurred in September 1988, in advance of the October 5 plebiscite when Chileans resoundingly voted to end the presidency of General Augusto Pinochet. California Committee participants, Abraham Lowenthal and Clara A. "Zazi" Pope, contributed Op Ed articles on Chile to several newspapers.

In April 1989, Raquel Ackerman of the California Committee participated in an Americas Watch delegation to Guatemala to investigate recent killings and death threats directed at Guatemalan human rights monitors. Following her trip, the California Committee participated in Americas Watch efforts to cut-off U.S. military aid to Guatemala until human rights conditions improve. The Committee also enlisted theater and film artists in protesting the killing of a Guatemalan actor and union activist and seeking protection for his colleagues who have received death threats.

Members of the California Committee have been active in litigation on behalf of family members of individuals who were tortured, "disappeared," or murdered by security forces during Argentina's "dirty war." On behalf of Americas Watch and the ACLU of Southern California, they represented the plaintiffs in Rapaport v. Suarez Mason, one of three civil lawsuits against former Argentine General Suarez Mason, commander of the Armed Forces in the Buenos Aires region from 1977-79. Suarez Mason, who lived clandestinely in the U.S. from 1984-88 was extradited to Argentina where he awaits trial for human rights atrocities. Plaintiffs in the Rapaport action were awarded a default judgment of $60 million. Counsel in the Rapaport action and the two related cases were nominated by the Trial Lawyers for Public Justice for 1989 Trial Lawyer of the Year.

The California Committee's primary activities on behalf of Asia Watch focused on China. In June, San Francisco-based Committee members helped organize a benefit concert at Davies Symphony Hall at which internationally recognized musicians performed. TheCommittee also formed a China sub-group that worked closely with Asia Watch's China researcher, Robin Munro, to develop a set of principles to guide U.S. businesses active in China. San Francisco-based Committee member Dolores Donovan, an expert on the Chinese penal system, testified at hearings held by U.S. Representatives Tom Lantos and Nancy Pelosi on the human rights situation in China and on measures to protect the rights of Chinese students in the United States.

The California Committee has also worked with Helsinki Watch. In September and October, California Committee member Frank Wheat visited Turkey where he met with human rights monitors and leading members of the Bar. Members of the California Committee subsequently took part in a campaign on behalf of Fatma Yazici, the Turkish magazine editor who was sentenced to six years and three months imprisonment for publishing an article that summarized Helsinki Watch's report Destroying Ethnic Identity: The Kurds of Turkey.

In April, several members participated in a meeting of U.S.-based public interest lawyers and Soviet lawyers interested in human rights. The Soviet lawyers expressed interest in receiving reference and training materials used by U.S., state and local prosecutors and public defenders regarding proper arrest, search and seizure, detention, and other pre-trial procedures to aid in their efforts to press for strengthened legislation to protect the rights of the accused. The Committee is compiling materials for use by lawyers throughout the world interested in learning more about U.S. criminal justice procedures.

Since its inception the California Committee has presented frequent public programs on various human rights issues. In September the California Committee hosted a special gallery premiere of Forced Out, a photo exhibition at the Los Angeles Municipal Art Gallery featuring photographs from Carole Kismaric's acclaimed photojournalistic account of the plight of refugees worldwide. Kismaric's work was sponsored by Human Rights Watch. A meeting with public interest immigration lawyers was held in December to discuss ways that Human Rights Watch can better serve the needs of refugees seeking asylum in the United States.

The forty-member California Committee meets bi-monthly. Meetings combine presentations about human rights conditions in countries throughout the world with oversight of the work of the California office. The Co-Chairmen of the California Committee are Stanley Sheinbaum and Jane Olson.

WASHINGTON OFFICE ACTIVITIES IN 1989

As Human Rights Watch grew with the creation of Africa Watch in 1988 and Middle East Watch in 1989, our Washington office activities expanded as well. Human Rights Watch representatives testified before Congress twenty times in 1989 on human rights violations and U.S. human rights policy. Helsinki Watch testified on Turkey, on the situation of ethnic Turks in Bulgaria, and on human rights developments in Eastern Europe and the USSR. Americas Watch testified on U.S. foreign assistance to Latin America, on human rights in El Salvador, Haiti and Cuba, and on U.S. asylum policy towards Nicaraguans and Salvadorans. Africa Watch provided Congressional testimony on U.S. foreign aid to five Africancountries, on human rights in Somalia, Angola and Sudan, and on U.S. policy towards Somalia in the multilateral development institutions. Asia Watch provided testimony on China on three separate occasions, on U.S. foreign aid to selected Asian countries and on human rights in Taiwan and Burma.

Monitoring U.S. policy towards China and providing information on human rights to the Congress were particular priorities of Asia Watch in Washington during 1989. Asia Watch's extensive prisoner lists were eagerly received by Members of Congress and their staffs. Asia Watch actively supported a strong U.S. sanctions policy against China as well as the rights of Chinese students in the United States not to be forced to return home.

The sharp deterioration of human rights conditions in El Salvador was a major focus of Americas Watch's work in 1989. The Washington office became an information clearinghouse for Congress on killings, jailings and developments in the Jesuit case, and the staff closely monitored U.S. policy on El Salvador. The office organized dozens of Congressional letters and cables to the Bush Administration and the Cristiani government on Salvadoran human rights cases.

The Washington Office of Africa Watch established extensive links with human rights leaders in Congress, who welcomed the creation of the group. Africa Watch established particularly close contacts with the Congressional Black Caucus, which has a strong interest in Africa. Africa Watch provided Congress with information on more than a dozen countries, concentrating on Sudan, Kenya and Somalia. Congressional activism on Somalia, aided by Africa Watch, effected a major change in U.S. policy towards the Siad Barre regime. Africa Watch's Washington staff facilitated the visit of South African anti-apartheid leader Albertina Sisulu to Washington where she met with President Bush.

The Washington office began work for the first time on U.S. policy towards countries in the Middle East. Middle East Watch was especially concerned about extensive U.S. support for Iraq through the Export-Import Bank and the commodity credit program, and supported Congressional efforts to limit such benefits to the Sadam Hussein regime. The office also took up cases of human rights monitors and journalists in the Middle East, including several cases involving Palestinians jailed by the Israeli government.

The events in Eastern Europe changed Helsinki Watch's Washington work, which had previously been focused on individual prisoner cases. In 1989, we kept Congress informed on human rights developments in the USSR and Eastern Europe, and encouraged Congressional attention to violent abuses, including the treatment of Turks in Bulgaria and the problem of torture in Turkey.

The Washington office of Human Rights Watch continued its work on labor rights, and pressed the U.S. Trade Representative to implement the laws linking U.S. trade benefits and protection for internationally recognized worker rights, particularly freedom of association. Americas Watch filed formal petitions with the U.S. Trade Representative on labor rights violations in El Salvador and the Dominican Republic.

"The Congressional Friends of Human Rights Monitors" (a bipartisan Congressional group formed by Human Rights Watch in 1985 whichincludes 32 Senators and 143 Members of the House of Representatives) took up the cause of dozens of persecuted human rights monitors in 1989, including cases in Brazil, Bulgaria, Cuba, Guatemala, China, South Africa, Suriname, Guyana, Kenya, Peru, Honduras, Romania, Somalia, El Salvador, Korea, Iran, Philippines, Czechoslovakia, Egypt, India, Nicaragua, Sri Lanka, Sudan and Israel.

A similar organization formed by Human Rights Watch in 1988 to support freedom of the press sent letters and cables on behalf of persecuted journalists and writers in Brazil, Chad, Czechoslovakia, South Korea, Malawi, Paraguay, Turkey, Uganda, Grenada, Taiwan, El Salvador, China, Colombia, Israel, Panama, Sri Lanka, Vietnam, Romania, USSR, Zimbabwe, Liberia, Nicaragua, Philippines and Afghanistan. The group also worked on the case of writer Salman Rushdie.

The Washington office organized extensive activities for ten human rights monitors, who visited Washington in December in connection with the publication of Human Rights Watch's third annual report on the persecution of human rights monitors worldwide. The monitors had visits with Congress, the executive branch, journalists, and with other human rights organizations.

Holly Burkhalter

Washington Director
YUGOSLAVIA

Yugoslavia has long enjoyed a reputation as the most free and open Communist nation, especially in permitting travel and work abroad, and in allowing a degree of freedom of expression and association. In addition, Yugoslavia's position outside the Soviet bloc and its strategic location as a non-aligned nation within Europe have increased its interest to U.S. administrations since the end of World War II. The U.S. traditionally has sought to preserve Yugoslavia's independence from the Soviet Union and to provide incentives for Yugoslavia to adopt a pro-Western foreign policy. As a consequence, successive U.S. administrations have paid scant attention to Yugoslav human rights practices.

The Bush administration has taken a welcome step in reversing this policy of inattention. Warren Zimmerman, the new ambassador to Yugoslavia and formerly U.S. ambassador to the Vienna session of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, has given unprecedented attention to questions of human rights. Changing conditions in the Soviet bloc have also contributed to this new interest, because Yugoslavia no longer has the strategic importance to NATO that it once had. Considerable credit must be given to Ambassador Zimmerman for his willingness openly to confront abuses that the Yugoslav government has long denied exist.

Pressure from the U.S. embassy comes none-too-soon, because evidence indicates that the human rights situation in Yugoslavia is far worse than generally admitted during the past decade. Moreover, the situation in certain regions of the country has worsened dramatically in the past eighteen months, most notably in Kosovo province. During the past several years, Yugoslavia as a whole has held between 1,000 and 2,000 political prisoners, most of them for "verbal crimes" related to nationalist expression.

Most abuses in Yugoslavia stem either from nationalist policies adopted by one or more of Yugoslavia's republics, or by abusive measures adopted by the federal or republic governments to quell nationalist sentiment by one or more nationalities. These violations range from the suppression of speech, including censorship of written materials, and the imposition of prison terms for attempts to express nationalist sentiment or to engage in ethnic association, to outright murder, as happened when government troops opened fire indiscriminately on a crowd in Pristina, Kosovo in early 1989, killing approximately thirty ethnic Albanians. Paradoxically, however, even while abuses mount in the southern province of Kosovo -- as the government of the Serbian republic, of which Kosovo province is part, tightens its grip on the ethnic-Albanian majority in that province -- conditions for free expression and democracy grow in the northern republic of Slovenia. In addition, at the close of 1989, the ruling Yugoslav parliament opened the possibility of a move toward a multi-party system for all of Yugoslavia, although it was not clear how serious the proposal was or what form it might take, since the move appears incompatible with the growth of a police state in Kosovo province.

Ambassador Zimmerman's response to these widely varying human rights conditions in Yugoslavia has been positive, pragmatic and, indeed, courageous. He and the U.S. embassy encouraged the movement toward multi-party democracy, at the republic and federal level, and made clear that in the U.S. view, the Communist Party should lose its mandated primacy, as has happened in Hungary and Poland. At the same time, he personally visited the troubled province of Kosovo -- despite a storm of protest from Serbian leaders in Belgrade, who even called for his ouster -- and made clear U.S. opposition to the abuses that have occurred as the Serbian republic moves to take full constitutional control of the province. Among those abuses in 1989 were the arbitrary arrest and detention of hundreds of prominent ethnic Albanians, some of whom spent months in solitary confinement; the imprisonment of hundreds of ethnic Albanian peasants for verbal statements against Serbia's takeover of Kosovo province; and the firing of many of the ethnic Albanian intellectual and technical elite solely because of their ethnicity. After meeting in Kosovo with ethnic Albanians as well as Serbs and Montenegrins, Ambassador Zimmerman made plain that the United States, while not condoning ethnic discrimination by anyone, considers the Serbian government's current practices to violate the human rights of ethnic Albanians in Kosovo.

This forthright stance by the embassy has, unfortunately, not been completely echoed in the United States. There appears to be a view among U.S. policy-makers that, as occurred during Tito's long and repressive rule, a certain amount of repression by the Yugoslav government is necessary as a practical matter to hold Yugoslavia's fractious ethnic minorities together as a nation. Moreover, the U.S. Congress has sometimes been whipsawed between political pressures from different U.S. emigre constituencies, particularly those of Serbian, Croatian and Albanian background. Congress and the State Department thus have been less than clear-cut in signaling to the Yugoslav government that abuses against any ethnic group are unacceptable.

The Bush administration could take several steps to encourage the Yugoslav government to respect international human rights standards. One is for the State Department to back Ambassador Zimmerman's stance on human rights by linking Most Favored Nation trading status and other U.S. trade benefits to human rights improvements, especially in releasing political prisoners, eliminating laws that permit imprisonment for political and nationalist expression, and encouraging the formation of independent political parties. A second is for the State Department to back Ambassador Zimmerman by welcoming moves to introduce multi-party democracy into Yugoslavia's federal political structure -- moves that are incompatible with the emerging police state in Kosovo. While we take no position on whether Kosovo should be granted greater autonomy, we uphold the right peacefully to urge such autonomy, and oppose the Serbian republic's suppression of such calls. One possibility worthy of consideration is the opening of a U.S. consulate in Kosovo to increase U.S. visibility in the region. There is obviously a need to protect the rights of non-Albanian minorities in Kosovo, but the Bush administration should make plain that such protection may not be had at the price of the human rights of the ethnic Albanian majority.
ZIMBABWE

Relations between the U.S. and Zimbabwe have improved markedly since August 1988, when $17 million in U.S. aid was restored after a two-year cutoff, following a dispute over U.S. policy toward South Africa. The evolution of the peace process in Angola and the holding of elections in Namibia also contributed to a reduction in tensions between the United States and Zimbabwe. These improved relations provided an opportunity for the Bush administration to press the Zimbabwe government to respect human rights. That opportunity has not, unfortunately, been seized. The administration has issued no public protests on human rights violations in Zimbabwe. At best, according to a State Department official, a "continuing dialogue" was maintained on unspecified "pertinent" issues.

Although there has been a reduction in certain violent abuses in Zimbabwe, the administration's silence is not explained by an absence of rights violations. The unity agreement concluded in December 1987 between the ruling Zimbabwe African National Union -- Patriotic Front ("ZANU") and the Zimbabwe African People's Union ("ZAPU") paved the way to an end of the conflict in Matabeleland and a reduction in the most severe abuses in Zimbabwe. Armed rebels had been active in Matabeleland since 1981, and the army massacred thousands of people and tortured and detained hundreds of others in its attempt to quell the insurrection. The unity agreement initially created a wider space for political dissent. There was a mushrooming of public criticism of the government -- through press reporting of corruption, student demonstrations and the formation of a new political party. But the government soon moved to close that space, using its Emergency Powers to arrest and detain critics without charge. Zimbabwe has been governed under a continuous state of emergency for nearly a quarter of a century. Since independence, Parliament has renewed the state of emergency every six months, as required by the Constitution, justifying its action by reference to the constant threat from South Africa.

After the unity agreement, the Chronicle newspaper engaged in an investigative effort with far-reaching political consequences. It exposed a corruption scandal involving a number of government ministers which led to the resignation of several of them, including Defense Minister Enos Nkala. Both the newspaper's editor and deputy editor were later "promoted" out of their editorial positions at the Chronicle. The Chronicle has published no more corruption scoops under its new editor.

In June 1989, fifteen members of the Zimbabwe Unity Movement (ZUM) were arrested in Harare. ZUM was formed in April 1989 by Edgar Tekere, the former ZANU secretary-general, who had been removed from party and government posts. Tekere criticized corruption and the size of the government, and increasingly distanced himself from the government's stated objective of moving toward a one-party state -- an objective that was brought one step closer to fruition at the first ZANU-ZAPU national congress in December when the two parties agreed formally to merge.

Also in June, Kempton Makamure, dean of the Faculty of Law at the University of Zimbabwe, was arrested and detained. Makamure is not known to be a member or supporter of ZUM, but he is a prominent critic of government corruption. In 1988 Makamure had faced criminal charges for allegedly assisting students to draft a manifesto against such corruption. Makamure and the ZUM members were released on June 17, but eleven other ZUM members were arrested in October and detained without charge for several weeks.

The government crackdown on critics also encompassed students. On September 29, students at the University of Zimbabwe attempted to hold a seminar which would have marked the anniversary of a major demonstration against government corruption in 1988. Two hundred riot police and members of the Central Intelligence Organization ("CIO") entered the campus and forced the students to disperse. On October 2, the Students' Representative Council ("SRC") issued a statement protesting the police action. Two days later, police stormed the rooms of SRC President Arthur Mutambara and SRC Secretary-General Enoch Chikweche, and arrested both men. As news of the arrests spread, thousands of students assembled in a spontaneous demonstration. Police were again dispatched and arrested more than 70 students, and the university was temporarily closed. By early October, all students had been released, but the two student leaders were charged with issuing a subversive document under the terms of the Law and Order Maintenance Act.

Trade unionists also found themselves under pressure. On October 6, soon after the Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Unions issued a statement condemning the closure of the university, its general-secretary, Morgan Tsvangirai, was arrested. Despite two rulings by the High Court that his detention was unlawful, he continued to be held by the CIO until his unconditional release on November 14. In September, during a strike by the Posts and Telecommunications Corporation workers, one of the leading strikers, Lovemore Matombo, was also held for a fortnight under the Emergency Powers Regulations.

The situation in the eastern part of the country poses the most serious threat to human rights in Zimbabwe. There, RENAMO, a Mozambican opposition group supported by South Africa, has committed appalling abuses. In its efforts to combat RENAMO attacks, the Zimbabwean government has arrested and tortured civilians and expelled thousands of refugees on the allegation that they were RENAMO supporters. The government appears to be reacting to the RENAMO threat without distinguishing between legitimate political dissent and armed opposition, much as it failed to make the same distinction in the earlier campaign against the "dissidents" in Matabeleland.

Also of particular concern is the ongoing use of torture by the CIO, which has continued to employ many of the Rhodesians associated with gross human rights abuses of the past. Because there has never been a purge of human rights abusers from either the police or the CIO, the culture of torture has survived intact into the post-independence era.

The resumption in U.S. aid to Zimbabwe in August 1988 ended a two-year freeze imposed in July 1986 in response to a Zimbabwe official's speech that was highly critical of the U.S. policy of "constructive engagement" toward South Africa. Zimbabwean leaders generally viewed "constructive engagement" as a tacit alliance with Pretoria. For its part, the Reagan administration was suspicious of the "socialist rhetoric" of those leaders, despite the administration's often-expressed enthusiasm for Zimbabwe's political and economic direction.

President Mugabe responded to the aid cutoff in the following terms:

This is the behavior of a country which in one vein would want us to believe that it does not ever want sanctions [against South Africa] and in another it is imposing sanctions against us for saying it refused to impose sanctions against South Africa. I find that quite ironical....

Mugabe's sense of the ironical stemmed from the Reagan administration's view that an attack on its policy was more worthy of financial penalties than the systematic denial of human rights to millions of black South Africans. But it was also ironical -- or, at least, unfortunate -- that the Reagan administration chose to take umbrage over criticisms of "constructive engagement," rather than pointing to the gross violations of human rights by the Zimbabwean government between 1983 and 1986, the period of the worst human rights violations in post-independence Zimbabwe. Having failed to condemn these abuses, and having withdrawn aid for reasons unconnected with human rights in Zimbabwe, the Reagan administration greatly lessened the possibility of moral leverage over the Zimbabwe government.

The resumption of U.S. aid in August 1988 marked a turning point in U.S.-Zimbabwe relations. The Reagam administration also gained greater moral leverage with the Zimbabwe government by a commendable study and unequivocal condemnation of RENAMO abuses.

The Bush administration's policy toward Zimbabwe in 1989 contained no new initiatives. The diplomatic climate between the two countries continued to improve with the evolution of the peace process in Angola, but U.S. aid to the South African-backed rebels of Jonas Savimbi's UNITA continues to be a stumbling block in relations with Zimbabwe.

In fiscal year 1989, with aid restored, the U.S. provided $5 million through the U.S. Agency for International Development to promote the private agricultural sector in Zimbabwe as well as $240,000 under the International Military Education Training program. Zimbabwe also received some assistance as a member of the Southern Africa Development Coordinating Conference. And in early 1989 Zimbabwe won international approval of political and economic developments in the country with a new investment package, including the prospect of U.S. government-backed insurance for U.S. investors in Zimbabwe by the Overseas Private Investment Corporation.

These developments, as well as the Bush administration's reassessment of "constructive engagement," provide an opportunity for U.S. leverage in Zimbabwe on human rights grounds. We hope that the Bush administration will use this leverage to persuade the Zimbabwe government to conduct a full investigation of past abuses and to introduce institutional guarantees of freedom of speech and freedom from arbitrary arrest and torture.