INDONESIA
The State Department's report forthrightly recognizes "serious human rights problems" in Indonesia. This is a more accurate general statement of the government's human rights practices for 1989 than the statement in last year's report that the government's human rights performance was "mixed." Nevertheless, while the general tone of this year's report is improved over last year's and some inaccuracies have been corrected, significant omissions, understatements and distortions leave a misleading impression of the Suharto government's human rights performance for 1989, and the general level of repression in Indonesia.
On the positive side, specific criticisms in the 1989 report are more direct and forceful. For example, rather than couching its discussion of political killings in terms of the conclusions of human rights groups, this year's report places responsibility for the killing of civilians in southern Sumatra and East Timor directly on the military. Qualifying language is avoided in the discussion of political disappearances and of restrictions on movement (last year's report said there were a "small number" of disappearances and "some" restrictions on freedom of movement). Government statements aimed at disassociating itself from the torture of criminal suspects and prisoners are not repeated in this year's report. In addition, some sections of the 1989 report have been beneficially expanded. As just one example, the discussion of government restrictions on radio and television broadcasts is significantly more developed than in past years.
Commendably, this year's report responds to nearly all of the specific criticisms raised in our 1988 Critique, albeit with mixed results. For instance, the 1989 report corrects a misimpression created in the previous report by noting that while police are sometimes disciplined for torturing criminal suspects, there were "no known instances" of officials being punished for torturing political prisoners or detainees. In some other cases, however, the response to points raised in the 1988 Critique is less satisfactory. For example, this year's report properly notes that the same restraints imposed on former prisoners detained in connection with the 1965 coup attempt are frequently extended to relatives of former detainees, but the report still fails to convey any sense of the repressive atmosphere created by the virtual witch hunt carried on in the name of ensuring a "clean environment." Nor does the report mention the government's practice of using the threat of being labeled an ex-communist as a
104
Indonesia
form of control and extortion, or that many of the same restrictions applied to alleged communists are now being informally imposed on ex-political prisoners from East Timor. Last year we noted that the report would benefit from the addition of information on the circumstances in which people are detained without trial, but no additional details are provided, even though detention and interrogation in local military command posts continued to occur at least as frequently as in 1988.
On the negative side, the report fails to recognize as a serious human rights abuse the forced eviction of thousands of peasants from their lands and homes. During 1988 and 1989, government security forces torched as many as 2,000 homes in Lampung, Sumatra as part of a government reforestation program. In many cases, the crops of farmers occupying lands slated for reforestation were also destroyed. Forced evictions of peasants from lands claimed by the government also occurred in areas of Java. There farmers unwilling to accept government offers of compensation or relocation were harassed, threatened with being labeled as subversives and arrested. The report mentions only the complaints generated by the evictions, and does so merely to commend the government for giving wide publicity to informal expressions of public opinion.
In several instances the report conveys a misleading impression about the level of openness and tolerated dissent in Indonesia. The report cites without comment a statement by President Suharto that comparative studies of foreign ideologies, including communism, are permissible. This statement is largely false, as would be evident if the report included an adequate account of the books banned by the government and the activities of those tried for subversion. The report notes the banning of the novel The Satanic Verses and a children's educational book depicting the human reproductive process, and states that "[sjeveral other foreign and domestic books were banned for assertedly subversive ideological content." However, it gives no examples of other bannings that would reveal the breadth of the government's definition of subversion. Among the seven other newly-banned books -were three manuals on strict adherence to Islamic law and a biography of Tan Malaka, an early Indonesian nationalist and leader of the Indonesian Communist Party. In a speech to public prosecutors in June, the Indonesian Attorney General cited as an example of the Tan Malaka book's subversive content, a sentence from the book stating that hell is an old wives' tale. This, said the Attorney General, was tantamount to advocating atheism. All of Pramoedya Ananta Toer's novels remain banned for supposed
105
Indonesia
communist content and the internationally recognized author remains under town arrest. Similarly, the discussion of activities prosecuted by the government as subversive fails to convey their wide range. The report mentions subversion prosecutions for possession and distribution of "banned books" without mentioning the contents of those books, and for "seeking to establish an Islamic state" without discussion of what that entails.
The discussion of student activism also gives a misleading impression of the limits of permissible expression and dissent. While it is true, as the report states, that student activism "increased markedly in 1989," there were repeated threats against student activists from the military and the government. Official response to student demonstrations was both more frequent and more severe than the report suggests. In April the military issued a statement reminding students that a formal ban on demonstrations issued by the military's internal security apparatus (KOPKAMTIB) in 1970 remained in effect. Later that month. Politics and Security Minister Sudomo told a group of students he believed procedures to "Normalize Campus Life" instituted in 1978 should be reactivated. The report states that student protestors were hospitalized "following a clash with security forces in Yogyakarta," but omits the fact that security forces often break up student demonstrations with bayonets. The report notes that two students were tried on criminal charges for participating in the Yogyakarta demonstration, but fails to mention that students have also been prosecuted for participation in nonviolent protests in Jakarta, Bandung and Ujung Pandang. Moreover, the significance of these prosecutions is not evident without information about the criminal charges filed or the alleged illegal activities, which is completely lacking.
The report states that public discussion of topics the government regards as sensitive, including human rights, "increased significantly in 1989," but fails to give an adequate account of the measures taken by the government to repress such expression. The section on freedom of speech reports an incident in which the Minister of Home Affairs summoned Indonesian members of the International Non-Governmental Organization Forum on Indonesia and publicly reprimanded them for a statement critical of the government. However, no mention is made of the denial of an exit visa to a leading human rights activist, H.J.C. Princen, who had been requested to address the killing of villagers in Lampung and the situation in East Timor before the United Nations Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in
106
Indonesia
Geneva. No less than six warnings were issued for press coverage of student demonstrations; as a result, news organizations often did not cover such demonstrations.
The report downplays the extent to which BAKORSTANAS, the Agency for Coordination of Assistance for the Consolidation of National Security, exercises extra-constitutional powers of arrest and interrogation. It notes that BAKORSTANAS appears to exercise such powers in Lampung and elsewhere, but states that its "precise functions and powers . . . remained unclear." In fact, virtually every political detainee arrested in 1989 was interrogated or initially detained by BAKORSTANAS.
The report overstates the degree to which restrictions on movement within East Timor have been eased. While noting that frequent security checks affect all travel outside Dili, the report fails to disclose that formal restrictions on movement remain in effect in five eastern districts, despite the government's declaration that the province was officially open as of January 1989. The absolute assertion that "[t]he Catholic church operates freely in East Timor" is wrong. The government has banned the performance of mass in Tetum, the local language, and military personnel enter places of worship to monitor compliance. Carlos Xiemenes Belo, the Catholic Bishop of Dili, has reported that authorities organize activities that interfere with village mass.
Also lacking is any discussion of the government backlash following publication in June of a letter written by Bishop Belo to UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar the previous February. In the letter Bishop Belo requested a more active UN role in the decolonization process and asked for a referendum on self-determination. After the letter was made public, government officials vigorously condemned Bishop Belo for having expressed views on non-religious issues. The Bishop was interrogated for three days, and mail and telephone communication was cut off for at least two months. This was followed by a wave of arrests in East Timor and Bali, including persons thought to be connected with the Bishop and other Catholic Church leaders. Eias Pereira Moniz, a Timorese student studying in Bali, was held in a district military command post for more than two weeks before being released. Seven other Timorese students sought political asylum in foreign embassies in Jakarta, but left after the Indonesian government promised them they would not be arrested.
107
Indonesia
The section on political rights and the right of citizens to change their government is an accurate description of the formal legal structure, but fails to give a realistic sense of the degree of control exercised by the army-dominated central bureaucracy. For instance, in recent years the central government has considerably increased its control over village leadership. The heads of administrative villages in urban areas are now all civil servants, which virtually ensures membership in the government's GOLKAR party. And implementation of the Village Law of 1979 has resulted in the installation of rural village heads more loyal to the central government and more dependent on Jakarta for revenue. The report gives some indication of the subordinate role of the legislature, which largely responds to the government's program. In this regard, mention should also be made of the generally vague character of most legislative enactments, and the resulting large degree of law-making discretion exercised by the executive in the formulation of necessary "implementing regulations."
The section on labor rights suffers from confusion of formal legal structures for enforceable rights, and fails to grasp the reality of worker rights in Indonesia. It is true, as the report states, that the government has encouraged the organization of unions and the negotiation of collective bargaining agreements, and that union locals and labor contracts now exist in some private companies in which the government has invested. Indeed, the chairman of the All Indonesia Labor Federation (SPSI) has stated publicly that SPSI hopes to establish union locals in state enterprises, and that the law prohibiting strikes in those and other industries in which they are not now allowed should be reconsidered. However, an appreciation of the significance of these developments requires an understanding of the way the SPSI, the only permitted trade union organization, acts as an instrument of government labor policy; this is completely lacking in the report.
The report's acknowledgment that the SPSI leadership is dominated by GOLKAR does not sufficiently convey the level of government control of SPSI. The formation of the SPSI was orchestrated by the government in 1985, as the country report for 1986 frankly recognized. The man who has served as chairman of SPSI since its creation is not only a member of GOLKAR'S central committee, but was at the time of his appointment chairman of the Indonesian Textile Employers' Federation. The report says the SPSI and its local units elect their own representatives. In fact, union officers at the central, regional and district levels are appointed. Only
108
Indonesia
factory level leaders are elected. Furthermore, there is strong evidence of frequent government interference with local elections. Government control over the SPSI central leadership was manifest last September with the dismissal from SPSI's Guidance Council of two former leaders of SPSI's predecessor organization, the FBSI. The explanation for the dismissals came from the government's Manpower Minister, who said that their thinking was out of line with SPSFs.
The centerpiece of government (and SPSI) labor policy is "Pancasila Industrial Relations." The official interpretation of Pancasila denounces all forms of institutionalized conflict as incompatible with Indonesian values. Pancasila Industrial Relations is based on a supposed harmony of interests among labor, management and government. In practice, Pancasila Industrial Relations has resulted in the obfuscation of the inherent conflict of interest between workers and management.
The report's failure to appreciate the significance of the repressive implications of Pancasila Industrial Relations distorts its discussion of basic labor rights. The report correctly states that "the Department of Manpower vigorously promotes collective agreements as instruments of Pancasila industrial relations." Most of those agreements, however, are standard forms which can be filled out without any collective bargaining. The report says that before a private sector union can legally strike it must inform the Department of Manpower that attempts to resolve disagreements through negotiation have failed, but that approval to strike is not required. In fact, the notice procedures can take three weeks or longer, considerably diluting the right to strike. (The report says 53 mostly "spontaneous" strikes occurred during 1988 and 1989, without explaining whether "spontaneous" means illegal). Moreover, under what amounts to virtually compulsory binding arbitration, the government representative on the tripartite commission to which disputes are referred has the power to compel a resolution. Parties to a dispute can avoid arbitration by the government only if both agree to a private arbitrator. Finally, exercise of this circumscribed right to strike is chilled by the combination of government and SPSI pronouncements that strikes are incompatible with Pancasila Industrial Relations, and the history of repression of strikes by police and security authorities.
The flat assertion that "[f]orced labor is strictly prohibited and does not exist" is doubtful. Military and civilian officials in Irian Jaya cooperate with Jakarta-based timber companies to compel Asmat
109
Indonesia
tribespeople to cut down trees and transport them downstream to waiting ships. There are also documented reports of labor contractors in Jakarta selling girls as domestic servants or to brothels near plantations. Men are sold as agricultural laborers. Contractors hold the identification papers of the workers to prevent them from running away. The government transmigration program raises serious questions of informed consent, and should also be discussed in the section on forced labor.
The section on worker rights is also flawed by two omissions. No mention is made of restrictions on workers in the informal sector, such as street peddlers in Jakarta who have been effectively prevented from organizing. Nor does the section discuss employment restraints imposed on suspected communist party members and their families.
110
