INDIA
While the report on India corrects some of the errors of last year's report, it nevertheless contains misleading statements and significant omissions. This is particularly true of the report's discussion of human rights abuses in Punjab, torture and excessive violence by police, and press freedom. Moreover, the report would have benefitted from more examples of problems cited, so as to provide a fuller picture of the human rights situation in India.
The 1989 report is more candid in its coverage of certain issues raised in last year's Critique. It notes a pattern of extrajudicial killings by security forces, particularly in the Northeast and Andhra Pradesh. It is also more forthright in describing the investigations into the anti-Sikh massacres of 1984 and the May 1987 Meerut massacre in Uttar Pradesh, which have failed to bring successful prosecutions of those persons believed primarily responsible. The section on discrimination has improved considerably and provides a comprehensive account of the status of women, minorities and "scheduled" castes and tribes in India.
The report does not describe accurately the serious human rights situation in Punjab in 1989. It focuses on killings by "separatist terrorists" and largely ignores killings by government security forces. It weakly states that "police officials in the most terrorist-prone districts have been heavyhanded." In fact, there have been a number of deaths in police custody and the report should have cited examples of police abuses. For instance, in January 1989, Professor Rajinderpal Singh Gill died in police custody during what is believed to have been a staged "encounter" by the police. Further, no mention is made of the police practice in Punjab to extort bribes in exchange for freeing jailed political detainees or as an assurance against future harassment, nor of the abusive private armies that the police reportedly established.
Not a single instance of torture in Punjab is described, although many cases have been well documented, such as those in the Justice Sodhi Report to the Punjab government, which was leaked to the media in September. Among the methods of torture employed by the police and described in the Justice Sodhi Report are: beating, placing logs and planks over the thighs, electric shock to the genitals and placing irritating substances like chili in the anus. In Batala District in Punjab, Sikh women have been tortured and molested in detention or after being forced to assemble outside their homes.
99
India
The report accurately describes the unwarranted delays of the government-sponsored investigations into the anti-Sikh riots of 1984, but omits important facts indicative of their ineffectiveness. Even after five years, the police have yet to register initial reports in the case of 1,341 deaths. All six people who were convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment for their role in the killings are now out on bail while their appeals are pending. Furthermore, a social activist involved in the rehabilitation of victims of the riots, Gurcharan Singh Babbar, was branded as a "wanted person" by the Delhi police until the Delhi High Court ordered all charges to be withdrawn. The findings of the Mishra Commission, which exonerated top Congress (I) Party officials in the killings, have been criticized by the press as well as by human rights groups. The Jain-Bannerjee Committee, set up to monitor the government investigations, was declared null and void by the Delhi High Court, which held that no fact-finding committee could be established outside the purview of the Commission of Inquiry Act. The efforts of the Dilip Kapoor/Kusum Lata Mittal Committee to investigate the role of the police were obstructed by the Delhi administration, which was slow to provide the committee with an office or staff.
In its description of the situation in Kashmir, the report should have been more forthright about the indiscriminate manner in which the police have fired into protesting crowds, resulting in deaths and injuries. The report should have related the suspicious circumstances under which Ghulam Mohammed Shah, father of a prominent secessionist leader, died in police custody in Anantnag, Kashmir, in April. The police claim he died of a heart ailment whereas family members allege he was tortured, eventually causing his death. His death raised tensions at protests in April against indiscriminate arrests.
In its discussion of the riots in Bombay concerning Salman Rushdie's The Satanic Verses^ the report repeats unwarranted commendations of the police for riot control by the press and Chief Minister. In fact, the police were criticized for a lack of discipline, specifically for indiscriminately firing into the crowd. Furthermore, the police acted in a manner that suggested bias against the Muslim community: on the day that a Muslim procession defied an order prohibiting an assembly of more than five persons, a procession of a "scheduled" caste community was permitted to march to protest against derogatory references in a magazine article about a past leader.
100
India
The report should have been more explicit on the government's role in the communal riots that took place across northern India in October over whether a 15th century mosque was built on a site considered sacred by Hindus. Home Minister Buta Singh permitted the Vishwa Hindu Parishad, a fundamentalist Hindu organization, to go ahead with the foundation stone ceremony for the construction of the temple at the disputed site, despite the Allahabad High Court's restraining order of August 1989 prohibiting this ceremony. Moreover, there were several instances, such as in Sitamarhi and Munger, where the local administration, despite being given advance warning, had not taken any precautionary measures to avert violence.
The State Department's description of the Bhagalpur riot is accurate, but mistakenly implies that the superintendent of police responsible for local law enforcement was immediately transferred after the riots. The state government initially ordered his transfer, but withdrew the order after Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi was petitioned by supporters of the police superintendent. It should also be noted that 40 policemen posted in Bhagalpur district defied transfer orders issued in November and are now themselves investigating the riots. With respect to the "Logain massacre," alleged police complicity is not mentioned in the report: according to press accounts, the police suppressed the news of the October 28 killings for nearly a month so as to permit the perpetrators to bury the victims. No policemen connected with either the Logain or Bhagalpur killings have been arrested.
The section on arbitrary arrests, in addition to discussing the case of Dr. K. Balagopal, should have noted the detention of Birendra Virodhi. Virodhi, a popular poet, was arrested under the National Security Act and held without trial for attempted murder and sedition after he smeared black ink (an accusation of lying) on the face of the Chief Minister Bhagwat Jha Azad to protest the government's failure to protect members of a "scheduled" caste community from sectarian violence. Virodhi clairned that he was tortured in detention and made to sign a statement sight unseen. Similarly, the section on "disappearances" should have mentioned the highly publicized disappearance in Patna, Bihar, of Lalji Choudhary, a tea stall owner who was reportedly in police custody.
The section on fair public trials fails to discuss the highly controversial execution in January of Kehar Singh for conspiracy to
101
India
murder Prime Minister Indira Gandhi. Indian legal experts have publicly expressed serious doubts about the fairness of Kehar Singh's trial and have argued that the evidence against him was weak. International organizations such as Amnesty International and the International Commission of Jurists have also raised these concerns.
The report, in the freedom of speech and press section, accurately describes the manipulation of radio and television by the government. Nonetheless, the report could have been more candid in its discussion of the Official Secrets Act. For example, the Official Secrets Act was used to suppress protests against the Narmada Valley Project by arresting demonstrators on charges of spying. It was also employed to prevent the movement of villagers in the vicinity of the Project.
There were other developments threatening press freedom that were not covered in the report. For example:
•	In January, noted playwright Safdar Hashmi died as the result of an armed assault by alleged supporters of an independent municipal candidate during the staging of a street play in support of the opposition Communist Party candidate.
•	In April, Indian customs banned the Oxford Illustrated Encyclopaedia: World History from 1800 to the Present Day because it contained sections critical of Indira Gandhi.
•	In May, Roy Matthew of The Hindu was beaten by police while taking photographs of police beating protestors during a demonstration in Kanyakumari in support of environmental protection.
•	A 30% increase in the price of newsprint by the government resulted in protests by press groups and others across the country in June.
•	In September, M. Kasturi, editor of The Hindu, reportedly acceded to government pressure and withdrew a story on the Bofors scandal.
The section on the right of citizens to change their government states that President's rule (state of emergency) was declared in Karnataka in August. President's rule was actually imposed on April 21. The section should also have mentioned the
102
India
widespread "booth-capturing," ballot stuffing and abduction of voters during the general elections in November. Over 130 people died as a result of violence in connection with the elections. The Election Commissioner commendably ordered a re-vote in over 1,000 polling stations after an independent monitoring body and others protested the rigging.
The section on discrimination should have discussed the alarming number of rapes of women in custody and judicial attitudes towards rape victims. For example, in the case of Suman Rani, the Supreme Court reduced the sentence imposed on two constables from ten years rigorous imprisonment to five years for rape because the victim was said to be of "easy virtue." The report should have also noted the high incidence of child prostitution throughout the country despite stringent laws prohibiting such practices. The police are reported to be in connivance with brothel owners and procurers, who kidnap and lure young women and sell them to brothels.
In the section on worker rights, the report should have been more specific with respect to certain violations that took place last year. During an altercation in Chandrapur, Maharashtra, the police fired into a crowd of workers and killed one bystander. Human rights groups believe that the police were acting in support of management against the union. No mention is made of the Narmada Valley Project workers who were prevented from protesting poor working conditions because of the Official Secrets Act. Nor is mention made of the large number of industrial accidents, often resulting in deaths, as a result of industries flouting safety standards.
103
