IRAQ
The State Department's report leads off with the acknowledgement that Iraq's human rights record "remained abysmal in 1989." It proceeds to make clear that the Iraqi government practices torture and summary execution; that freedom of speech, press, assembly and association are "virtually nonexistent"; that Iraqi citizens are denied the right to peacefully change their government; and that political opposition groups are "severely repressed." Despite these welcome unequivocal statements, the 1989 report is a seriously flawed document, marked by omission, understatement, misleading information and minimal analysis, particularly with regard to the Kurdish issue. The abuses perpetrated against Iraq's Kurdish population would have to be one of the major points of analysis in any fair and accurate assessment of Iraq's human rights record, yet the State Department's report gives this issue only a few brief and transparently misleading paragraphs.
The report begins by framing the Kurdish issue exclusively in terms of armed Kurdish insurgency. "Armed Kurdish insurgency continued in 1989," the report declares, "but at a reduced level." It then explains that "in its efforts to crush the rebellion, [the Iraqi government] continued to violate the human rights of elements of the Kurdish population." One conclusion that the report's authors evidently wish to be drawn is that the Kurds have only themselves to blame for whatever human rights violations the Iraqi government may have perpetrated against them, since these violations were brought on by Kurdish armed insurgency. A second is that the Iraqi government's violations affect only "elements" of the Kurdish population. Both are highly questionable, as is the report's assertion that the Kurdish armed insurgency continued in 1989.
The State Department offers no substantiation for its assertion that the Iraqi authorities faced continued armed Kurdish insurgency in 1989. There were no press reports during the year of insurgent initiatives of any significance. Claims issued by spokesmen in Europe for Kurdish insurgent* groups to the effect that armed resistance continues inside Iraqi Kurdistan have generally been dismissed by knowledgeable observers as baseless and meant only to boost the morale of their followers. As best as could be learned, the government of Iraq effectively crushed armed Kurdish resistance in the final months of 1988 through the use of chemical weapons and a massive military sweep through Iraqi Kurdistan. Either the authors of the 1989 report have information about the Kurdish insurgency
111
Iraq
that they have not made publicly available, or they seek to use the allegation of continued insurgency to mitigate criticism of Iraq's repression of its Kurdish minority.
Regarding the massive forced relocation of Iraqi Kurds — in which an estimated half-million people were expelled from their homes and large areas of Iraqi Kurdistan were razed and depopulated — the 1989 report devotes no more than a half-dozen sentences scattered throughout its various sections. This Iraqi government program was one of the major human rights violations anywhere in the world in recent years, yet the State Department's report is equivocal on the issue. In one section of the report it is acknowledged half-heartedly that the relocation of the Kurds "may be considered a form of internal exile." This vague language exempts the State Department from taking a position. Yet, further on in the report additional, and seemingly contradictory, analysis is provided: "The government's harsh campaign to suppress Kurdish rebels, involving mass relocations of Kurdish villagers, has nullified the right of hundreds of thousands of Kurds to choose their place of residence . . . . the forced removals and razing of villages has had a destructive impact on the lives of some half a million Kurds."
The report also cites Iraqi government claims that the program was aimed only at clearing a 30-kilometer zone along the border and was undertaken for security reasons, "to ensure the safety and security of citizens in the border regions. . . and to provide better services to the villagers." According to its own guidelines, the State Department should have assessed the credibility of the Iraqi government's assertion of these benign intentions. It makes no mention of the fact that Kurdish villages well beyond the so-called 30-kilometer "security zone" have been destroyed, and it offers no information about the difficult conditions faced by the displaced Kurdish population. The State Department refrains from commenting about repeated allegations by Kurdish exile groups that large numbers of Kurds have been sent to camps in the Iraqi desert near the Saudi and Jordanian borders. And the report offers no discussion or its own analysis of charges that the Iraqi actions represent a deliberately calculated attempt to undermine Kurdish ethnic identity.
The section of the report which deals with repatriation states that "2,000 Kurds have voluntarily returned from refugee camps in Turkey" but makes no mention of the many reports that some, if not all, of these people were coerced into returning; or of charges, referred to in the 1989 report of the UN Working Group on Enforced
112
Iraq
or Involuntary Disappearances, that a number of those who returned from Turkey and Iran in late 1988 and in 1989 under amnesties were later either detained or executed.
On other issues as well, the report makes a harsh criticism and then retreats. For example, the State Department's discussion of political and extrajudicial killings begins with a straightforward assertion that "[f]or years execution has been an established Iraqi method for dealing with perceived political and military opponents of the government." It goes on to mention cases of execution from 1987 through 1989 reported by Amnesty International, but then casts doubt on Amnesty's independence by stating: "Independent information to confirm the allegations cited in AI reports is not available." This qualification is puzzling since the report states in no uncertain terms that the authorities execute opponents, therefore the need for further independent confirmation of Amnesty's information seems superfluous.
The State Department uses a similar approach in the section on torture. The report states that "it is clear that both physical and psychological torture are used by the authorities, especially the security police." However, the State Department does not make its own assessment of the frequency of the use of torture in Iraq, and distances itself from the specific details it does provide. The report cites Amnesty's findings that "routine torture and ill-treatment of prisoners continued to be widely reported" and that "victims included detainees below the age of 18 who were reportedly beaten, whipped, given electric shocks and deprived of food." It then notes that the Iraqi government "categorically denied any use of torture against children as an official policy or as a practice, and stated its readiness to consider fully any individual allegation with a view to bringing perpetrators to justice." The State Department further distances itself with a final and, in our view, inappropriate comment: "Impartial observers have so far been unable to look into these allegations." Again, since the State Department reports unequivocally that the authorities practice torture, isn't it more likely than not that Amnesty's information is correct? Why is it necessary to discount the reports of Amnesty International by implying that the organization lacks the status of an impartial observer of human rights? The real question that the report should have answered is why "impartial observers" have not been able to investigate.
In the report's introduction, the State Department identifies "continuing disappearances" as an important human rights problem in
113
Iraq
Iraq. Yet, in the section of the report that discusses "disappearances," the State Department inexplicably refrains from offering a clear and detailed statement in its own voice. For example, while the report notes "assertions" by Amnesty International — "that thousands of people arrested over the years by Iraqi security or intelligence forces reportedly have 'disappeared' while in detention, with many feared executed" — it refrains from stating if these assertions are regarded as credible. The State Department should have noted that the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, in its tenth report to the UN Commission on Human Rights, reported that it transmitted in September 1989 a letter to the Iraqi government detailing 65 cases of "disappearances" that occurred between 1979 and 1986, and in a December 1989 letter 64 additional cases of "disappearances" between 1976 and 1988. The Working Group stated that these 129 cases were newly reported. Also, the number of Assyrian Christians who reportedly "disappeared" after returning to Iraq from Iran and Turkey under an amnesty decree is given in the report as 33 persons, although a complaint submitted to the UN Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August 1989 speaks of 33 families.
The report's section on arbitrary arrest and detention is inadequate, mostly because of the omission of pertinent information. The State Department notes, correctly, that Iraqi security police "not only make arbitrary arrests but also secretly detain suspects, whose fate sometimes becomes known only after they have been executed." The State Department should have also cited in this section the 71-page February 1989 report issued by Amnesty International, Children: Innocent Victims of Repression. The document includes in an appendix the names of 344 children and young people detained by the Iraqi authorities, most of whom "disappeared" in detention. Amnesty also lists the names of 31 children under the age of 18 when they were arrested and who were later reportedly executed. Among other findings. Amnesty notes the following: "Children have frequently been the victims of human rights violations in Iraq .... They have been imprisoned as 'hostages' in lieu of their parents or relatives who were being sought by the authorities .... Opponents and critics of the government have frequently had to pay a price for their activities in terms of the welfare — and sometimes the lives — of their children."
The report's section on denial of a fair public trial is poor. First, the report is misleading in its discussion of security cases heard by the Revolutionary Court and temporary special courts. By stating
114
Iraq
that security cases include "espionage, treason, smuggling, currency violations and drug trafficking," the State Department implies to the uninformed reader that defendants accused of political offenses are not brought before these special courts. Second, the State Department offers none of its own information or analysis about these courts, and couches its reporting in tentative language: the right of defense in the special courts "is said to be severely restricted" and the courts "are apparently exempt from constitutional safeguards of defendants' rights". There is no mention or assessment of Amnesty's findings that many executions, especially of political prisoners and army deserters, occur secretly in prisons, but only one statement that "there are reports that executions take place shortly after trial." Third, the report makes no mention of Amnesty International's charges that most political prisoners are tried in special courts where the proceedings typically are held in camera; that access to lawyers is restricted, often to the day of the trial only; and that, according to Amnesty, "defendants charged with capital offences are frequently denied their legal right to call witnesses on their behalf or to submit evidence refuting the charges." Fourth, while the report notes that confessions extracted by torture are admissible, it does not state that confessions obtained under torture are often the basis for conviction (this point is also not mentioned in the section of the report that discusses torture). Last, the report does not discuss the fact that judgments of special courts, especially those held in secret session, are difficult if not impossible to obtain, precluding any effective monitoring of the functioning of the legal system as it affects the rights of political prisoners and other detainees in Iraq.
The report fails to mention the several dozen Iraqi laws that impose the death penalty. In Iraq, one can be legally put to death, for example, for insulting the President of the Republic, for espousal of Zionist principles, for recidivism to the Bahai faith, and for leaving the Ba'th party to join another or for persuading someone else to do so. The proliferation of Iraqi death penalty laws represents a clear violation of the right to life and stands in stark contravention of Iraq's obligation, under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which it is a p^rty, to limit the death penalty provision only to the most serious crimes. The State Department should have mentioned the February 1989 document issued by Amnesty International on the death penalty in Iraq, which reported that among those sentenced to death and executed have been members of proscribed political parties, suspected opponents of the government, students, and civilians arrested as hostages, including children. The Amnesty report also stated that the bodies of executed prisoners "have
115
Iraq
been returned to their families bearing the marks of torture, including the fingernails extracted and the eyes gouged out."
The report's section on governmental attitude regarding international and nongovernmental investigation of alleged violations of human rights makes no mention of the Iraqi government's continued failure to respond to yearly requests made by the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances for authorization to visit Iraq. The report's statement that "the government allows one human rights group to operate inside Iraq, but this is largely under government control" is at best misleading. The organization in question. Human Rights Association in Iraq, is a creation of the Iraqi government, is not known to have undertaken any serious human rights work in Iraq, and has not established cooperative ties with human rights organizations elsewhere. The report's remark that the Iraqi government "has rarely cooperated" with private human rights groups or international organizations in investigating practices in Iraq is sheer understatement. No human rights group has ever been allowed to visit Iraq for the purpose of conducting investigations. In 1989, the government of Iraq ignored requests by the Parliamentary Human Rights Group (UK) and Middle East Watch (US) to send representatives to Iraq to examine human rights conditions there. This information should have been included in the report.
The report's section on freedom of speech and the press states that the government "strictly controls speech and all information media" and that "Ia]ll publications are subject to censorship." While this clear and straightforward description is welcome, the report should have included pertinent information about the Iraqi Press Code. According to the London-based Article 19, the Press Code lists 12 proscribed topics, including "[wjhatever injures the President of the Republic." An additional seven items need pre-publication approval, including "any statement or word attributed to the President of the Republic, members of the Revolutionary Command or the Prime Minister, or those who act on their behalf. The report also omits mention of the cases, publicized by Article 19, of six journalists arrested in 1979 and 1980, whose whereabouts continue to be unknown. Their names are: Dr. Hussain Qasim El-Aziz, Muhammed Karim Fathallah, Zuhair Al-Jassani, Abdul Salam Al-Nasiri, Dema Rashid and Dara Toufiq.
In the section on arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home or correspondence, the report limits itself to stating only that
116
Iraq
"many Iraqis believe" that telephone conversations and mail are monitored, although foreign visitors to Iraq report pervasive monitoring of all electronic and postal correspondence. The report also states that "there have been reports of forced entry and arrest by the security police," but makes no assessment of the credibility of such reports or whether the State Department believes that this was a pattern of abuse in Iraq in 1989 and prior years.
The report also speaks in understanding terms about the Iraqi government's denial of freedom of emigration and travel abroad: "Because of the drain on the economy caused by the war and reconstruction, permission to travel abroad is restricted to a few categories of Iraqis. . . ." The reader is left to conclude that the sole reason for this policy is the legitimate desire of a government to save foreign exchange. No mention is made of the fact that permission to emigrate or to travel abroad has been denied even in cases where expenses would have been paid by organizations or individuals outside Iraq, with no depletion whatever of the government's foreign exchange reserves. The report also asserts categorically that "the government has ceased expelling Iraqis of supposed Iranian descent. . . ." How this is known is not explained; Iraqi exile groups charge that the Iraqi government did in fact continue deporting its own citizens during 1989.
The State Department's report clearly suffers from fractured analysis and a minimalist approach to the provision of information relevant to the continuing pattern of human rights abuses in Iraq. On the one hand, its authors knew quite well that the government of Iraq is a major violator of human rights and that a report that did not state this would lack even marginal credibility. On the other hand, the authors refrained from issuing a totally candid report and masked a full, detailed explanation of much of what they themselves felt compelled to condemn as abysmal.
117
