ISRAELI-OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
The State Department's assessment of human rights conditions in the occupied territories is disappointing. The report is marked by some of the same flaws we criticized last year. It also departs from the more balanced approach and tone which we found and applauded in the 1988 report. The difference is immediately apparent by comparing the introductions to the two reports. In the 1988 report, the State Department found "a substantial increase in human rights violations" as the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) responded to the widespread civilian unrest of the Palestinian uprising, or intifada, which began in December 1987. In the 1989 report, however, the State Department refrains from offering, as it does in other country reports, an overall assessment of the scope or frequency of human rights violations. State Department sources interviewed by U.S. journalists confirmed in February 1990 that the office of Richard Schifter, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, "cut out the wealth of details and statistics on
'	I
beatings and other excesses and played up intra-Palestinian violence." By many accounts, including those of the U.S. Consulate staff in Jerusalem,^ the human rights situation in the territories worsened in 1989. Instead of saying so in a straightforward and clear manner, the report instead chooses the language of diplomacy, noting that the human rights situation in the territories "remains a source of deep concern to the United States."
The report's discussion of the use of excessive force by the Israeli security forces is marked by a lack of detail, even though statistics and other information from both Israeli and Palestinian human rights groups were widely publicized and easily obtainable. The report's introduction states tersely: "Overall, there were more Palestinian deaths in 1989 than in 1988." What the State Department does not say is that more Palestinians were shot and killed by the Israeli security forces in the intifada's second year (285) than in the first (270), and that this occurred despite the fact that, in the words of former Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin in June 1989, "[w]e have managed to put an end to the major violent demonstrations, which are
^T. Phelps, "U.S. Official Toned Down Israel Critique," New York Newsday. Feb. 22, 1990.
2
See J. Anderson and D. Van Atta, "Human Rights Report Irks Israel--Again," Washington Post. Feb. 20, 1990.
118
Israeli-Occupied Territories
virtually nonexistent." The report also neglects to mention that in the intifada's second year there was a dramatic rise in the number of Palestinian children aged 16 or under who were killed by Israeli security forces. It should have noted that, in 1989, 80 children under the age of 17 were shot and killed, compared to 51 in 1988; and that 28 children under the age of 12 were killed in 1989, compared to 9 in
1988.
Regarding these shooting deaths, the State Department uses statements that move away from the harder-hitting findings of the
1988	report. For example, the 1988 report stated: "Soldiers frequently used gunfire in situations that did not present mortal danger to troops, causing many avoidable deaths and injuries." The
1989	report states: "IDF guidelines often were not followed, resulting in avoidable deaths and injuries."
The State Department again this year appears to have difficulty addressing the issue of so-called "non-lethal" plastic bullets used by the Israeli security forces. We criticized the 1988 report for its abbreviated and misleading discussion of plastic bullets, which had caused the death of 47 Palestinians between August 1988 and January
1989.	In this year's report, plastic bullets are mentioned only once, and inadequately: "Misuse of plastic and rubber bullets continued to result in death and serious injury." The State Department did not note that, according to the IDF's own data, 125 Palestinians were killed by plastic bullets between July 20, 1988 and January 8, 1990. It also did not point out, as it should have, that the number of Palestinians killed has increased rather than decreased since the introduction of this so-called "non-lethal" ammunition, which former Defense Minister Rabin announced was designed to reduce fatalities.
To the State Department's credit, the analysis of the IDF's investigation and prosecution of misconduct by its soldiers and officers was not softened. The 1988 report found that there were "many cases of unjustified killing which did not result in disciplinary actions or prosecutions" and that when soldiers were held accountable, punishment was lenient. This year's report reaches a similar conclusion: "[R]egulations often were not vigorously enforced, many cases of unjust killing did not result in disciplinary action, and punishments were often lenient."
The report's treatment of political and extrajudicial killings is uneven, and concentrates on the killing of Palestinians by other Palestinians. In both 1988 and 1989, the State Department found that
119
Israeli-Occupied Territories
there were "many cases" of unjust or unjustifiable killing of Palestinians by the Israeli security forces. By the State Department's own definition, extrajudicial killings include cases of "deliberate and illegal use of lethal force by the police against criminal suspects". Despite this, the report does not discuss extrajudicial killings and focuses brief attention on political killing only, stating that "[pjolitical killing is not condoned by Israel.... [I]n 1989 there were allegations that Palestinian activists were intentionally killed by Israeli security forces or Palestinians working for them." No additional details about the allegations are supplied, which included specific cases of shooting deaths investigated and publicized by both Amnesty International and Al-Haq, the Ramallah-based human rights organization. The short discussion of the issue ends with a single sentence: "Israel categorically denied these charges."
The State Department notes correctly that in 1989 there was a "significant increase" in the use of force by Palestinians against other Palestinians, including the killing of 128 people and the injury of many more. While the report acknowledges that "[m]any of the victims were working with the Israeli security authorities," it refrains from assessing two controversial issues related to the killing of so-called "collaborators." First, it repeats without comment a view much-publicized by some Israeli officials: "Israelis state that a number of the victims of intra-Palestinian violence have been killed for seeking to express moderate views." The State Department does not say whether it finds this contention supportable by the facts. Second, the report states that "Palestinians claim that some of [the victims] were armed and provided information leading to arrests of uprising activists." The report should have noted that, by their own admission, Israeli military and security forces have supplied weapons to some Palestinians, and rely on them to provide intelligence and to identify suspects wanted for arrest. The Israeli practice of recruiting and arming certain Palestinians to carry out security force activities in the West Bank and Gaza Strip is a contributing factor in the escalation of violence. It should have been noted in the report, rather than described by the State Department as a "claim" by Palestinians, which implies that confirmed facts are mere allegations.
The State Department, as it did in both the 1988 and 1987 reports, does not provide its own assessment of continuing and persistent allegations of torture, beating and other forms of abuse by the Israeli security forces against Palestinian prisoners, detainees and other residents of the territories. It notes, for example, that "reports continue of harsh and demeaning treatment of prisoners and
120
Israeli-Occupied Territories
detainees" but does not say if it views any of these reports as credible. Curiously, the State Department refuses to even use the word torture in its discussion of allegations by others. The continuing reluctance of the State Department to comment in its own voice about the actual practice of torture in the territories stands in sharp contrast to its straightforward assertions about allegations of torture in this year's reporting on Egypt (reports of torture are termed "convincing") and Iraq (". . . it is clear that both physical and psychological torture are used by the authorities . . . ."). The State Department notes that at least 10 Palestinian deaths in 1989 "can be attributed to beatings." However, it further notes that there are "allegations of beatings of suspects and detainees, including during house searches," without providing its own assessment of these claims. The report also says that "Palestinian and international human rights groups claim that other cruel practices — including enforced standing in one position for prolonged periods, hooding, sleep deprivation, and cold showers --have continued", but the "claims" are not given weight by the State Department's own assessment about whether these practices in fact take place. Instead, the reader is provided with only one vague sentence: "Physical and psychological pressures are particularly severe in incommunicado detention during investigation and interrogation."
Again this year, the State Department does not fully describe the October 1987 report of the government-appointed Landau Commission, which was formed in June 1987 to investigate the interrogation methods used by the Shin Bet, Israel's domestic intelligence service. As we wrote last year, the Commission recommended that Shin Bet interrogators be permitted to use "a moderate amount of physical pressure." The State Department should have made it clear that the term "moderate physical pressure" was not defined in the public section of the Commission's report. (The Landau Commission's findings were published in a two-part report: a public document, and a second part which was not publicly released "in order to preserve State security.") This is significant because the Israeli Cabinet adopted the Commission's findings and recommendations in November 1987, which the State Department also neglects to mention. This calls into question the 1989 report's unequivocal assertion that: "Torture is forbidden by Israeli law, and Israeli authorities assert they do not condone its use in the occupied territories." The Cabinet's official endorsement of the use of moderate physical pressure against in-custody detainees contravenes the universally recognized right to be free from "cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment" and should have been so noted by the State Department.
121
Israeli-Occupied Territories
As we found last year, this year's report is uneven in its coverage of administrative sanctions imposed on Palestinian residents of the territories by the Israeli military. First, the reader has no sense of how the Israeli authorities' use of administrative sanctions in 1989 has affected the lives of hundreds of thousands of people. Among these sanctions are curfews, including extended curfews, on towns, villages and refugee camps. Although the State Department notes that curfews "caused severe hardship" and that there were "hundreds" of them in 1989, "some lasting several weeks," it should have noted that more than 700,000 Palestinian residents of the Gaza Strip lived for most of 1989 under a continuous dusk-to-dawn curfew. It also should have mentioned that curfews are sometimes accompanied by disconnection of telephones, electrical lines and the water supply, rather than simply noting without comment that: "Telephone service to specific areas is sometimes interrupted by the authorities." The report does not mention if the State Department considers these cutoffs of essential services collective punishment.
The State Department does not provide an accurate picture of the restrictions imposed on the foreign travel of Palestinian residents of the territories, who must first obtain a laissez-passer travel document from the Israeli authorities in order to leave Israel. The State Department misrepresents the situation when it says: "Israel imposed travel restraints on some political activists and on family members of some deportees." No additional information is provided to the reader. It should have mentioned that some Palestinians in 1989 were simply prohibited from traveling abroad, without reasons being provided. This was the case with the coordinator of fieldwork for Al-Haq, who applied in May for permission to travel to a human rights conference in France in June. He was repeatedly summoned to the military commander's office; in June he was informed that his application to travel was rejected, without any reasons provided. The State Department also neglects to report that in 1989 the Israeli authorities imposed travel restrictions on entire towns and villages in the West Bank. The Association for Civil Rights in Israel (ACRI) petitioned the High Court of Justice in the cases of the village of Kafr Malik and the town of Qabitiya after the authorities had not permitted any of the residents to travel abroad for over one year. The exit ban was lifted in October, three days before the scheduled court session. Similar bans were imposed during the last six months of 1989 on the villages of Batir, Taluza, Burqin and others, which should have been described in the report.
122
Israeli-Occupied Territories
The report correctly notes that as of January 1, 1990, 1,271 Palestinians were being held under administrative detention, but its discussion of the practice of imprisonment without charge or trial is abbreviated. The Israeli government states that administrative detention is used against individuals "because of the danger they pose to the lives and safety of others, and because of their ongoing involvement in violence-related acts." The report repeats the government's assertion that administrative detainees are interned not for "political acts, but only for hostile and illegal activity." Last year's report challenged this assertion, specifically mentioning that Israel detains "[mjany individuals, including academics, journalists, and human rights workers, who have not engaged in or advocated violence or other acts threatening security." Regrettably, the 1989 report retreats from this straightforward finding and substitutes more tentative language: "[I]n a number of cases persons appear to have been detained for nonviolent political activities." It fails to mention that Palestinian lawyers, doctors, academics, trade unionists, journalists and others were imprisoned without charge in 1989, and omits mention of any individual cases. Among those detained in 1989 were: Dr. Ghassan Andoni of Beit Sahour, a participant in that town's non-violent tax revolt that captured international attention, who was administratively detained in the fall of 1989; Shawan Jabarin, a human rights fieldworker for Al-Haq, who was arrested in October and issued a one-year administrative detention order; Adnan Abu Leila, a prominent defense attorney from Nablus, was administratively detained for three months beginning in September; and Muhammed Shadid, a defense lawyer from Tulkarem, was placed in six months administrative detention in March.
Since the Israeli authorities admit that administrative detention is used in place of trials in a court of law, and since, as the report notes, the amount of time that a detainee can be imprisoned without charge or trial was doubled in 1989 from 6 to 12 months, the State Department should have devoted more than one brief sentence to the use of "secret" evidence in administrative detention proceedings. It should have noted that most Palestinians are detained on the basis of evidence that the military authorities contend must be kept secret in order to protect the lives of informers and other intelligence sources, leaving the detainees and their lawyers unable to confront the general allegations offered in appeal hearings before military judges.
The 1988 report's clear, informative discussion of the Israeli military's practice of bulldozing, dynamiting or sealing Palestinian homes is replaced this year by text that obfuscates major issues. The
123
Israeli-Occupied Territories
report correctly notes that house demolition and sealing is carried out only against Palestinian residents of the territories and not Jewish settlers, and that these measures are "nonjudicial administrative punishments." It does not highlight, as it did last year, that the places of residence of individuals suspected but not convicted of security offenses are demolished or sealed, sometimes even before an arrest. In the overwhelming majority of cases, demolition orders are carried out prior to conviction. It also should have noted that the majority of the demolition cases involved the parents' houses for suspicion against their sons, and that the IDF demolished homes because family members were on "wanted" lists. The report also neglects to mention that in 1989 the IDF broadened the use of demolition to include the destruction of a home if one of its residents was merely suspected of throwing a Molotov cocktail or stones; that in January 1989 the IDF demolished the homes of three young men suspected of stone throwing; and that B'Tselem, the Israeli human rights group, cited several cases where suspicion of incitement and resisting arrest were reasons given for issuing demolition orders.
The State Department declined again this year to say straightforwardly that the destruction and sealing of homes is collective punishment that violates Article 33 of the Fourth Geneva Convention, which reads: "No protected person may be punished for an offence he or she has not personally committed. Collective penalties and likewise all measures of intimidation or of terrorism are prohibited." Instead, the report notes that: "The United States believes demolition and sealing as punishment of families contravenes the Fourth Geneva Convention. Israel, however, holds that the Convention permits demolition under imperative military considerations." This juxtaposition of differing opinions without assessing which interpretation is appropriate based on the facts leaves the impression that each interpretation of the Convention is equally valid.
The report records only 170 Palestinian houses demolished or sealed in 1989; B'Tselem documented, through November, 216 destroyed or sealed homes. In contrast to the 1988 report, which noted that 1,000 people were affected by the 154 demolitions and sealings that took place that year, this year the State Department dropped any mention of the number of Palestinians who suffered from house demolition and sealing. B'Tselem estimated that 2,400 people were affected in 1989.
124
Israeli-Occupied Territories
The report notes that 26 Palestinians were deported in 1989 following unsuccessful appeals to the High Court of Justice yet fails to mention that among this group were academics, journalists and trade unionists. The report states, correctly, that: "[tjhe deportation process is characterized by a lack of formal charges and the use of secret evidence not disclosed to the suspect or his attorney." It should have added that none of the 58 Palestinians expelled since the beginning of the intifada was tried, convicted and sentenced before a court of law. The report also misleads the uninformed reader when it states without further elaboration: "Palestinians under deportation orders may appeal to the Israeli High Court." The appeals process, however, is fundamentally flawed because it denies deportee-designates and their attorneys access to the "secret" evidence that forms the basis for expulsion orders. The report's comment that the High Court has never overturned such an order should have been analyzed in this context.
The report barely comments about the military detention center at Ketziot in the Negev Desert within Israel proper. Last year's report noted that the number of Palestinians from the territories detained there in 1988 ranged from approximately 1,200 to nearly 3,000. The 1989 report comments only that "serious overcrowding continued," making no mention of the approximately 4,200 prisoners held at Ketziot by early December 1989 in an enlarged facility. The report failed again this year to mention the extreme isolation of the detainees and prisoners held at Ketziot and that there have been no family visits since the facility opened in March 1988. Reports from lawyers and others, including the International Commission of Jurists (ICJ), continued throughout 1989 about inadequate health care, sanitary facilities and protection against the rigors of the harsh desert climate; shortages of food and water; and the lack of materials for intellectual, educational and recreational pursuits. The report also should have mentioned that lawyers' visits are severely restricted, with attorneys often allotted only 15 minutes to see 15 clients, in a setting that is not private. Detainees and attorneys also continued to complain about long delays in receiving clothing packages and correspondence from families, about severe limitations on the number and types of books allowed, and about seemingly arbitrary interruptions in the distribution of daily newspapers and the playing of radio news and music from the camp's loudspeakers.
The report only briefly mentions Megiddo prison, which is also located in Israel proper. It should have noted the study released
125
Israeli-Occupied Territories
by the Israel branch of Defense for Children International, prepared in part by Dr. Menahmen Horowitz, the dean of Hebrew University's law faculty. The report found that 65 Palestinian minors aged 14 to 17 (out of a total prison population of 1,400) were held in overcrowded conditions with inadequate sanitary arrangements, subjected to harsh interrogation before reaching prison and permitted family visits only once a month.
The report's discussion of arrest, detention and the military courts is uneven.
** The report correctly notes that any Israeli soldier can arrest, without a warrant, anyone suspected of having committed a security offense in the territories, and that detainees "are often not told the reasons for their detention." To its credit, the State Department accurately notes that security offenses are "broadly defined" and "cover Palestinian nationalist activity of a nonviolent character."
** The section on the military courts suffers from a major omission. The State Department does not mention the two boycotts of the military courts in 1989 by West Bank and Israeli lawyers: the first from January 2 until March 12; the second from July 20 until August 20. The boycotts were called to focus attention on problems related to the functioning of the military courts, after the lawyers found that their repeated complaints to the authorities were unsuccessful. The lawyers' grievances included: lack of immediate notification of arrest and the location of detention; denial of access to clients, often in an arbitrary fashion; severe restrictions on the length of lawyer-client meetings; systematic denial of bail; extended pre-trial detention; and arbitrary sentencing.
** Last year's report understated the problem of notification of arrest: "At times families of some detainees did not know if or where relatives were being held." The 1989 report states the problem in clearer terms: "Denial of notification of arrest to immediate family members, attorneys, and consular officials is common and under law can be extended for up to 14 days." In mentioning that in September Israel announced improved family notification procedures, the State Department should have noted that the improvements came as a result of a lawsuit filed with the High Court of Justice by ACRI.
** The report is misleading when it states without further explanation that: "Suspects are entitled to counsel." The report should have noted that detainees are denied access to their lawyers until the
126
Israeli-Occupied Territories
period of interrogation is completed, which can last from 15 to 30 days after arrest, or even longer.
** In a previous section, the report notes that: "The normal pretrial detention period is 60 days." And in its discussion of denial of fair public trial, the report seems to justify this by explaining: "[I]n 1989 there were long delays before trial because military courts were overburdened by the large number of uprising-related security cases." The State Department also should have cited the complaints of Palestinian and Israeli lawyers practicing in the military courts, who reported that since December 1988 detainees have been held for three months, on average, between arrest and the first trial date. The lawyers also found that prosecution witnesses often do not appear for scheduled court appointments, resulting in the postponement of trials and longer periods of pre-trial detention for their clients. As West Bank lawyers said in a press release in January 1989: "It does not pay to plead innocent before a military court .... In all cases, the detainee stays in detention for a period of time that can be longer than the period he would have served if he had in fact pleaded guilty to the offence charged to him." The report should have considered long pre-trial detention periods in light of its earlier observation that "[sjecurity detainees are usually denied bail."
** The report significantly understates the element of coercion which is a systemic part of Israel's treatment of Palestinian suspects arrested for security offenses. As noted elsewhere in the report, suspects "normally" are not allowed access to counsel until "after the interrogation is completed and a confession, if obtained, has been made." Yet the report remarked in one section that, "[mjost convictions in security cases are based on confessions," while in another section several pages later the following qualifying statement appears: "[t]he absence of bail, long pretrial delays, and physical and psychological pressures increase the likelihood of confessions." Even this observation is a significant change from the 1988 report, which read: "There are numerous affidavits that confessions are often obtained by physical and psychological coercion. The 1987 Landau Commission report confirmed such practices on the part of the Shin Bet, as well as systematic perjury before the military courts." Evidence of physical and psychological coercion during interrogation continued to mount in 1989 (as noted above in the discussion of torture) and should have been independently assessed by the Department of State.
127
Israeli-Occupied Territories
** The report omits relevant information about confessions. While it correctly states that confessions "are usually recorded in Hebrew, which many defendants are unable to read," it should have made clear that interpreters are not provided to read these confessions to detainees before they sign them. The ICJ found that this violates Article 72 of the Fourth Geneva Convention.
The report is misleading when it states: "Forced entries, which are a regular part of IDF operations, have resulted in beatings, destruction of property, and arrests." The report should have stated that forced entries have included beatings, destruction of property and arrests as integral aspects of IDF operations, not, as the State Department seems to imply, as unintended consequences. The report also should have noted that forced entry resulted in Palestinian deaths and injuries in 1989. One incident, publicized by Knesset member Haim Oron, occurred on December 22 in the West Bank village of Jaba. Witnesses charged that the IDF, trying to arrest a wanted man, sprayed gunfire into a room in which he was barricaded along with his family. The suspect, 22-year-old Muhammad Alawneh, was shot in the legs, his 15-year-old sister, Shifa, was killed; two other siblings, one four years old, the other 18, were wounded. In affidavits taken by ACRI, the family said that the shooting continued even after family members shouted to the soldiers that there were casualties. The Jerusalem Post reported that: "Windows of the room were covered with metal grilles, which would have made it impossible for the wanted man to escape."
As we found last year, there are major omissions in the discussion of worker rights. The report misleads when it states, using identical language as in last year's report, that: "Israeli authorities, citing security concerns, actively discourage union activities in the West Bank." It also notes, further on in the discussion, that: "Union leaders have been among those detained for alleged security offenses." There is no mention that in August five Palestinian trade union leaders were deported. The report also neglects to mention that, as reported by Al-Haq, in 1989 "dozens of trade union activists have been placed under administrative detention . . . and in early 1989, at least 26 trade union offices were still closed under orders issued in 1988, although most of these have now reopened."
A last point is related to the report's coverage of the government's attitude regarding international and nongovernmental investigation of alleged violations of human rights. In its notes on preparation of the country reports, the State Department says that it
128
Israeli-Occupied Territories
is "particularly appreciative of, and make[s] reference in most reports to, the role of nongovernmental human rights organizations, ranging from groups in a single country to major organizations that concern themselves with human rights matters in larger geographic regions or over the entire world." The 1988 report on the occupied territories noted that: "The Government of Israel stepped up pressure on indigenous human rights organizations in 1988." The State Department mentioned two of these organizations by name: Al-Haq, which is based in Ramallah, and the Palestine Human Rights Information Center, which has offices in East Jerusalem. In contrast, in the 1989 report the State Department appears to go out of its way to avoid mention of Palestinian human rights groups by name. The report states: "Individuals working for a prominent Palestinian legal rights organization were detained, beaten, prevented from traveling freely, and harassed at military checkpoints." Clearly, the State Department is referring to Al-Haq; it should have identified the organization. Also, additional details should have been provided, as is the methodology in other country reports, when members of locally based human rights groups are arrested, detained or beaten by the authorities. In particular, the case of Al-Haq fieldworker ShaVan Jabarin should have been highlighted. In October, he was arrested and beaten, once severely, and ordered to serve a one-year term of administrative detention.
129
