JAMAICA
The State Department's 1989 report on Jamaica continues the practice, begun two years ago, of presenting a reasonably accurate picture of human rights in Jamaica. Jamaica is correctly described by the State Department as a parliamentary democracy with a constitution that protects the rights of its citizens. Freedom of expression, assembly, association and religion are respected. Jamaicans are free to criticize their government and to elect a new one. An independent human rights group monitors abuses, and the government cooperates with international human rights monitoring groups.
Human rights abuses, however, continue to occur. The 1989 report again correctly identifies the excessive use of lethal force by police officers as "the country's most persistent human rights problem" (a conclusion that was supported by an Americas Watch fact-finding mission to Jamaica in January 1990). Earlier reports had minimized killings by police officers and ascribed them to poorly trained police officers.
The 1989 report states:
The incidence of violent crime remains high in Jamaica. There continue to be credible reports of excessive use of lethal force by the police officers in dealing with suspected criminals. According to police statistics, officers killed 91 persons and wounded 63 in shooting incidents through the end of August 1989.
In January 1990, Police Commissioner Herman Ricketts informed Americas Watch that police officers had shot and killed 162 people in 1989. For the 10 year period from 1979 through 1988, police officers, according to their own statistics, shot and killed an average of 208 people a year. 1989's figure of 162 fatal shootings is an improvement, but is still extraordinarily high.
The report goes on to state: "The disparity between the ratio of persons killed by police to those wounded has led several human rights groups to charge that some officers are engaging in summary executions of suspects." The 1989 figures continue to support this analysis. While police fatally shot 162 people, they wounded only 109. On the other hand, the number of police shot and killed in the line of duty in 1989 was II, but 21 police were wounded. This ratio
130
Jamaica
of woundings to killings of police, approximately two to one, is in the range of what one would expect; the ratio of approximately 5.5 woundings to every eight killings of civilians by police, on the other hand, again suggests a practice of summary executions. The 1988 report, unlike this year's, did not include a discussion of this disparity.
This year's report, unlike last year's, properly includes the discussion of excessive lethal force by police in the section entitled, "Political and Extrajudicial Killing." It also refers to "abuses by police," rather than, as last year's report did, "alleged abuses."
The report correctly asserts that "local and international human rights groups have criticized the fact that the Jamaica Constabulary Force [the police] itself is responsible for investigating police abuses," and that, although the current government has announced plans "to establish an independent body to review complaints against members of the force," no action has yet been taken to set up such a body. The report discloses that 92 police officers were placed on administrative leave through October 1989 "pending resolution of criminal conduct cases." In addition, it reveals that "almost $200,000 was paid out in damages following successful lawsuits against the police between January and August 1989."
The report also correctly includes the information that 12 people were killed in election-related violence during the 1988-1989 campaign that led to the parliamentary election of February 1989, and attributes this to efforts by both political parties to reduce such violence. In the last contested parliamentary election in 1980, hundreds of Jamaicans were killed in election-related violence.
In discussing detentions of criminal suspects without charges, this year's report states: "Police must record detentions and are responsible for ensuring that detainees appear before a member of the judiciary within 24 hours of detention. Most detainees are held for 3 to 5 days. However, there have been instances of detainees being held for several weeks without being brought before a judicial officer." Last year's report spoke of detainees being held "for two weeks or longer." The recent report is therefore somewhat more accurate, although still an understatement in light of the experience of the Jamaica Council for Human Rights, which reports that the detainees it represents spend an average of 21 days in detention before being released or charged.
131
Jamaica
The report correctly notes that many of these detentions — some of which are incommunicado — have taken place under the authority of the Suppression of Crime Act, a law that went into effect in 1974. That act has been routinely extended at six-month intervals and has been responsible for many warrantless detentions and searches. It also notes that the act was lifted in July for seven of the island's 14 parishes. (Early in February 1990, Minister of National Security K. D. Knight announced that the act would be ended in the other seven parishes in April 1990). The report also acknowledges current abuses: "In areas where the Act has been lifted, reports indicate that police are relying on blank, presigned warrants to meet the new legal requirements."
As it did last year, the 1989 report states that "suspected criminals are often beaten or mistreated by police while being held in local stations." The report goes on to discuss brutality in prisons, which it did not do last year: "In 1989 there were numerous complaints of police brutality, including reports of beatings by guards and security personnel of inmates held in prisons.... Violence in the prisons is commonplace, with both prisoners and guards subject to assault." The report also cites the deaths of two prisoners who were beaten by guards during disturbances that followed a hunger strike at the General Penitentiary in Kingston in July, and a refusal by guards to feed prisoners at St. Catherine District Prison following attacks on guards in August.
Like last year's report, there is no general discussion of prison conditions. The 1987 report, in contrast, described prison conditions as "substandard . . . [with] overcrowding, unsanitary conditions, inadequate food and limited medical care for inmates . . . The omission of this information in 1989 is puzzling. The State Department's guidelines for the preparation of the reports require that "inhumane prison conditions" be included in the discussion of "torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment."
A joint Americas Watch-Jamaica Council for Human Rights fact-finding mission inspected conditions in prisons and lock-ups in January 1990. The mission found most prisoners living in filthy, inhumane, unsanitary and extremely over-crowded institutions. In the two maximum security institutions, inmates live with four to six men confined in cells that are five feet by eight feet, with no beds or bedding, no sanitary facilities except slop buckets, no water, no light except for the light that comes in, sometimes through transoms, from corridors. Prisoners are locked into these cells from 3:00 or 3:30 in
132
Jamaica
the afternoon until 8:00 in the morning. Inmates receive inadequate food and no rehabilitation programs. Justice Minister Carl Rattray described to Americas Watch a series of steps he hopes to take to improve prison conditions. Conditions in the lock-ups attached to police stations, under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of National Security, are even worse than those in most of the prisons — more overcrowded, even more unsanitary, with detainees receiving no exercise or fresh air, and in some cases no light at all.
The 1989 report presents a more accurate picture of the problems encountered with private security forces — armed commercial guard services -- including the fact that private security guards shot and killed 40 persons in 1988. Police Commissioner Herman Ricketts told Americas Watch in January 1990 that private security guards had killed 25 people in 1989.
All in all, the 1989 report, although omitting or understating some problems, presents a more realistic picture of human rights abuses in Jamaica in 1989.
133
