JORDAN
The State Department's evaluation of human rights in Jordan is disappointing. It takes a minimalist approach to reporting, and excludes information that would amplify the context and scope of human rights problems in Jordan in 1989, and government initiatives in the later part of the year to address past abuses. The report brushes over the riots that rocked Jordan in April 1989, stating simply that the combination of a weakened dinar and price increases created "a public furor which culminated in disturbances." It does not mention that the "disturbances" represented the worst domestic unrest Jordan had experienced in almost two decades; began in southern Jordanian towns considered strongholds of support for King Hussein; left 12 dead and over 80 wounded; and within weeks precipitated calls for human rights and political reform from a broad spectrum of personalities and organizations in Jordan, including former government officials and some of the country's most influential clans.
In various parts of the report, facts are stated correctly but pertinent information is omitted or placed elsewhere in the narrative. For example, it is mentioned that martial law has been in force in Jordan since 1967. The report neglects to mention, however, that an emergency defense law, declared in force by royal decree in 1939, is also in effect in the Kingdom. In a similar vein, the State Department writes that despite an explicit constitutional guarantee, political parties are "outlawed" in Jordan. It is not stated, however, that all existing political parties were dissolved in 1957 (with the exception of the Jordanian Communist Party, which was made illegal by the 1953 Law on Resistance to Communism) and that no parties have been able to function legally since this time. The report's introduction notes the constitutional provision for a bicameral Parliament and states that parliamentary elections were held in November 1989. However, the reader must look elsewhere in the report to discover that the lower house of Parliament is elected and that the upper house, or Senate, is appointed.
Very little is said about allegations of torture or other forms of mistreatment of detainees and prisoners. In the 1988 report, the State Department wrote: "There is no evidence that the Government condones or practices torture". Although this year's report does not include a similar unequivocal statement, it avoids making an assessment of allegations of torture by Jordanians and international human rights organizations. It states, for example, that there have been "occasional reports of ill-treatment of detainees" but is silent
134
Jordan
about whether the State Department finds any of these reports credible or reliable. Nor does the report focus attention on the General Intelligence Directorate headquarters building in Amman, which is well-known in Jordan for being the location for alleged mistreatment of detainees, who can be held there indefinitely under martial law powers.
It is also regrettable that, as in last year's report, the State Department avoids a full discussion of the subject of political prisoners. It merely notes in passing that "martial law crimes" include "security offenses" or "security crimes." The report should have stated that security offenses are broadly defined, and that Jordanians have been arrested and detained without charge by the authorities, and/or prosecuted in the martial law court, for non-violent political activities such as the possession or distribution of political literature and alleged involvement in political parties.
The report provides an incomplete picture of the political arrests that occurred in the wake of the April 1989 riots when it states that "up to 70 persons were in detention for 4 months after the disturbances in April, None was charged." It neglects to mention that in the immediate aftermath of the disturbances, the security forces arrested several hundred people throughout the country, including students, writers, trade unionists, lawyers and doctors. Many of those detained were alleged to be members of proscribed political organizations, held for their non-violent political beliefs or activities. Other well-known activists associated with proscribed political parties went into hiding, for fear of arrest and detention. The report also does not note that King Hussein ordered an amnesty on May 10 for those arrested and that the Interior Minister said that all detainees would be released the next day. Although most were freed, an estimated 70 continued to be held. On at least two occasions, in May and in July, demonstrations were held in Amman, demanding the release of the detainees.
The report also overlooks the arrests, on the evening of October 4 and the morning of October 5 of nine known or suspected political leaders of the Jordanian branch of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP). At the time of the arrests, which were made by members of the security forces without warrants and in some cases by forcible entry into homes, the reasons for the detention were not stated and family members were not told where the detainees were being taken. Amnesty International and the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights wrote to the Jordanian
135
Jordan
authorities and urged that the location of the detainees be disclosed and that they be allowed access to their attorneys and families. The detainees were released by the order of King Hussein on December 2 and were never charged with an offense.
The report is unclear and confusing about the issue of incommunicado detention. In the introduction, it is written: "Under martial law, some detained persons have been denied the opportunity to communicate with their families or attorneys for varying periods, sometimes for several months." Yet, in a subsequent section it is implied that the practice no longer occurs: "In the past, security forces have apparently detained incommunicado (or with limited outside access) some persons suspected of cross-border infiltration and security crimes." In November 1989, the family of Hamdi Matar wrote an appeal to members of Parliament about the conditions of his detention, which they alleged included solitary confinement and poor medical care. Matar, 59, was one of the PFLP members arrested by the security forces on October 4; his family was not permitted to visit him until November 28.
The State Department refrains from making any judgment about the administration of justice in the martial law court, which prosecutes political cases, other than noting that Amnesty International found that its proceedings "fell below international standards for fair trial." The report reassures the reader that the martial law court "observes the law of criminal procedure" that applies in civilian courts and that "cases are reviewed for fairness by a legal advisor or the Justice Minister" before the Prime Minister approves each sentence. The report should also have cited the long-standing criticisms of the martial court by Jordanian lawyers, including their lack of independence; convictions on the basis of weak evidence; the submission into evidence of confessions recorded while defendants are held incommunicado, prior to seeing counsel; and repeated requests to the authorities that martial court decisions be subject to independent judicial review.
The report is misleading on press freedom issues when it euphemistically states that the government "frequently provides editors with guidance on key foreign policy and security matters." It was openly acknowledged by many Jordanian journalists in 1989 that, as part of a continuing pattern from 1988, the daily newspapers were very tightly controlled during the first half of the year and that government "guidance" consisted of editors receiving instructions from the Ministry of Information about the content of editorials. The
136
Jordan
report also should have noted that the six Jordanian journalists who had their press credentials withdrawn in 1988 for political reasons were only allowed to work again in May 1989, on instructions from Prime Minister bin Shakir.
The State Department notes that foreign newspapers and magazines "are subject to censorship" but provides no details. One example that should have been mentioned occurred during the week of October 8 when the Minister of Information decided to prohibit seven foreign Arabic-language newspapers and magazines from entering Jordan until after the Parliamentary election was held on November 8.
A major gap in the report this year, as last year, is the partial discussion of freedom of association, which has been significantly circumscribed in Jordan for years. The State Department focuses only — and briefly — on professional associations. It should have noted that some sectors in Jordan have been denied the right to form associations. Teachers in private and government schools, for example, have lacked associations since 1955. It also should have noted that professional associations are chartered under legislation that grants broad authority to the government to interfere in their internal affairs. For example, the Cabinet can dissolve an association's board of directors for security reasons and replace it with an appointed committee; it also has the power to dissolve any union or federation between associations. The report avoids mentioning that broad-based popular organizations have been dissolved by the authorities in past years and that independent groups for students, women and youth did not exist in Jordan in 1989.
In a glaring example of understatement of a problem, the report claims that "the Government does not restrict emigration or foreign travel" except in cases primarily involving military personnel. Further in the narrative, however, it is also stated that in December 1989 "the Government eliminated travel and work restrictions imposed by security provisions respecting political beliefs, and indicated that passports previously held by security authorities would be released." Through this combination of unclear writing and obfuscation, the reader is given no sense that thousands of Jordanians — targeted by the intelligence service -- continued to have their freedom of movement severely restricted in 1989 by not being able to secure permission to travel abroad. This practice is well-known, has gone on for years, and has been much discussed in Jordan. It has
137
Jordan
affected prominent lawyers and other professionals, as well as political opponents of the government, students and others.
The report also glosses over another widely known practice of the intelligence service — ordering that employees in public and some private sector jobs be dismissed from their posts or denied employment for which they are qualified because of their political beliefs or suspected political associations. The State Department refers to this as "work restrictions imposed under security provisions for political beliefs" in the report's introduction, which gives a misleading impression of the severity of the sanction and its effect on the lives and livelihood of thousands of Jordanians over the years.
The report correctly notes that the Jordanian Lawyers' Professional Association "dramatically increased its advocacy on behalf of political prisoners in 1989," but this leaves the incorrect impression that the organization did not raise other human rights issues. The Association prepared a statement in June, for example, that strongly criticized the executive branch of government, which "has gone too far in assassinating personal rights and basic freedoms and abolishing the means of popular and political supervision; thus it became the right of the Military Governor-General [the Prime Minister], or whoever he empowers, to detain individuals and deprive them of their liberty as long as he wants, search their homes and invade the privacy of residences any time, day or night, impose censorship on newspapers and publications, and do away with the right to political organization and freedom of opinion, conviction and alternative viewpoints." The State Department's cursory and incomplete description of the human rights situation in Jordan in 1989 omits information and facts that have informed the analysis of Jordanian lawyers and other human rights advocates in the Kingdom, and should so have informed the readers of the 1989 country report.
138
