KENYA
The report on Kenya presents a generally accurate picture of human rights conditions, touching on most of the issues of importance for 1989. In particular, it provides useful details on political trials involving alleged Mwakenya or Kenya Patriotic Front members and on the recent elections using the queuing system of voting. The report also rectifies omissions made in the 1988 report by including reference to travel restrictions in the North-East and the infiltration of academic institutions by security officials. However, it neglects opportunities to make strong statements about some issues that have serious implications for the protection of human rights.
The report underplays the discriminatory nature of the recent screening of Kenyan citizens of Somali descent to determine citizenship. In November 1989, Kenyans of Somali descent over the age of 18 were given three weeks to present themselves at specially set up centers and present identification to verify their Kenyan citizenship. Upon verification, they were issued special identity cards, in addition to the standard national ID. The government announced that those who did not so register were subject to arrest and detention.
The State Department's report only alludes to the unconstitutionality of this process noting that "clergy, the Law Society of Kenya, and members of the ethnic Kenyan Somali community criticized the screening process as discriminatory and illegal" without offering its own independent analysis and conclusion. The report should have clearly pointed out that by the terms of Section 82 of the Kenyan Constitution, there are reasonable grounds to believe that the screening and carding of one segment of Kenyan society is unconstitutional.
In addition, the report fails to mention that the screening process was accompanied by harassment and intimidation by Kenyan security forces, immigration officials and the police. In Nairobi, Kenyans of Somali descent were picked up in police sweeps and made to produce identity cards. Those who did not were imprisoned or deported. Some Kenyans of Somali descent who produced valid identity documents were accused of obtaining them fraudulently. Ahmed Khalif Mohammed, Secretary General of the Supreme Muslim Council of Kenya and a former member of Parliament, was dismissed from the Secretary General position for refusing to be screened.
139
Kenya
In discussing the 1988 constitutional amendment that permits the President to dismiss judges without cause, the report uses very tentative language in stating only that the amendment gave the government "greater" control and that observers describe these amendments as undermining judicial independence. Once again, the State Department should have offered an independent analysis and conclusion. This amendment gave the President absolute control over the judiciary, and as a result, judicial independence has clearly been jeopardized.
The report does not capture the increasingly strained relationship between the state and independent organizations. Criticism of government policy is more and more often equated with total opposition to the government. Some independent groups have been officially affiliated into the ruling party KANU which diminishes their ability to remain independent. The women's organization, now called KANU Maendeleo Ya Wanawake, has been formally incorporated into KANU, and the intended affiliation of the national federation of trade unions COTU (Central Organization of Trade Unions) has also been announced.
The report does not mention that independent nongovernmental groups have been criticized, and their work undermined, by various government officials throughout the year. In particular, lawyers and clergy have been subject to such attacks. Lawyers who opposed the screening of Kenyans of Somali descent as unconstitutional were accused by President Moi of not being Kenyan.
The report correctly notes that the draft version of the Advocates Act enacted in December 1989 contained no requirement that lawyers obtain licenses. However, the report omits to mention that new amendments to the Trade Licensing Act were passed which require that all professionals, including lawyers, register with and annually obtain licenses from the local Trade Licensing Officer. This annual licensing gives the government a control mechanism over the whole profession and the opportunity to deny registration to lawyers willing to handle controversial cases. It is also worth noting that the legal community, while objecting to this licensing, has made it clear that it is not averse to the revenue-raising aspects of the legislation. It has proposed that an annual fee for all lawyers be collected through the Law Society of Kenya, and this in fact has been done.
In the section on freedom of speech, the report discusses the charges against Bedan Mbugua, former editor-in-chief of the
140
Kenya
magazine Beyond, but fails to mention, as last year's report also omitted, that similar charges are currently pending against Gitobu Imanyara, editor and publisher of the Nairobi Law Monthly. Mr. Imanyara has been unable to find a printer who will regularly publish the magazine, and those who do print for him charge an extra fee for publishing "sensitive material." The report also does not mention that while material from abroad is readily available, foreign periodicals containing articles critical of the government are not allowed to circulate, or can circulate only with the offending pages deleted.
In discussing the situation of Somali refugees who had entered Kenya to flee fighting in Somalia, the report only mentions that the Kenyan government held an estimated 3,000 Somali refugees in the border town of Liboi in Kenya and that the Kenyan Red Cross and UNHCR were prohibited for some time to travel to the area. In fact, the refugees were housed in makeshift shelters without food or medical attention. There were reports of deaths from starvation. As the report mentions, 60 refugees were forcibly repatriated to areas of heavy fighting in Somalia, but the report fails to mention that of those, 18 were reportedly executed by Somali soldiers on their return.
141
