SOUTH KOREA
While generally accurate, the report on South Korea (Republic of Korea) attempts to paint a rosy gloss on what was a serious deterioration in the human rights situation in 1989. The report contains remarks that soften, and in some instances negate, the impact of the discussion of specific abuses. This is captured in the opening sentences of the report:
The Republic of Korea (ROK) is moving away from its authoritarian past and has made great strides towards attaining full democracy. However, the process of consolidating democratic institutions and practices is still ongoing.
As the report notes, in 1989 the number of political prisoners rose considerably from the previous year; several deaths occurred under circumstances that indicate possible governmental abuse; and there was an increase in arbitrary arrests and surveillance of dissidents. Particularly disturbing was the increased enforcement of the National Security Law and the Law on Assembly and Demonstrations against dissidents, a trend that is not indicative of a country "moving away from its authoritarian past." The significant backsliding in the human rights situation in 1989 also weakens the claim in the introduction that "on balance Korea remains a much more tolerant and open society than in the past." Moreover, the introduction is particularly sanguine about the beneficial role of a "boisterous free press that frequently criticizes the government," despite continued curbs on the press in the past year.
The Lawyers Committee agrees with the report's conclusion that "[s]ome credible allegations of torture were made during the last half of 1989 by persons arrested under the National Security Law." The report cites two specific cases of alleged torture or mistreatment in 1989, but could have added others. For instance: In April, 15 striking workers in Changwon and Masan alleged that they had been tortured by police with electric shock batons. The authorities denied torturing the workers, but did not deny having supplies of electric shock batons. Officials reportedly blocked an investigation of the incident by opposition National Assembly members. A senior at Kookmin University, Kim Chong-hwan, alleged that he was abducted by the military police. When he could not provide his abductors with the information they demanded, they beat him and threatened to bury him alive. He was released early the next day. The Ministry of
202
South Korea
National Defense confirmed that two military intelligence agents had questioned Kim, but denied he was tortured.
The report accurately states that in 1989 there was a "substantial increase" from 1988 in the number of arrests on "security-related charges," particularly under the National Security Law, and notes the creation and activities of the Joint Security Investigation Headquarters (JSIH). However, the report fails to mention the breadth of the investigations conducted by the JSIH. The stated purpose of the new unit, made up of representatives of the Agency for National Security Planning (ANSP), Defense Security Command, National Police Headquarters and prosecution authorities, was to investigate Rev. Moon Ik-hwan's trip to North Korea and to prosecute suspected leftists. The JSIH also announced that it would investigate 33 groups which since July 1988 had allegedly sought unauthorized contacts with North Korea and had conducted "leftist political indoctrination of workers." The JSIH rounded up thousands of people, usually union activists and students, during the course of its investigations. By the time the JSIH had disbanded in mid-June, it had formally arrested 317 people and charged 126 others. The mass arrests continued after the JSIH's disbandment.
In the section on arbitrary arrests, the report states that "[a] major step forward in the human rights area in 1989 was the National Assembly's decision in May to abolish the Social Safety Act." The report fails to mention that four months later, the government enacted the Protective Surveillance Law (also known as the Social Surveillance Law), which contains a number of provisions similar to the Social Safety Act and allows for re-imprisonment for up to two years for persons who have served their sentence but fail to report their activities in detail to the authorities.
The Korean judiciary has long been subject to political pressure from the executive branch. The report is correct to note "some indications of increased judicial independence in 1989." However, in politically sensitive cases, the judiciary is still subject to political influence. While political defendants sometimes have had their sentences reduced on appeal, convictions in political cases are rarely overturned.
The report does not discuss long-term political prisoners in South Korea. At the end of 1989, over 200 prisoners were serving long-term sentences on charges of having been spies or agents for North Korea. Some of these prisoners are being held on charges that
203
South Korea
arose out of the Korean War, and many are serving life sentences. Human rights groups have questioned the fairness of the continued detention of many of those convicted of spying. The overly broad definition of espionage has allowed the government to imprison people for the exercise of fundamental rights. The fairness of some of these convictions is also in question because of the numerous procedural irregularities surrounding the cases, such as allegations of the use of torture to extract confessions used in the trials.
The report understates the extent to which the government arbitrarily interferes with the privacy of individuals. On June 9, the National Police Headquarters (NPH) announced that it would "beef up" surveillance of 259 religious, workers', cultural, teachers' and campus organizations. At the end of June, the ANS? reportedly circulated a "resource book on the reality of the leftists in the country," which claimed that 10,500 "hard-core leftists" had infiltrated 126 organizations for the purpose of promoting violent revolution to reunify the country with North Korea under communist rule.
The report fairly discusses the severe restrictions on expression of ideas considered to be pro-North Korean; however, the breadth of the authorities' sweep against unpopular notions was not detailed in the report. As part of the JSIH crackdown, approximately 460 publishing companies and bookshops were investigated in late April, resulting in the confiscation without warrant of 11,471 volumes of 51 different publications. In early July, police raids of publishers' offices were resumed. Most of the seized books and publications reportedly related to North Korea.
With regard to prosecutions against journalists, writers and artists, the report mentions the case against editorial writer and journalism professor Lee Yong-hee, who was charged under the National Security Law; however, the report does not discuss other cases involving issues of free speech. They include:
Kim Song-kyu, a student at Kongguk University in Seoul, was arrested in December for staging a performance of a North Korean opera.
• Publisher and professor Kim Chun-ki was arrested in June; some of the charges against him stemmed from articles appearing in his magazine Together With Farmers. By the end of the year, he was sentenced to two years in prison.
204
South Korea
Writer and human rights activist Kim Hyon-jang was arrested in August for sending information and receiving funds from a Korean organization in Japan. Both Kim and his wife, Kim Yong-ae, who was arrested the same day, were accused of setting up a Korea-US study group. Kim Yong-ae reportedly received beatings in detention that may have caused her to miscarry.
The publisher of the monthly magazine Workers' Liberation Literature, Kim Sa-in, received a one and a half year sentence, suspended for two years, for an article he had written on the 1980 Kwangju popular movement. In December the magazine was given a three month suspension order after it published an article alleged to "defame" President Roh. (Early in 1990, Kim was re-arrested by the ANSP along with the magazine's editor Im Kyu-chan, in the authorities' efforts to find the writer of the "defamatory" article.)
Lee Shi-young, an editor of Creation and Criticism magazine, was arrested in November by the ANSP. Lee was charged under the National Security Law for writing a travelogue about North Korea.
Oh Seung-joon, a newspaper columnist and member of a Seoul literary club was arrested in July with five other members of the club. They were charged under the National Security Law for writing novels and poems "praising" North Korea. In November, Oh was sentenced to two years in prison; the others received suspended sentences.
205
