KUWAIT
Although the 1989 report on Kuwait discusses most of the issues of concern to local and international human rights advocates, it obscures the systemic nature of human rights problems in Kuwait. The State Department fails to evaluate the government's claim of internal security threats, or to include in the report widely available information about abuses, including torture. It also, inexplicably, ignores the emergence in 1989 of a broad-based, pro-democracy movement representing parliamentarians, students, professionals, university professors, women and others, formed to advocate the reinstatement of Parliament.
Until 1986, Kuwaiti citizens were represented by a freely elected Parliament which, as the Department of State correctly notes, "had served over the years as an important forum for the expression of diverse political views, some sharply at odds with those of the government." In July 1986, the government dissolved Parliament and suspended key portions of the Constitution governing elections and the protection of press freedoms.
While Kuwait's Constitution permits the head of state to dissolve Parliament, it also requires that he call new elections within two months of the dissolution decree or restore the former assembly until new elections can be called. The executive branch has refused to call new elections, in clear violation of the suspended Constitution, despite repeated calls from a broad spectrum of Kuwaiti society for the restoration of the legislature and full implementation of the Constitution. Since 1986, the Amir has ruled unchallenged, by decree, in the continued absence of a Parliament which had consistently exercised its oversight and investigatory powers to review government policies and investigate allegations of corruption in various ministries.
In the view of human rights advocates and former parliamentarians, the continued violation of the country's Constitution and absence of what was the Arab Gulf's only freely elected Parliament form the proper backdrop for analyzing human rights concerns in Kuwait during 1989. The Department of State is correct in stating that "the Government remained preoccupied in 1989 with the internal security threat, and serious restrictions on the civil rights of both Kuwaitis and non-Kuwaitis, many of them imposed by the Government during the Iran-Iraq war, remained in place." However, this juxtaposition of threats and restrictions serves to legitimize the
142
Kuwait
government's repeated claims of security threats, viewed by many parliamentarians as exaggerated, and provides a context for muting criticism of the authorities' restrictions on basic freedoms and rights.
A more thorough analysis of the political context would not have uncritically accepted the notion of "Iranian-inspired subversion." This view of the government of Kuwait often masks its systematic efforts to prevent opposition voices from being heard and precludes serious investigations of the actual rights violations that the State Department report outlines.
Without factual justification and in contrast to its commendable 1988 discussion of torture, the report limits its 1989 presentation to two sentences that offer no comment on the seriousness or magnitude of the use of torture by the authorities. The report states: "There were credible reports of beatings and physical abuse of prisoners in Kuwait's prisons and deportation centers in 1989, including on the soles of prisoners' feet." Unfortunately, the State Department gives no indication of the frequency of abuses nor is there a description of other physical abuse, in addition to beatings. The report's brief mention of actual torture is exceedingly vague: "There were unconfirmed reports again in 1989 that torture was used by state security police to extract information from some of the 22 Shi'a convicted in June of plotting to overthrow the Government." In not adding its own analysis of these "unconfirmed reports," the State Department implicitly questions their credibility and permits an interpretation that torture is not practiced in Kuwait.
In contrast, the previous year's discussion on torture enhanced the credibility of similar allegations of abuse of Shi'a prisoners by adding the State Department's view that the sources were "unofficial but knowledgeable" and represented both the "Sunni and Shi'a communities." In addition, the 1988 report specifically mentioned Amnesty International's concerns that torture was used against prisoners and even included Amnesty's list of the methods allegedly utilized: "beatings while blindfolded, electric shock, sexual assault, alternate dousing with cold and hot water, threats of death or deportation, and threats against relatives."
The scant coverage of physical abuse and torture in Kuwait's prisons during 1989 cannot be attributed to lack of publicly available information. In November, Amnesty International issued an appeal on behalf of Sayyid Muhammad Baqir 'Abbas Al-Musawi, a Shi'i religious leader, held incommunicado without charge or trial since
143
Kuwait
September, whom Amnesty believed may have been tortured. Also in November, Faisal Al-Mahmid, 'Abd Al-Hamid Al-Safar, Sayyid Walid Al-Mazidi and 'Abd Al-Rida Karoun were arrested and were reported to have been subjected to torture with electric shocks, and other physical and psychological abuse, during interrogation. In December, Amnesty raised the case of these five detainees with the government, but received no response.
Allegations of torture are among the most serious that can be leveled against a government and should not be treated in a cursory fashion. The 1989 report ought to have given detailed consideration to allegations that arose during the year and presented its own analysis of the credibility of such reports. Furthermore, the report should have stated that torture is prohibited by Kuwait's Constitution, which reads: "No person shall be subjected to torture or to degrading treatment" (Article 31) and "The infliction of physical or moral injury on an accused person is prohibited" (Article 34). In light of this, the report should have indicated the response of the government of Kuwait and its legal system to allegations of violations of these Constitutional prohibitions.
The report was incomplete, though not incorrect, in stating that: "Arrests are generally made openly and for specific violations of the law. Reports of incommunicado detention are rare." The State Department should have provided additional details, and, at a minimum, noted the reports of arrest without charge made by Amnesty International and explained above.
The report's opening paragraph states: "There is an independent judicial system." Yet, in the section covering denial of fair public trial, facts are presented that call this view into question. The Department of State notes: "Kuwaiti nationals serving as judges usually receive lifetime appointments, while the many [emphasis added] non-Kuwaiti judges serve under I- to 3- year contracts, which are renewable." The report should have analyzed whether a system of justice that rests on short-term contracts can be truly independent.
In its discussion of freedom of speech and press, the report accurately notes the existence of an "active censorship department." However, it errs in stating that there were no reports in 1989 of confiscated journals. Article 19, the London-based nongovernmental organization, issued an appeal on May 24 detailing the case of Dr. Su'ad AI Sabah, an expatriate Kuwaiti poet, writer and human rights
144
Kuwait
activist, whose work was banned in her home country on February 9. Article 19 wrote that it "understands that the Kuwaiti authorities confiscated many Arab newspapers and magazines which contained interviews with Dr. A1 Sabah or published her studies or poetry." According to the Committee to Protect Journalists, the following publications were confiscated for defying the ban: Kol El Arab, At Esbou AI Arabi, Al Mawqef Al Arabi, AI S her a'a (two issues). El Eza'aa & Television (two issues), Sabah El Kheir, Al Wattan Al Arabi.
The section covering the right of citizens to change their government is nearly identical to last year's report. The brief narrative of Kuwait's political history correctly describes the near monopoly of power enjoyed by the Amir and the carefully constructed legal distinctions that "establish a limited class of citizenship with the privilege to participate in the political system." However, the discussion of the former Parliament's role is weakened by the report's failure to give adequate background to the Amir's 1986 decree that dissolved the Parliament. In addition to providing a "forum for the expression of diverse political views," the legislature was invested with significant oversight and investigatory powers that it frequently exercised to challenge Cabinet ministers, who were often members of the ruling royal family. For example, two days prior to the Amir's 1986 dissolution decree, the Cabinet had been forced to resign in the face of mounting criticism by many members of Parliament.
The Department of State notes that freedom of speech, press and assembly, although guaranteed by the Constitution, are "subject to such conditional phrases as 'in accordance with conditions and manner specified by law'." It should have been added that one result of the ambiguities written into the Constitution is that the actual observance of these freedoms has often depended upon the relative strength of the Parliament in relation to the royal family. By dissolving the Parliament and its powers to review executive decisions, the government made it easier to further restrict or suspend altogether those parts of the Constitution guaranteeing freedom of assembly, speech and press.
The report misleads the reader by uncritically announcing that the government "has recently instituted local government councils . . . to give Kuwaiti citizens more of a voice in issues of immediate concern in their daily lives." In fact, the councils were established in the hope of deflecting demands for the return of Parliament and should have been discussed in this context.
145
Kuwait
The report also neglects to highlight the emergence in 1989 of a broad-based coalition formed to advocate the return of Parliament and the full implementation of the Constitution. The State Department notes, but presents an incomplete picture of, the petition drive urging the Amir to restore democratic government. The outcome is incorrectly recorded.
On July 1, a 45-member committee formed in the hope of presenting the Amir with the petitions, which had been signed by approximately 30,000 citizens. The Amir refused to meet with the delegation. This refusal prompted a group comprised of more than half of the former members of Parliament to begin holding weekly assemblies as a forum for advocating the restoration of the legislature. The first assembly was held on December 4 at the home of ex-legislator Jaasim Al-Qataami. The government responded by forbidding the local press and foreign reporters based in Kuwait from covering the story. The authorities also violated the constitutional right to private assembly by closing the home of Mashaari Al-'Anjari, where the next assembly was to be held.
On December 11, two to three thousand people gathered at the home of Mr. Al-'Anjari, in defiance of the government ban and despite the presence of members of two of the state's security forces. The peaceful assembly was violently dispersed by riot squads with police dogs who arrived during a speech by the Speaker of the former Parliament, Ahmad As-Sa'duun. On December 18, an estimated four to five thousand people gathered at the Mosque of Fatima in the Kuwait city suburb of 'Abdullah As-Saalim. There were no reports of security force interference.
These widely attended political assemblies and the government's attempt to prevent them represented an important development in the human rights situation in Kuwait in 1989. Kuwaitis risked confrontation with the government to protest the growing web of restrictions on rights they once enjoyed. In their view, the laws choking freedom of expression, assembly and press enacted by Amiri decree since 1986 and the continued expansion of the state security courts are intended to abort any attempt to curb the Amir's near-monopoly of the political system. It is disappointing that the report chooses to restate, without comment or analysis, the government's security concerns and neglects to indicate that thousands of Kuwaitis challenged those views.
146
