LIBERIA
This year's report on Liberia is a detailed and improved presentation of human rights conditions. In particular, the section on freedom of speech and press is more accurate than in the past few years. The report moves away from the portrayal of the press as "lively," and acknowledges the many difficulties facing those in the media. The report also includes mention of the terrible prison conditions that exist in Liberia.
While the report is detailed, it fails to describe adequately the larger context and pattern of human rights abuses that have emerged since Samuel Doe became President. Two aspects of this pattern do not come across in the report. First, the abuses, particularly summary executions, have been episodic, not systematic or consistently applied over time. Thus in describing an incident, it is important to place it in its immediate context. Secondly, no one has ever been held accountable for abuses that have taken place since 1980, and many of those who were in government positions when the worst abuses occurred continue in those jobs. Meanwhile, government institutions are being steadily undermined by those responsible for past abuses.
Without placing human rights abuses within this context, the importance of incidents and events that are described in the report are placed in a partial and often misleading light. This is exemplified in the State Department's portrayal of the rebel incursion into Nimba County at the end of the year. The State Department states that "[b]oth dissidents and AFL [Armed Forces of Liberia] troops have largely concentrated their actions against civilian members of ethnic groups not their own." What it fails to note is that these actions mirror the coup attempt that took place in 1985. The 1985 attempt, led by Thomas Quiwonkpa from Nimba County, resulted in massive reprisals directed at Nimba County residents belonging to the Gio and Mano ethnic groups, and that tension still remains. Thus, the response of the AFL in Nimba County to the 1989 coup attempt resulting in "the tens of thousands of Nimba county residents seeking refuge into the Cote d'lvoire" was typical: during times of crisis, when the government has felt threatened, it has responded with massive, largely arbitrary repression often based on festering ethnic rivalries.
Another example of the need to analyze events within the larger context is the portrayal of the opposition political groups. The
147
Liberia
overall picture depicting the ability of the opposition groups to associate and organize freely is rosier than warranted.
On the one hand, the report commendably refers to the 1986 "Grand Coalition" incident where the opposition was forbidden to form a coalition, an important event which has affected subsequent political activity. It also correctly notes that "Liberia has moved closer to a de facto one-party system." On the other hand, the report fails to convey the extent of the constraints facing the opposition parties when it states that: "Three opposition parties are legally recognized and permitted to function, but they continue to protest the Government's conduct of the 1985 elections and decided not to participate in the 1989 by-elections." This implies that the opposition parties are not willing to participate in a democratic process. A more accurate description is that President Doe's blatant tampering with the 1985 election results rendered participation meaningless. The report should have asserted its own opinion on this issue rather than noting several pages later that "the only national election since the 1980 coup . . . was widely believed to have been fraudulent."
Similarly, to say that "legal opposition groups did conduct public and private meetings and other organizational activities in the Monrovia area without interference from the Government" does not accurately portray the situation. Opposition activity is allowed only if it is not deemed threatening to the government. (In the past, the standard bearers of opposition parties, the Liberia Action Party (LAP), Unity Party (UP) and Liberia Unification Party (LUP) were detained without charge in the military prison at Belle Yella in 1986. The headquarters of LAP were vandalized in 1985 and again in 1987, reportedly by government troops. In 1987, the legislature considered banning the opposition United Peoples Party for "inciting the masses to cause trouble." LUP was banned by the Elections Commission in 1987 without a judicial determination as required by law.)
While the continued closures of the newspapers Footprints Today and Suntimes are mentioned in the report, there is no mention of the similarly closed opposition LAP paper Co-co-leo~co either last year or this year. The report's sole reference to opposition publications notes that "[a] lack of financial resources crippled their activities, however, and prevented the publication of newsletters on a regular basis," a somewhat misleading statement given Co-co-leo-co^s closure.
148
Liberia
The increasing consolidation of power by the ruling National Democratic Party of Liberia (NDPL) is downplayed in sentences such as "civil servants are not forced to join the NDPL, but it is highly advantageous for career advancement." In a country where the government is the largest employer, it is misleading to say that it is merely advantageous to join the NDPL; it often means the difference between being employed or out of work.
Other sections of the report, while painstakingly detailed --describing, for example, financial constraints underlying weak judicial institutions — gloss over more serious reasons for violations. While the lack of adequate financial resources is undoubtedly a significant problem in Liberia, at least equal emphasis should be placed on the frequent interference in the judiciary by the executive branch.
The report correctly notes that "the judiciary suffers from severe shortages of the basic tools it needs to do its work, such as office supplies, stenographers, and records of precedent cases." However, the report barely mentions the prominent political trial of the LUP leader Gabriel Kpolleh. While the report mentions that a "controversial trial" occurred, like the 1988 report it fails to explain its deficiencies. During the trial, one witness recanted his written testimony and asked the court for protection from the state. Several of the defense witnesses testified to beatings, degrading treatment and detentions without charge. Many of the prosecution witnesses were also detained without charge. The State Department also glosses over the fact that the defendants have been granted a retrial, without acknowledging that the Supreme Court remanded the case precisely for these procedural deficiencies after concluding and confirming that "incalculable blunders, errors and omissions as well as the numerous irregularities [were] committed by the practices and their councils in the court below." To its credit, the report extensively notes the deficiencies in the trial of the former Defense Minister, Gray Allison.
In discussing the role of the Ministry of Internal Affairs in administering the traditional court system, the State Department fails to discuss actions that serve to undermine the judiciary. The Ministry sanctions the use of an illegal "trial by ordeal" system where innocence is determined by physical tests, for example, whether the person who drinks a poisonous drink survives or whether a hot knife applied to the skin does not leave a burn mark. The Chief Justice, in his October 1989 opening address for the court session, publicly called
149
Liberia
on the Ministry of Internal Affairs to stop administering outlawed forms of trial and punishment.
In discussing the proposed Labor Code, the report mentions that the proposed Code would repeal Decree 12 which outlaws strikes. However, it fails to mention that the Code would exempt government workers from its protections, or that technically Decree 12 was invalidated by the Liberian Constitution four years ago pursuant to a supremacy clause nullifying any conflicting "laws, treaties, statutes, decrees, customs and regulations." The existence of a constitutional prohibition of Decree 12 has not prevented its use for the last four years, raising strong doubts whether the Code will be enforced in practice.
While the State Department asserts that there is no evidence of a "'black list' of persons who may be denied permission to travel," the Lawyers Committee received a number of accounts supporting its existence. This list consists mainly of people who are perceived as outspoken critics of the government. (A recent incident confirms the existence of the list. In March 1990, opposition Unity Party's Secretary-General Walter Wisner received clearance for an exit visa. However, on the bottom of the letter requesting the visa that was returned to him, a hand-written note stated "Col. E. Doe or Maj. Jones, Please allow the holder of this document to travel. We were told that he was black listed, but the letter could not be traced. However, order revoked.")
150
