SRI LANKA
The report on Sri Lanka gives a generally accurate account of human rights abuses during the past year. It correctly notes that the human rights situation deteriorated in 1989, and justifiably uses stronger language in criticism of Sri Lankan and Indian government forces than in previous years. However, the report does not sufficiently emphasize the complicity of the government in the development of vigilante groups, fails to link a dramatic increase in violence to the reimposition of Emergency Regulations and inadequately reports the increasing limitations on freedom of expression.
The 1989 report makes stronger assertions regarding extrajudicial killings by Sri Lankan and Indian government forces than the previous year's report. In the 1988 report, allegations of government involvement in political killings of suspected Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP) members were mentioned but said to be unsubstantiated. Allegations that Tamil civilians had been victims of reprisal killings by the Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) were also mentioned, but considered unconfirmed. In contrast, the 1989 report notes that "[c]redible allegations linked the IPKF and government security forces to extrajudicial killings, disappearances, and torture." The 1989 report reflects increasing skepticism of the Sri Lankan government's denial of knowledge of the activities of anti-JVP vigilante groups, giving the last word to "knowledgeable observers" who claim that "the groups were manned at least in part by security force personnel operating with the knowledge of the Government."
The figure of 8,500 political killings in 1989 is a conservative estimate; the Financial Times reported in January 1990 that Western diplomats believe that as many as 30,000 political killings occurred last year. In its discussion of reprisal killings, the report correctly refers to the link between vigilante groups and government security forces. The State Department forcefully states that the Sri Lankan government's "claim of ignorance" regarding the identity of vigilantes and its declaration that captured vigilantes would be treated like terrorists "runs counter to strong circumstantial evidence linking security forces to vigilante groups." Noting that a wide range of observers, including opposition politicians, individual government officials and members of the security forces themselves assert that many vigilantes were security force personnel operating with the knowledge and acquiescence of the government, the report provides
206
Sri Lanka
strong credence to the assertion of government complicity in serious human rights violations.
The State Department is correct to refer to the rise of anti-JVP paramilitary or vigilante groups as a "disturbing development." However, the circumstantial evidence implicating government involvement in or acquiescence to paramilitary killings warrants more detail than the report provides. Many observers have remarked on the wide distribution of weapons by the government and the proliferation of private militias under the control of government officials. Observers report that in several cases, police spokespersons have made prompt public statements attributing specific killings to particular vigilante groups before inquiries could have been conducted. These premature announcements, combined with vigilante activity during nighttime curfew hours enforced by government forces, lead many observers to assert police and security force involvement in vigilante activities.
The report fails to link the dramatic increase in extrajudicial killings by the JVP and security forces in the second half of the year to the government's reimposition of Emergency Regulations on June 20, 1989. Amnesty International and other human rights groups have reported that after June, security forces and police increasingly matched the criminal violence of the JVP. In a form of systematic intimidation frequently practiced by both the JVP and security force and police personnel, the bodies of victims, often mutilated, were burned on rubber tires by the roadside, dumped in cemeteries or thrown in the rivers to float out to sea. Government forces and opposition groups alike are said to have displayed bodies and severed heads and limbs to instill terror in others. Many such sights are labeled with signs warning of a like fate for JVP sympathizers.
The report ignores possible government involvement in the killing of lawyers, attributing these attacks only to the JVP and vigilantes. The report could have provided greater detail of these killings. In July, Charitha Lankapura, a lawyer who had been active in seeking redress in the courts for alleged abuses by the security forces, was killed by two unidentified gunmen. Two of his close colleagues were warned to stop filing petitions, and one, Kanchana Abhayapala, was killed in August. In October, Sarath Karalliyadda, a lawyer representing the relatives of a 16-year-old who had been shot by police during a demonstration, was taken into custody by three armed men, one of whom was said to be in army uniform.
207
Sri Lanka
Karalliyadda's body was found the next day. Two of the three witnesses scheduled to testify in the pending trial were also killed.
The report does not describe the detrimental effect these killings have had on the legal system generally. For instance, after the killings of lawyers who filed habeas corpus petitions, observers noted the failure of many habeas corpus petitioners to appear on the dates fixed for their inquiries and a drastic drop in a number of habeas corpus filings compared to previous weeks.
The State Department ends the section on political killings with a misleading summary:
The Government condemned the threats and attacks against lawyers, and ordered the establishment of an independent commission to investigate vigilante groups. The Attorney General's office charged 10 policemen with murder in two different security-related cases .... In 1989 the military court-martialed a number of servicemen for abuses of authority.
While these facts are in themselves encouraging, presented without qualifications they leave the reader with a more favorable impression of the practical effect of such policies in Sri Lanka than is warranted, as well as risk confusing the reader about the degree to which such policies are implemented by government officials. Despite burgeoning activity of paramilitary groups in 1989, no arrests of vigilante gunmen were reported until mid-September, though the arrests or killings of thousands of people allegedly associated with the JVP were reported throughout the year. In September, the government announced a crackdown on vigilante groups, although reprisal killings by such groups continued to be reported with alarming frequency. The statement that "[following a pattern set in 1983, the Government published no results of its inquiries into alleged security force human rights abuses" is very weak and wrongly implies that the government conducts serious inquiries into alleged human rights offenses.
In the section on disappearances, the report correctly points to the continuing problem of citizens observed being taken into custody by police or security force personnel, only to have such arrests later denied by the authorities. It also states that the appearance of "disappeared" persons in custody and the wide latitude permitted government officials under the Emergency Regulations "strongly
208
Sri Lanka
suggest that some ^disappeared* persons have been killed by the security forces, perhaps in reprisal for attacks on security forces and their families." Such a conclusion is warranted and welcome. However, the report uncritically repeats for another year the Sri Lankan government's position that part of the problem in finding disappeared people is that those arrested give false names or leave the country immediately after release. The report notes but should have emphasized that much of the problem may lie in the Emergency Regulations, which allow the disposal of bodies without any formalities, identification or records.
The section on torture cites credible sources, including "members of Parliament, individual government officials, and members of the security forces," that Sri Lankan security forces and the IPKF tortured and mistreated persons in detention. Reports that "torture is used extensively by the Sri Lanka security forces" and acknowledgements by "[Ijocal human rights groups and some government officials" that "Sri Lankan security forces commonly used torture to elicit information and cooperation from suspected members of the JVP" are rightly left unchallenged. Also welcome is the discussion of the Indemnity Act, which provides immunity from prosecution for members of the security forces for all actions committed "in good faith."
The report of an estimated 4,000 youths being abducted since June by Indian-allied Tamil militants warranted more detailed discussion. The State Department does not mention that boys as young as 10 years old are being forced into military service, or that the IPKF checkpoints, noted in the report, prevent youths from taking refuge in government-established camps in Colombo.
The 1989 report comes closer than past State Department reports to holding the government responsible for human rights abuses, but could have provided a more detailed accounting in certain instances. The report notes that the security forces have put up posters threatening reprisals should the JVP attack security force members or members of their families; it does not mention frequent reports that the retaliation threatened is to kill 12 JVP members for every person killed by the JVP. The report does not voice the concern of many observers, including Amnesty International, that unarmed people who present no immediate threat to the security forces have been killed, and that communities may be subject to collective punishment as JVP sympathizers. For example, in August, after a police constable and his wife were killed by a JVP gunman,
209
Sri Lanka
eyewitnesses reported that three truck-loads of uniformed police, army officers and civilian-dressed men came to the fishing village of Pallikkudave and fired indiscriminately at passers-by on the road. In September, the bodies of at least 80 villagers from Menikhanna, a suspected JVP stronghold, were found burned on the roadside; 20 more bodies were recovered from a nearby river.
The report does not address the human rights implications of the killing of top JVP leaders in military custody. In November, the leader of the JVP was taken into custody by government security forces and was killed soon thereafter, allegedly while trying to escape. Days later, the JVP second in command was also taken into custody and killed almost immediately by security forces who claimed that he too had tried to escape. The government's version of these killings was greeted with justifiable skepticism in Sri Lanka and abroad. The report refers to these events, but does not draw attention to the concern of human rights organizations that the JVP leaders were summarily executed.
The report correctly points to the "numerous credible reports" of indiscriminate killings of civilians in the northeast by the IPKF. In addition to reprisal killings of civilians, including the aged and infants, the IPKF troops were also implicated in setting fire to houses, looting and raping.
The section on freedom of speech and the press in Sri Lanka is inadequate. The blanket statement that "the Government continued to prosecute individuals who distributed 'anti-government' literature" does little to condemn the limitations on freedom of expression in the country. While the report expresses the concern of human rights groups that the prohibition against criticizing any member of Parliament serves as a deterrent to free speech, the State Department should include its own condemnation of such a prohibition. This prohibition extends to academics, which the State Department mentioned last year but not this year.
Particularly disturbing is the conclusory statement that "[a] variety of independent newspapers and journals . . . provide a full range of viewpoints on foreign policy and most domestic matters, including human rights issues." This contrasts sharply with reports from Sri Lanka that there is no free flow of information on current events, particularly due to the government's monopoly on radio and television and its control of print media, including control of the distribution of newsprint, government advertising and pressure on
210
Sri Lanka
journalists to exercise self-censorship. Amnesty International and other commentators claimed that in 1989 censorship restricted both domestic and international reporting on human rights violations in Sri Lanka. The report should have mentioned that on the state-owned television network, only government news is allowed to be broadcast. Opposition parties are allowed to air their views only immediately prior to elections. The State Department's conclusion that "[m]any small-circulation periodicals published by opposition political parties operate freely" suggests a much too favorable impression of the state of freedom of expression in Sri Lanka.
The State Department fails to mention reports that journalists who have reported human rights violations by the security forces have been threatened and in at least one case killed. In September, a Colombo journalist was killed after reporting on the killings of 14 people by security forces two weeks earlier. Another journalist who had published several articles on alleged killings by security forces and paramilitary groups received a form letter threatening her and her family. The government is unable to offer security to the many journalists and broadcasters who have received death threats from militant groups. When mass resignations of journalists and other media employees resulted from threats, the army took over the broadcasting services and sometimes forced employees back to work at gunpoint. The report cites these occurrences without criticism.
The report fails to mention the wide-spread problem of self-censorship in Sri Lanka. In announcing an end to official censorship, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the State Minister for Defense suggested that newspapers should not seek to "glorify subversive activity" and should exercise self-censorship in reporting such matters. A Tamil daily published in Colombo was also reported to have been constrained to observe a self-imposed censorship with respect to news from the north and east.
The mild assertion that the IPKF and its Tamil allies "reportedly attempted to influence" Tamil newspapers understates the severity of the pressure applied against the newspapers. The report should have noted that the forced closure of three local Tamil dailies in the northeast by the Eelam People's Revolutionary Liberation Front (EPRLF) resulted in a virtual news black-out in the area. Although the State Department's report mentions that "Tamil militants" in the northeast were responsible in May for the killing of the son of an editor of one of Jaffna's Tamil dailies, it fails to link such militants with the IPKF and the EPRLF as reports suggest.
211
Sri Lanka
In the section on freedom of peaceful assembly and association, the report states that "[t]here was no evidence in 1989 that permits to hold public meetings were denied to the legal opposition," and that "[a]ntigovernment militants were the greatest threat to Sri Lankans' freedom of assembly." These statements downplay the government's share of responsibility for limitations on assembly and association. However unofficially, the freedoms of assembly and association are denied not only to all JVP members, but to anyone who is viewed as sympathizing with their cause.
The section on freedom of religion states that "[c]omplaints in the past that Buddhists had an advantage over members of other religions in winning senior government positions are now heard less frequently." There may be fewer complaints, but there is no evidence that the situation has fundamentally changed.
The section on respect for political rights cites the findings of "international observer teams" during the presidential and parliamentary elections as the basis for concluding that the elections were "generally free and fair." However, the observer teams, from the South Asia Association for Regional Cooperation, were very small and thus could not adequately monitor polling places throughout the country.
212
