YUGOSLAVIA
Yugoslavia had a reputation in the international community as the most free and open communist nation prior to the fall of East European governments in 1989. Historically, little attention has been paid to human rights policies within Yugoslavia, in large part due to the fact that, relative to other Soviet bloc societies, it has had more liberal policies, particularly regarding the ability of its citizens to travel and work abroad.
The State Department's 1989 report on Yugoslavia is generally thorough and reflects an increasing amount of attention to human rights concerns. The human rights situation in Yugoslavia has deteriorated dramatically in certain regions of the country in the past 18 months, notably the southern province of Kosovo. During the past several years, Yugoslavia as a whole has held somewhere between 1,000 to 2,000 political prisoners, most of them for "verbal crimes" related to nationalist expression. This number of political prisoners exceeds the total of known political prisoners in all of Eastern Europe or the Soviet Union. The great majority of these prisoners are ethnic Albanians from Kosovo.
As correctly noted in the report, most human rights abuses committed in Yugoslavia result from either nationalist policies adopted by one or another federal republic in Yugoslavia, or by the government's abusive measures to stifle nationalist sentiment by one or another nationality. Violations of human rights include the suppression of speech and expression, including censorship of written materials and jail terms for expressing nationalist views, limitations on the freedom of association, especially involving ethnic groups, and extrajudicial execution, as occurred when government troops opened fire indiscriminately on a crowd in Pristina, Kosovo in early 1989 killing approximately 30 ethnic Albanians.
Yet, even while abuses mount in the southern province of Kosovo as the government of Serbia takes control of the ethnic Albanian majority there, conditions for free expression and democracy have improved in other parts of the country, notably in the republics of Slovenia and Croatia. At the close of 1989, the ruling Yugoslav parliament had opened the possibility of a move to a multiparty system for all of Yugoslavia. Contested elections have been held in several republics.
256
Yugoslavia
The State Department's report does a good job of cataloging the abuses which have taken place against ethnic Albanians in Kosovo, while recognizing the pressures which Serbian and other ethnic minorities in Kosovo have faced. The report also correctly recognizes that in the gradual political fragmentation of Yugoslavia, the abuses occurring in Kosovo are not abuses which occur, for example, in Slovenia.
Nonetheless, the report has certain deficiencies. For example, in the section on denial of fair public trial, it states that the "majority of trials, including those on political charges, are conducted in accordance with Yugoslav legal norms, without overt interference by outside authorities. In some cases, however, Yugoslav courts may be influenced by political authorities." Yet, in the next paragraph, the report states that "[iln many political cases, the outcome is often predetermined by the political authorities." The apparent inconsistency should be resolved in favor of the latter statement. The experience of human rights organizations has been that Yugoslav political authorities interfere with trials on a constant basis, and that in many cases judges look directly to political and bureaucratic authorities for instructions on how to rule and what sentence to impose. Many of the trials interfered with in this way are not overtly political. In clearly political trials, such as the trial of Azem Vllasi in 1989-90, the judiciary was merely a conduit for political in-fighting.
In addition, the report gives a possibly misleading figure for the number of political detainees in Yugoslavia. It states that "the number of political prisoners in Yugoslavia is difficult to determine. In 1989, Amnesty International estimated that at least 200 political prisoners were being held in 1988." The report noted earlier that the Yugoslav government had acknowledged a higher figure of 436. The report is entirely correct in saying the number of political prisoners is difficult to determine. It should have noted that Amnesty's estimate was of "prisoners of conscience," people held solely for their nonviolent beliefs; the organization's estimate for persons convicted of political crimes was higher. In any event, readers of the report may mistakenly conclude that the true number of political prisoners is lower than generally accepted by organizations such as Amnesty International.
Finally, in its discussion of governmental attitudes regarding international and nongovernmental investigations of alleged violations of human rights, the report states that "[o]f the domestic human rights groups, the largest is the Forum for Human Rights, established by the
257
Yugoslavia
Socialist Alliance to monitor domestic human rights trends and foster understanding of Yugoslavia's international commitments to human rights." The Socialist Alliance of the Working People is as stated by the State Department, "a [communist] party-approved mass organization." Until the end of 1989, to obtain legal status in Yugoslavia, all organizations had to register with the government, which in turn required membership in the Socialist Alliance. Some new organizations did not want to join the Alliance; some that did apply were refused registration. Thus, independent organizations were at a distinct disadvantage to the Forum for Human Rights in establishing themselves and operating in Yugoslavia.
The forthright stance of the U.S. embassy on human rights in Kosovo is welcome, but it has not yet been fully reflected in U.S. policy. The State Department should continue to monitor human rights issues during 1990, particularly involving political prisoners and freedom of expression.
258
