SOUTH AFRICA
This year's report on South Africa provides a fairly complete overview of the human rights situation. The report is well-documented, cites numerous sources and has included comprehensive descriptions of many of the key events of 1989.
In mentioning the positive steps taken following the election, the report states that "government repression of anti-apartheid opposition, including nonviolent peaceful protest, eased after the September election of State President De Klerk." The report should have qualified this statement, noting that while the government has been pressured to concede on some issues, none of these concessions involved dismantling the legislative or security apparatus of apartheid.
The report, to its credit, states that despite this change, "the fundamental, highly restrictive human rights situation in South Africa remained unchanged in 1989." However, it should have gone further and pointed out that while many of the positive steps cited, such as the release of the seven African National Congress leaders or the integration of the beaches, were high profile actions that attracted significant attention, these actions did not signify the dismantling of apartheid or address the issue of political representation for the majority.
The State Department mentions that "black groups" continued to resist apartheid in 1989. This reference is a complete misnomer given that anti-apartheid activity is not defined on racial lines, nor restricted to "black groups." It is a characterization promulgated by the South African government and not one that should have been repeated by the State Department.
In the section on political killings, the report describes in some detail violence by rightwing groups such as the White Wolves, and that of Chief Buthelezi's Zulu political and cultural organization, Inkatha. However, the report does not mention that the police have been slow in halting factional violence between Inkatha and the United Democratic Front, and there have been some reports that they have not intervened during such violence on occasion.
Furthermore, the report barely touches on the exposure of the activities of the government-sponsored "death squad" in murdering anti-apartheid activists. While it refers to "mysterious killings, attacks, and threats against anti-apartheid groups," the statement that
197
South Africa
there was an increase "as the specter of vigilante rightwing terrorism grew" implies that such violence was committed by independent groups only and not by the government. The recent exposure of the activities of the South African government Civil Cooperation Bureau (CCB) indicates this to be otherwise. The charter of the CCB, formed in 1987, defines it as a covert unit independent of existing state intelligence and covert structures, charged with the task of gathering intelligence and acting against "aggressors." The CCB has been implicated in the murders of anti-apartheid activists, including Griffith Mxenge, Ruth First and Jeannette Schoon. The CCB has also been linked to the assassination in May of anti-apartheid activist David Webster in Johannesburg; the assassination of the South West-African Peoples' Organization (SWAPO) member Anton Lubowski in September and the bombing in August of an anti-election meeting in Cape Town.
The State Department's reporting improved in some of the sections criticized last year. The section on torture is quite strong and states in a straightforward manner with no qualifying language that torture occurs. However, the State Department notes that "the number of incidents overall seem to be declining." Unfortunately, there is little evidence to indicate that this is the case. The report also provides an improved analysis of violations in the "homelands," noting the presence of "seconded" South African government security officials belied government claims of noninvolvement in "homeland" affairs.
As noted in previous critiques, the report has consistently neglected discussion of the National Security Management System (NSMS) for the past three years. This year, while it mentions that in 1989 the NSMS was downgraded and made accountable to the Cabinet, it does not adequately explain how powerful the NSMS had become and that this first step in dismantling it was important. This "parallel" government was created in 1986 by army generals and police chiefs and was designed to suppress anti-apartheid activity. Until November 1989, it was only accountable to the cabinet-level State Security Council and had established itself as dominant over the Cabinet in security matters. In recent years, the NSMS served as a security intelligence service that compiled information and used intimidation against government critics. While the NSMS has not been dismantled, the changes are a positive first step in reasserting the dominance of civilian control over national security policy.
198
South Africa
The report notes in some detail the nationwide hunger strikes that hundreds of detainees embarked on in February. The action, along with pressure exerted by international and national attention, resulted in a widespread release of detainees. However, the authors of the report only mention briefly that hundreds of these released detainees were served with restriction orders by year's end.
The dramatic increase in the use of restriction orders by the government in 1989 deserved more attention. In lieu of detention following the hunger strikes, the government relied heavily on restriction orders to prevent anti-apartheid activity. The report should have pointed out that compared to 50 people subject to restriction orders in 1988, the number jumped drastically to over 650 in 1989.
To its credit, the report states that the South African government can restrict people by simply publishing the name of the person and that restriction orders prevented restricted persons from engaging in any anti-apartheid activity. However, given that restriction orders affected the rights of association and of speech of hundreds of people, the authors should have devoted more time to the broader human rights implications of such orders.
These orders include restrictions preventing movement out of a certain area; having to report to the police station regularly (sometimes as often as twice a day at set times); and not being able to leave one's house during certain hours. Some restriction orders effectively prohibit restricted persons from returning to their occupation. For example, Witswatersrand law lecturer Raymond Suttner's restriction order actually prohibited him from entering any educational institute, thus rendering him unemployable.
Individuals subject to restriction orders also suffer adverse psychological effects. They are forced to become their own "jailors" and for many, their homes become their jails. Unannounced police visits at all hours were much more common in homes of restricted persons which affect not only them, but also those living with them. The report should have included greater detail about the pernicious effects of restriction orders.
The report accurately notes that the predictable routines of restricted persons make them vulnerable to attacks and assassinations. It should have pointed out that more than 10 of these people were killed in 1989. It also should have noted that many of the killings and
199
South Africa
attacks took place near police stations or just after the restricted person had reported to the police station. (In February 1990, President De Klerk lifted restriction orders on individuals (as opposed to organizations). However, the State of Emergency is still in effect and legislative authorization to reissue such orders in the future still exists.)
The report fails to mention that 35 people who contravened their restriction orders were charged. While most of the cases were dropped by the government, three people were sentenced and fined for contravening their orders.
While the section on freedom of press mentions all the various newspapers that were charged with contravening State of Emergency regulations, the report does not note that a number of publications received "gazetted" warnings. The Minister of Home Affairs is permitted to determine, in his own opinion, whether an article published in a periodical is a threat to public safety. The newspapers Grassroots, New Era, Al-Qalam, Work in Progress and the New Nation all received such warnings which are published in the government gazette. These warnings often preceded legal charges brought by the State. In fact, as the State Department notes, Grassroots and New Era were closed for three months and the editor of New Nation was charged in August. The use of gazetted warnings has a chilling effect on journalists and editors.
The report does not mention that prior to the September election, there was an intensified effort by the police to suppress coverage of the defiance campaign. There were over 100 arrests of journalists reported by the Anti-Censorship Action Group during September and over 200 foreign journalists were denied visas to enter the country. While the report cites the figure of 169 as the number of passports that the government refused to issue in 1988, it should have noted that in 1989 the figure, according to the Department of Home Affairs, had risen to 214.
The report omits a positive development in not mentioning that in September the police announced that they were not going to use whips (sjamboks) in dispersing demonstrations as a result of negative publicity they had been receiving in the international community. However, they do continue to use birdshot, dogs and teargas.
200
South Africa
Another omission was the government's introduction of a new funding act. The Disclosure of Foreign Funding Act requires all organizations declared as "Reporting Organisations" to inform the Registrar of Reporting Organisations of overseas funding and the purpose and conditions of such funding. Seen only as a regulatory requirement, this law poses no human rights issues. However, its potential for misuse to compel the disclosure of confidential information from human rights or anti-apartheid groups to security and other government agencies raises serious concerns, which the State Department failed to mention, much less discuss.
201
