ZIMBABWE
The 1989 State Department report on Zimbabwe is more balanced than previous reports and identifies new areas of human rights abuses by the government. The report, however, fails to fully evaluate the State of Emergency (SOE) and its implementing legislation, the Emergency Powers Act (EPA). Although the report recounts anecdotes involving government harassment or the arrest and detention of students, workers, journalists, activists and leaders of the Zimbabwe Unity Movement (ZUM), it fails to describe fully the serious erosion of basic civil and political rights during 1989.
The report correctly points out that the unity agreement between the Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU) and the Zimbabwe African People's Union (ZAPU) led to a marked decrease in the number of human rights abuses by government forces. But the report fails to state clearly that the unity agreement has sometimes been used as a pretext by the government to muzzle, and often suppress by force, dissenting social and political views in efforts to impose a de facto one party state. For example, ZUM leaders and activists were arrested and detained on numerous occasions during 1989. Similarly, in September and October, security forces violently stopped a seminar given by University of Zimbabwe students to commemorate a major 1988 student demonstration protesting government corruption. The report should have pointed out that these were not isolated incidents, but rather a growing pattern of government intolerance of differing views.
The arrest of striking doctors in June, the arrest and detention in October of Morgan Tsvangirai, General Secretary of the Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Unions, after he issued a statement supporting the students' right to protest government actions and government harassment of several investigative reporters, should have been described in the context of the narrowing space for independent action.
The report's treatment of the SOE is inadequate in that it fails to assess the reasonableness of the justification for its implementation throughout the country. Since independence, the government has continually extended the SOE ostensibly to guard against "dissident" activity and South African spies. Whatever their validity, these reasons do not justify such a drastic remedy, particularly because those suspected of spying for foreign powers can and should be brought to justice before the courts. The unity agreement between
265
Zimbabwe
ZANU and ZAPU in 1987 contributed substantially to a decrease in "dissident" activity further undermining the government's stated reasons for continuing emergency regulations.
The only conflict area in the country is along the eastern border with Mozambique where the Mozambican National Resistance (RENAMO) has carried out periodic raids on Zimbabwean villages and transportation routes. Zimbabwean armed and security forces have been deployed in the area to combat these incursions and protect transportation corridors. The government of Zimbabwe has used RENAMO raids as an excuse to extend the SOE. The report should have clearly stated that the continuing SOE cannot be justified, except perhaps in limited areas on the eastern border with Mozambique.
In discussing the EPA, the report states that "[t]he professionalism of police investigations has been eroded because of the ease with which persons can be detained under EPA . . . ." This statement suggests, quite wrongly, that in the past the police forces respected human rights in their work. The human rights abuses committed by government forces between 1982-86 were not illustrative of "professionalism." It is also erroneous to suggest that it is now "easier" to detain people; the use of detention, which was widespread in the colonial period has been routinely employed since independence to silence criticism of the government.
While President Mugabe has publicly stated that he wishes to establish a de jure one party state, it is inaccurate for the report to state flatly that the unity accord of 1987 was intended to achieve that purpose. The conflict between ZANU and ZAPU and the attendant violence and human rights abuses between 1982-86 should be seen as the primary motivation for the accord, with a secondary reason being the increased desire of the government for the creation of a one party state.
A welcome addition to the 1989 report is its section on women, and particularly the analysis of domestic violence against women. Earlier reports ignored this important issue. While the report provides some valuable information in this regard, it is important that future reports devote more attention to these concerns. Perfunctory treatment of the issue and statements like "[d]omestic violence, especially wife beating, is believed to be prevalent. . . ." do not do justice to such a central concern.
266
Zimbabwe
In the section on race relations, the report notes that Zimbabwe remains a racially stratified society in spite of government efforts to encourage interaction between various races. It is regrettable, however, that the report chooses to employ the language of South Africa's apartheid to identify Zimbabweans of mixed race, by referring to them as "colored." This description is unfortunate and should not be imported into the Zimbabwean context.
Elsewhere the report provides a balanced picture of the status of press freedom, arbitrary arrest and detention, reports of torture by the Central Intelligence Organization and freedom of religion. In particular, the report rightly criticizes the government for failing to make progress in locating disappeared people from Ndebele regions during 1982-85 and states that the "Government has never made a serious effort to account for these missing persons."
In summary, while the report is generally accurate, it fails to capture clearly the worsening human rights conditions in the country, particularly government intolerance of differing views. In view of the government's stated aim to establish a one party state, it is important to stress that independent political action came under sharp attack during 1989.
267
