Between a Dream and a Nightmare
Hardly one year after being hailed for showing unprecedented progress toward turning itself around, Africa once again veered towards the precipice. The much-vaunted African renaissance, a three-way equation of a flowering of democracy, culture, and economic growth appeared to be in tatters. Instead, sagging economic performance, backsliding on democracy and other human rights reforms, and increased national and regional tensions menaced much of the continent. A new war in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) drew in countries as far afield as Chad and Zimbabwe, and other conflicts threatened Ethiopia, Eritrea, Guinea Bissau, Sierra Leone, and even tiny Lesotho. In some countries, however, the gains made in recent years were maintained: in South Africa, Botswana, Mozambique, Mauritius, Mali, and elsewhere progress towards respect for human rights and the rule of law stayed on course. The change of guard in Nigeria with the death of General Sani Abacha and the undertaking by new head of state General Abdulsalami Abubakar to return Nigeria to democratic rule also offered a major new hope during the year, at the same time diverting the threat of instability in Africas most populous country; but even in Nigeria nothing was guaranteed.

The slogan of African solutions for African problems had implied a new paradigm with multiple qualities: indigenousness, the involvement of local actors, and cost-effectiveness. But African leadership repeatedly stumbled in finding solutions to the continents grave political and human rights problems of 1998. Leaders from countries that could have played a greater rolesuch as Cote dIvoire, Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, Senegal, and South Africaseemed unable to initiate coordinated responses to the continents problems. Regional mechanisms, including the Organization of African Unity (OAU), were equally unable to muster the political will or financial resources to address these crises.

Yet, for good or ill, African governments did become more willing to mobilize military power to step in when strife broke out in a neighboring country. During 1998, West African peacekeeping troops, led primarily by Nigeria, restored civilian rule in Sierra Leone, while remainingin reduced forcefor the eighth year in Liberia. Senegalese and Guinean troops stepped in to stop violence in Guinea Bissau. Under the umbrella of the Southern African Development Community (SADC), South Africa and Botswana dispatched troops into Lesotho to rescue a government that was on the verge of collapse. While interventions in these small countries were relatively self-contained, regional involvement in the DRC threatened to embroil much of central Africa in conflict: Ugandan and Rwandan troops fought alongside rebel forces in the DRC, while Angolan, Namibian, Zimbabwean, and even Chadian troops intervened on behalf of embattled President Kabila, who had himself only taken powerwith the assistance of Rwandan soldiersin 1997. With a rapid multiplication of unilateral or subregional interventions, Africa witnessed a slow, but evident, erosion of the concept of state sovereignty, enshrined in the charter of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and so jealously guarded in the past.

Although it became clear that the old rules might no longer apply, new rules providing a reasonable basis for regional stability had not been established. The result: the objectives of interventions remained distorted by each intervening governments short-term view of its national self-interest. Meetings of African leaders were hastily convened to put out the fires, yet there was an absence of serious long term planning, matched by effective action, to address Africas problems at a continental level and to try to prevent another Congo-type crisis. The OAUs Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution remained largely untried; the SADCs Organ on Politics, Defense and Security was exposed as inoperative by divisions between South Africa and Zimbabwe over intervention in the DRC (a SADC member since 1997) and the botching of a South African-led intervention in Lesotho; and the discussions of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) for the establishment of a permanent regional peacekeeping capacity produced no action.

The turmoil in the DRC, as well as a border conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea that broke out in July, illustrated three features of the African landscape in 1998. First was the abruptness with which the new leaders of Uganda, Rwanda, Ethiopia, Eritrea, and the DRC, lost their gloss, raising questions about the capacity of any autocratic strongman to contribute in the long-term to an African renaissance. Despite the fact that all of these leaders had replaced brutal and corrupt regimes, and despite all the talk of solidarity, their interests clearly diverged, in some cases into open conflict between former colleagues-in-arms. Second was the wider regional nature of the conflicts, especially the imbroglio in the DRC. This war not only threatened a conflagration involving at least a half dozen countries in the heart of Africa, but also crystallized and brought into the open major rifts within the continent, pitting countries such as Rwanda and Uganda, two of the closest U.S. allies, against important countries in southern and central Africa, such as Zimbabwe and Angola. Third was the extent to which some of Africas older statesmenincluding Mugabe of Zimbabwe, Nujoma of Namibia, and Dos Santos of Angola, who had previously perceived themselves as the vanguard of leftism and pan-Africanismfelt threatened by the favor accorded to the new leaders by the international community in general and the U.S. in particular.

Overall, the Congo crisis appeared to have generated a major, though inchoate, shift in power from the bloc of new leaders in central and eastern Africa toward central and southern Africa leaders, who thus gained a new platform for diplomatic and military influce. The shift may lead to a situation very different from what western strategists had contemplated when they uncritically embraced the project of African solutions for African problems. The ascendancy of Zimbabwe and its allies in the Congo intervention in the long term could return Africa to a status quo of uncritical support of sovereign rights within state boundaries, but with states increasingly prepared to support political favorites of the day militarily whatever their records. This would entail dire consequences for regional and international efforts to defend human rights. Alternatively, because South Africas leaders created a more hospitable environment for human rights than the leaders of eastern Africa, the power shift might carry positive consequencesfor human rights. But it could rule out, at least in the short term, the forging of inclusive political and security alliances in the region that could benefit all Africas peoples.

The Benchmarks of Democracy
Assessments of democratization in Africa continued to be dominated by misleading benchmarks such as the holding of multiparty elections however restricted while underplaying substantive freedoms. Gross fraud, serious procedural irregularities, opposition party withdrawals, and boycotts persisted. Manipulated and flawed electoral processes that seemed designed to ensure victory for incumbents continued to be a profound source of tensions and crises. During 1998, election-related controversy led to crises in Lesotho, Togo, and Mali. Though the basic nuts and bolts of democracy were installed across the regionthere were political parties, elections, parliaments, judiciaries, newspapers galore, and a growing number of electronic mediatheir ability to secure respect for human rights and the rule of law was another question.

In countries such as Angola, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Cote dIvoire, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Gambia, Guinea Bissau, Kenya, Niger, Tanzania, Togo, Zambia, and Zimbabwe, where the political landscape had historically been dominated by single-party structures, de jure and de facto, a legacy of dominant political control, restrictions on entry and participation in political life and excessive regulation persisted, even when the one party system had been liberalized. Promises to treat political competitors on an equal basis with ruling parties were of limited practical value, and opposition parties remained at a substantial disadvantage. Countries with a long legacy of intrusive state control would require huge effort and goodwill to disentangle the cats cradle of laws and regulations that continued to enmesh the media and civil society and to hobble political opposition. Few, if any, governments appeared to relish such a prospect.

Government-controlled media continued to serve as propaganda tools. In most countries television and radio remained firmly under state control, and governments continued to threaten critical newspapers and independent radio stations that challenged government abuses. As a result, journalists were often constrained to practice self-censorship. Others were intimidated, assaulted, thrown into jail and numerous bannings of newspapers and closures of radio station occurred during 1998. Nigeria alone had the dubious honor of having arrested more than thirty journalists, though almost all were released by new head of state General Abubakar by October. In Ethiopia thirteen journalists continued to be imprisoned at the time of writing. Even in South Africa, deportation proceedings were commenced against Newton Kanhema, a leading journalist of Zimbabwean origin who had been critical of the government, amid a domestic and international outcry that immigration proceedings were being used to limit press freedom. Following a court challenge, the deportation was halted. In October, a South African court ruled in a landmark decision on constitutional protection for free expression that it was admissible as a defense to a libel action against a newspaper for journalists to show that they had acted reasonably and carefully in reporting.

In many countries, incumbent officials continued to harass and imprison opponents and choke off any attempts at public protest. In Sudan, a return to political parties banned since the 1989 coup that overthrew the elected government was thwarted when a key clause in the draft constitution was revised by National Islamic Front leader Hassan al Turabi. The newly elected government of Charles Taylor in Liberia showed an intolerance of losing factions in that countrys civil war. President Chilubas Zambia continued to betray the title of his party, the Movement for Multiparty Democracy, by detaining opponents. In Kenya, President Moi banned Islamic organizations from operating. In Zimbabwe, President Mugabes intervention in the conflict in the DRC could not distract from an internal crisis brought on by his failure to listen to criticism from internal opposition led by the unions.

In other countries, the military continued to play a pivotal role in shaping public policy even after avowing to exit the political arena. Claiming to embody the good of the nation, the army continued to play a dual role that was often camouflaged by a facade of legality and constitutionalism. In Nigeria, despite promises from the new head of state to restore the country to civilian elected government, human rights and pro-democracy groups argued that the disgraced military establishment should not continue to wield power during a transition period, and that a civilian government of national unity should take office to arrange new elections.

There were exceptions to prove the rule. After four years, the process of democratic transition in South Africa remained on course. Though the government led by the African National Congress failed to act effectively in some areas, and remained inordinately sensitive to criticism, major reforms of the justice system and policing continued, as did efforts to improve respect for womens and childrens rights, and to increase access to land and water, and (less successfully) to education. There were other success stories. Botswanas and Mauritiuss stable democracies endured as islands amid turbulence in the region. Ketumile Masire of Botswana resigned the presidency before the end of his termthus strengthening the countrys foundations of constitutional governance. In Senegal, a combination of political uncertainty, insurgency, and a controversial military intervention in Guinea Bissau took its toll and the country appeared to have somewhat lost its status as a regional leader. But it seemed unlikely that it would unravel and succumb to wide scale instability and rights abuses thanks to its relatively strong democratic foundations. Newly democratizing Benin, Ghana, Malawi, Mali, and Mozambique stayed the course, albeit sometimes on a bumpy road. Taken together all these success stories constituted the real beacons of hope that could show the way forward for the rest of Africa.

Open Markets, Closed Political Systems
Bowing to pressures from international and domestic forces and pinning hopes on an obsolete Asian model, almost all the regions forty-eight countries continued to implement programs to liberalize financial and trading policies and adopt programs of macroeconomic adjustment supported by the World Bank and the IMF. Prominent implementors of economic liberalization included Angola, Cote dIvoire, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Benin, Kenya, Madagascar, Mali, Mozambique, Senegal, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. Although many of these countries accomplished significant macroeconomic reforms, there were few signsthat governments were displaying similar commitment to the expansion of political freedoms. In many cases, economic progress was damaged precisely because of the lack of democratic accountability and respect for human rights and the rule of law.

With globalization and the increased power of market forces to propel change, financial and commodity volatility emerged as critical elements that African governments had to factor into political calculations. As political legitimacy was beginning to be tied directly to economic success, the fallout from Asias economic crisis appeared to translate into political fragility. With sagging economic performance, political leaders were confronted by a force beyond their control, a power more radically unyielding than the domestic political opponents they had grown used to controlling by a combination of brute force, favoritism, or political manipulation.

Uganda, Ethiopia, and Eritrea continued to build an autocratic brand of capitalism. For this they had continued to be hailed as beacons of hope. Yet the dominance of ruling parties was unrelenting and opposition remained hobbled. Yoweri Museveni showed no shift from his so-called no-party system, while Ethiopia carried on detaining political challengers. None of the leaders of Ethiopia, Eritrea, or Uganda showed any sign of early departureapparently joining the old leaders in Zimbabwe, Kenya, Gabon and elsewhere in their attachment to power. Namibians, too, continued to contemplate a third-term reelection of Sam Nujoma, raising strong feelings: Ben Ulenga, Namibias High Commissioner to London and a senior member of the ruling party, resigned his post in August, citing his opposition to the proposed third term move as one of the reasons for quitting.

In the context of the global financial crisis precipitated by economic collapse in southeast Asia, liberalization and the opening of markets had significant costs. Market openings might have improved economic efficiency, but openness escalated the potential and actual impact of international influence on internal processes. Although the scale and impact of globalization in Africa was not comparable to the Asian meltdown, the impact of a fall in demand and price for basic commodities supplied from Africa, including oil, metals, timber, coffee, and cocoa was not inconsequential. For countries that depended heavily on selling raw materials globally to generate growth and to support their government budgets, the economic downturn contributed to cutbacks, radically lower currency values, shortfalls in revenue and ballooning trade deficits. In many countries, the results were profoundly unsettling as evidence of lasting social and political consequences mounted. Human rights problems were hard to solve at the best of times.

How this played out in domestic political processes varied from country to country. Even in South Africa, the perilous state of the economy posed a huge challenge to the sustainability of democratic reform. Though South Africas economy remained the largest in Africa, more than 30 percent of its almost forty million people were without work, and many continued to live in extreme poverty as a legacy of apartheid. Squeezed by astronomical interest rates and thwarted by turmoil in key export markets, the economy labored through a bad year. Growing xenophobia, including incidents of violence directed against foreigners were a direct manifestation of the detrimental effect economic problems could have on respect for human rights.

Elsewhere in Africa where a transition to democracy had hardly commenced, as was the case in Nigeria, or was only half complete, in countries such as Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Uganda, Zambia, or Zimbabwe, a retreat from democratic and human rights reforms and tolerance for civil society was threatened in the face of economic problems. In both Kenya and Zimbabwe the government was in the grip of a crisis of confidence regarding its ability to manage the economy, and both Mugabe and Moi appeared to have opted for a mixture of carrot and stick: conceding limited economic and political points while lashing out against some of their most virulent critics.

For some countries, rich in oil or precious minerals such as diamonds, wealth appeared rather to buttress dictatorial regimes characterized by a lack of respect for human rights than to promote development. Angola, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Democratic Republic of Congo, Republic of Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea, Liberia, and Nigeria all fell in this category. The huge profits earned in royalties either reinforced autocratic governments, and sometimes rebel movements as well, or prevented the development of mechanisms for transparency and accountability, often with the connivance of foreign corporations. Wasted national wealth, hampered development, and massive abuse of human rights was the price local populations continued to pay for economic success.

Man-made Disasters
Civil strife, often spawned by longstanding and monumental human rights abuses, and fueled by weapons supplied from outside the continent, threatened many countries in Africa during the year, provoking large-scale forced migrations. As always, civiliansmostly women and childrenbore the brunt of horrific abuses.

Some of the most alarming reports came from Sierra Leone, where civilians were subjected to mutilations, rape, and systematic killings by rebel forces. Children were victims of gross violations of human rights committed by both sides to the conflict, both prior to and following the restoration of the government of President Kabbah. Rebel forces fighting the government abducted an unknown number of childrenprobably in the thousandsfor use as laborers, fighters, and in the case of girls, sexual prisoners. There were many child soldiers among fighters aligned with rebel forces, and despite promises by the government to demobilize all combatants under the age of eighteen, government allies continued to recruit children at least until July. Close to half a million Sierra Leoneans fled the fighting as refugees to neighboring Guinea and Liberia or to camps for the internally displaced. Refugees and the internally displaced suffered from a host of problems including a lack of protection, high malnutrition and disease rates, and attacks by rebel forces.

Following the outbreak of fighting in Guinea Bissau on June 7, when the army mutinied against President Joo Nino Vieira, after he had suspended and then sacked Ansumane Mane as chief-of-staff, virtually the entire population of 300,000 of the capital Bissau was forced to flee towards the western regions of the country where they continued to live in life-threatening conditions atyear end. Gross human rights abuses in Sudans fifteen year civil war persisted, causing or aggravating a severe famine in three separate regions: the southern Bahr El Ghazal, Western Upper Nile areas, and the central Nuba Mountains. Both sides to the conflict employed abusive military strategies such as targeting civilians and their cattle. Combatants stripped assets from civilians, repeatedly displaced them, and manipulated and diverted relief goods and other food belonging to civilian populations.

In Uganda, the anti-government Lords Resistance Army (LRA) continued its campaign of terror, brutalizing civilians, destroying property, and abducting children in northern Uganda. In June, the LRA attacked a school and abducted thirty-nine girls. The majority of the population in the North continued to live in protected camps, with inadequate access to housing, water, food, health care, and education. In western Uganda, the Allied Defense Forces (ADF), another guerrilla group, waged war against the Museveni government. The ADF was reportedly responsible for numerous abuses against civilians, including abductions of children. On June 9, the ADF attacked and reportedly burned a school, killing an estimated fifty to eighty students and abducting an estimated one hundred students and civilians.

Noncombatants also bore the brunt of the renewed fighting in the DRC. Both sides to the conflict resorted to extrajudicial executions and arbitrary detentions in appalling conditions. The conflict also forced thousands to seek refuge in neighboring countries. In Rwanda the government army and rebel forces each slaughtered tens of thousands of civilians as they struggled to control the northwestern part of the country. Rebel forces, including soldiers and militia responsible for the 1994 genocide, affirmed their intention of completing the slaughter of Rwandese Tutsi. In addition, government and military authorities took into custody a growing number of persons suspected of rebel ties who were never seen or heard from again.

In Burundi, a new constitutional arrangement between the government and the leading opposition party followed by a peace agreement and projected cease-fire led to hopes that the four-year-old civil war in that country might be brought to an end. Factions of some of the parties that signed the agreement disavowed it, however, and attacks by rebels and reprisals by the military continued, particularly in the western part of Burundi. As elsewhere on the continent, civilians bore the brunt of suffering in this conflict, through attacks by both sides and through deprivation of food, medical attention, and other services disrupted by the combat and economic decline.

The odds worsened for Angolas peace process and the country seemed dangerously close to renewed war. As a result, the chances of any turnaround regarding the plight of refugees and the internally displaced faded fast. Some 300,000 refugees in neighboring countries remained unrepatriated. The renewed belligerence caused further flows of refugees into the DRC, Namibia, and Zambia. By September Angola had an approximated 1.3 million internally displaced people. During 1998 alone, 142,000 newly internally displaced people were registered.

Lesotho was plunged into what appeared to be its worst crisis in its troubled post-independence history when South Africa and Botswana troops intervened to restore order after a long simmering dispute concerning the elections in May. Lesothos capital Maseru and surrounding towns were seriously damaged by looting and arson, largely carried out by civilians. Up to one hundred soldiers and civilians died, and thousands of refugees were sent scurrying across the border into South Africa.

Political Islam continued to have a presence in Africa, not only in the self-described Islamic Republic of Sudan (installed after a military coup overthrew an elected government in 1989) but also in political-religious and sometimes armed movements in Ethiopia, Eritrea, Kenya, Uganda and elsewhere. The governments of Ethiopia and Eritrea accused Sudan of supporting, arming and training Islamist rebel groups to oppose them; the Ugandans accused Sudan of supporting Ugandan rebels. Sudan, in turn, accused these three governments of supporting several Sudanese rebel groups. In late 1998 Sudan and Uganda were accusing each other of bombing the other and sending troops in to the others soil.

On August 7, bombs exploded outside the U.S. embassies in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam. In the Nairobi bombing alone, more than 200 were killed and thousands injured. The U.S. blamed dissident Saudi extremist Usama bin Laden for these outrages, but largely dissipated sympathy generated by the attacks by bombing in response a pharmaceutical factory in Sudan which the U.S. alleged was being used for the manufacture of chemical weapons and in which bin Laden, a resident of Sudan until 1996, was alleged to have a financial interest. On the same day, August 20, the U.S. also bombed what it alleged were Islamist training camps in Afghanistan sponsored by bin Ladin. It later emerged that the evidence that the factory had been used to make chemical weapons, and that bin Laden had an interest in the factory, was less certain than had originally been portrayed. On August 25, the Planet Hollywood restaurant in Cape Town, South Africa, was also bombed without warning, killing one and injuring over twenty-five. Responsibility for the blast was claimed in the name of a Muslims Against Global Oppression.
Angola	
Human Rights Developments
Angola was teetering on the brink of war, even while moves were afoot to avert yet another flare-up of this protracted conflict. Human rights abuses were widespread. The government, dominated by the Movement for the Popular Liberation of Angola (MPLA), and the armed opposition Union for the Total Independence (UNITA) restricted freedom of movement, arbitrarily abducted or detained civilians, censored information, and conscripted children. Both sides violated cease-fire agreements and indiscriminate attacks on civilians and looting were a persistent feature of military operations.

The year started on a more upbeat note after UNITA leader Jonas Savimbi and President dos Santos spoke by telephone in December 1997 for the first time in many months, agreeing on January 9 to complete the implementation of the key outstanding elements of the Lusaka Protocol. The development of a government of national unity, the demobilization of UNITA, and the full restoration of state control over local government was due to be completed on February 28. However, UNITA had not fulfilled its obligations by this time and a new deadline was set for March 16, to be marked by the installation of UNITAs leadership in Luanda. When UNITA declared on March 6 that it had demilitarized all its forces, the government responded by legalizing UNITA as a political party and appointing three governors and seven vice-governors nominated by UNITA. Both sides also agreed on the list of six ambassadors nominated by UNITA. On March 31, a law granting special status to Savimbi as the leader of the largest opposition party was promulgated.

On April 1, Radio Vorgan, the UNITA radio station, ceased broadcasting. On the same day a UNITA delegation led by Vice-President General Sebastio Dembo arrived in Luanda to prepare for the reopening of UNITAs office there on June 1. However, the April 1 deadline for the return of local administrations was missed, with only 80 percent of the 335 localities brought under government control. Eight of the twelve strategic areas set to be handed back to the government were normalized by early June but the key outstanding areas of Andulo, Bailundo, Nharea, and Mongo in the center of the country remained the focus of negotiations. In May, the U.N. submitted a new timetable, calling for the former rebels to hand back the areas by May 31. They did not comply, and UNITA requested more time. On May 31, the U.N. announced that UNITA had proposed that it should hand over the four remaining strongholds by June 25.

UNITA again sought a delay in handing over of the four strategic locations, and was given an extra ten days by the U.N. However, on July 1, when UNITA again requested at least two further weeks to withdraw, the U.N. imposed a new package of sanctions on UNITA to try to force compliance.

In anticipation of these sanctions UNITA pulled out of the U.N.-chaired Joint Commission for two months in protest; upon its return in August UNITA said it would permit the extension of state administration to the four strongholds by October 15. The government counter-proposed an August 31 deadline; on that date it suspended UNITA from the Government of Unity and National Reconciliation (GURN) on the grounds of non-compliance by UNITA with its commitments under the Lusaka Protocol.

In a related action, Jorge Valentim, and other UNITA members who had served in the GURN announced a split with Savimbi, launching a party called the Renovation Committee of UNITA. The government stated that it would only negotiate with this new UNITA and urged others to do the same. Although the Southern African Development Community (SADC) branded Jonas Savimbi a war criminal and threw its support behind the new UNITA, the group did not attract strong support inside Angola or outside SADC. Many of UNITAs seventy members of parliament disassociated themselves from the group (another thirteen were not in Luanda and two were ill) and many other senior UNITA officials refused to support the breakaway group, despite threats, bribes by the government pressing them to do so. On September 2 police surrounded and took control of UNITAs headquarters in Luanda and only allowed supporters of the Valentim faction to enter the building. Senior police officers publicly said that anyone not with the Valentim group was a political criminal.

The governments sponsorship of a new UNITA was part of its wider strategy of gradually weakening the rebels through military action and cooption. Luanda also embarked on a strategy to build an international cordon sanitaire around UNITA to cut off its supplies. Luanda intervened successfully militarily in Congo-Brazzaville and in the ex-Zaire in 1997 to ensure UNITA could not maintain the significant foothold it had in these countries in the past. Angolan troops remained in Congo-Brazzaville and the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) in 1998 and Zambia was also successfully threatened by Luanda with invasion in March unless it stopped UNITA sanction-busting operations on its soil. In August Luanda also reengaged in DRC with troops, tanks, and air support in support of President Kabila. Namibia was always supportive of the government.

Human rights violations in Angola increased throughout the year and were at a higher level than 1997. Security in many areas of the country remained precarious, with continuing tensions mostly the result of armed attacks, often targeting the Angola NationalPolice (ANP) and local government authorities in the countryside. There were also numerous attacks on government posts and vehicles, as well as abductions of personnel. Often the perpetrators were groups of well-armed, unidentified men. The U.N. Observer Mission to Angola (MONUA) was also attacked: on March 27, UNITA attacked a MONUA team at Chongoroi, killing one Angolan and injuring three others. Attacks like this appeared intended by UNITA to show that the U.N. presence was still needed beyond April 30, when its mandate was to expire. There was a temporary decline in attacks on MONUA after the mandate was extended to June 30.

UNITA continued to harass government forces, as if to remind Luanda that it could make the country ungovernable. On March 30 the government warned the U.N. in an open letter that UNITA was preparing for war. The U.N. rejected the letter, calling it inflammatory, but marked the deterioration by referring to the military situation rather than the security situation. Armed attacks increased in 1998, forcing thousands of people from the countryside to migrate to urban areas. Incidents such as the pillage of Ngove on April 23 and the killing of eleven policemen in Bembe on April 26 did not increase confidence. In early May, armed bandits attacked villages in the diamond-producing areas around Chica River, Lunda Sul, leaving behind them a trail of deaths.

Although UNITA continued to deny its involvement in what often seemed to be well-coordinated attacks, it was clear that many of the offensives were conducted by armed elements directly or indirectly under UNITA control. According to Amnesty International, at least forty people were killed in May, including more than twenty police officers, with dozens of others injured or missing.

A number of UNITA officials and sympathizers were targeted in the many acts of violence since April. UNITA claimed that government forces killed seven of its members near Negage on May 6 or 7. Gross human rights abuses, including the killing of local UNITA functionaries in Cuando Cubango, Cuanza Norte, and Lunda Norte provinces, and harassment of UNITA members, were also reported by MONUA. UNITA representatives abandoned their offices in some areas because of real or perceived persecution by the police. UNITA leader Savimbi claimed on August 3 that UNITA had turned over some 272 localities to the government, but said the police and Angolan Armed Forces (FAA) had forcibly expelled all UNITA cadres and supporters from 260 of these. In Luanda Human Rights Watch found credible evidence of UNITA supporters being harassed by government forces. There were also lynchings of alleged UNITA supporters; a Human Rights Watch researcher witnessed one such incident outside Caxito in August and was held at gun-point by police and military personnel and threatened with death.

The death of U.N. Special Representative Blondin Beye in an air crash in Cote dIvoire on June 27 undermined mediation U.N. efforts. Beye, who was replaced by Issa Diallo of Guinea, had been on trip to the West African states Cote dIvoire, Togo, and Burkina Faso to ask their governments to stop supporting UNITA. Following Beyes death, insecurity increased and UNITA reasserted itself in several areas, including Luau, Lumbala Nguimbo, and Cazombo in Moxico province.

In early July government forces backed by helicopter gunships clashed with UNITA rebels in the provinces of Kwanza Norte and Lunda Norte, in the diamond-producing areas. Fighting was also reported in Cuando Cubango. According to MONUA in late July, ten of the countrys eighteen provinces were unsafe.

The levels of violence by both sides were very high in August, with the national police targeting demobilized soldiers and UNITA officials and burning villages in areas sympathetic to UNITA. There were also abuses during forced recruitment for the Angolan military often of children. Between June and August, the government conscripted males aged fifteen to thirty-four for combat. Extra soldiers were sent to remote areas and unemployed teenagers rounded up and sent for military training. UNITA continued to attack villages and police posts, ambush vehicles, and lay new mines.

The increase in military operations resulted in a further rise in reported human rights violations, particularly in Lunda Norte, Malange, and Cabinda provinces. The mass killing of at least 105 civilians by an unidentified group on July 21 and the wounding of numerous others in the mining settlement of Bula in Lunda Norte constituted the most dramatic abuse. Attacks on Cambo-Sungingi and Cunda-Dia-Baze in Malange in August by heavily armed individuals resulted in numerous deaths; at least nine summary executions indicated a growing pattern. In September fighting continued in Malange, Uige, Huambo, and Lunda Norte provinces. A World Food Program (WFP) convoy was attacked in Uige on September 16 by unidentified gunmen: nine U.N. trucks were torched, one U.N. employee was killed, and a number of people were injured. The WFP suspended its land convoys for three weeks after the incident.

The renewed hostilities resulted in fresh flows of refugees into Namibia and Zambia. The office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees reported that 7,000 civilians crossed into the Democratic Republic of Congo in mid-July to escape fighting. Some 300,000 refugees in neighboring countries were not repatriated because of the delays in implementing the peace accords, along with general insecurity.

By September an estimated total of 1.3 million displaced people inside Angola were also unable or unwilling to return to their homes, particularly in rural areas, because of insecurity. From the beginning of 1998, more than 142,000 newly displaced persons were registered by the U.N. and the national displacement of the civilian population spread to areas untouched for several years, such as Kwanza Sul, Namibe, and Cunene provinces. Freedom of movement remained limited and illegal checkpoints and banditry continued to restrict the circulation of people and goods in various parts of the country.

One of the few areas of improvement was in the exercise of freedom of expression in the independent media in Luanda, as government officials encouraged editorial self-censorship and used the incentive of payment for the publication for pro-government stories as an alternative to open censorship and repression of journalists. In the provinces the situation was different: for example, the governors office in Malange province banned all freelance activity by Voice of America stringer Isaias Soares. Soares had already been suspended from his job as a reporter on the local radio station for criticizing the governors office for failing to help local communities recover from the war before the unexplained second ban. In March the government also terminated live coverage of National Assembly debates, saying it was too expensive, but also halting the publicity given to parliamentary challenges from theopposition.

Angola has one of the highest numbers of landmines of any country in the world, and there were reports of new mines being planted by UNITA in areas it controlled. The U.N. confirmed new landmine incidents in Bie, Malange, Lunda Norte, and Lunda Sul. The government, although it signed the Ottawa landmine ban treaty in December 1997, maintained its stockpiles and began to lay new defensive minefields in Luena, Saurimo, Malange, Quibaxe, Uige, Kuito and in Cabinda.

Both sides continued to purchase arms in 1998. The government received new weapons from Bulgaria, Russia, and possibly Brazil. Although the number of sanction-busting flights into UNITA zones declined, they still continued. The Angolan air force compelled a South African DC-4 cargo plane to land in Menongue in January. The plane had been carrying mining equipment from South Africa and had filed a false flight plan to the Democratic Republic of Congo. Up to March a number of flights refueled in Ndola, Zambia, prior to heading for UNITA areas. The South African authorities also impounded four planes owned by Russians and used for sanction-busting in this period. Togo, Cote dIvoire, and Burkina Faso also acted as staging posts. A number of these flights originated in Bulgaria.
Burundi
Human Rights Developments
In a continuing civil war, both government troops and insurgents slaughtered unarmed civilians and carried out other grievous human rights violations, including arbitrary executions, rape, and torture, and the pillage and destruction of property. The number of lives lost was apparently less in 1998 than in 1997, however, and most parties to the war engaged in negotiations that gave some hope of peace.

In Burundi, as in neighboring Rwanda, representatives of the majority Hutu and the minority Tutsi struggled for power. The Tutsi, an elite who had dominated political life for centuries, rebuffed Hutu efforts to participate more fully in power, whether through political means or rebellion. In 1972, in the worse such case, the Tutsi-dominated army massacred as many as 200,000 Hutu following several Hutu attacks on Tutsi.

In 1993, Maj. Pierre Buyoya, in power after a military coup, permitted a fair election which chose the first Hutu president, Melchior Ndadaye, but Tutsi soldiers murdered Ndadaye in October 1993. Hutu in many communities, sometimes led by local officials, then slaughtered thousands of Tutsi and the army massacred thousands of Hutu, sometimes in communities where there had been no violence against Tutsi.

The army permitted a nominal restoration of civilian rule after Ndadayes murder, but the government remained paralyzed as radical Tutsi militia led dead city demonstrations and as predominantly Hutu opposition groups mounted an insurgency in rural areas. In 1996 Buyoya took power again, supposedly to end violence. The army set out to destroy the base of the insurgents among the population by a policy of regroupment, forcibly relocating hundreds of thousands of civilians into camps controlled by soldiers. During 1997, troops massacred thousands of unarmed civilians as they displaced hundreds of thousands of others into camps where there was no often no adequate provision for food, water or health needs. Soldiers burned homes, destroyed crops, and pillaged other property in the process. In many camps they raped, otherwise injured, or removed residents who then disappeared.

After 1993, the army expanded to an estimated 60,000 troops, drawing in students as well as many of the young, urban-based Tutsi militia. Rebels who left the insurgency were sometimes organized into paramilitary groups to assist the regular troops. The authorities established local self-defense forces in many communities and distributed firearms to civilians, most of them Tutsi.

At the start of 1998 the two major blocks of insurgents were the Forces for the Defense of Democracy (Forces pour la Dfense de la Dmocratie, FDD), with its political wing, the National Council for the Defense of Democracy (Conseil National pour la Dfense de la Dmocratie, CNDD) and the Party for the Liberation of the Hutu People (Parti pour la Liberation du Peuple Hutu, PALIPEHUTU) and the allied National Liberation Front (FNL). They competed with each other as well as with authorities for the support of the population. As the military extended its control in late 1997 and early 1998, the insurgents adopted increasingly harsh tactics against the local population, extorting money and goods and in some cases obliging them to relocate to areas under rebel control. The rebels killed local authorities and also ordinary people who refused to support the insurgency. In some communities, local people moved voluntarily to military bases because they had been attacked by insurgents.

On January 1, insurgents attacked the airport and the surrounding area. In that attack and subsequent reprisals by the army, some 300 civilians were killed. The insurgents clashed with the military around the capital throughout January and February and in other provinces to the south and west in the following months, but ordinary life resumed in some other parts of the country.

With the reduction in combat in many areas and in the face of continuing international opposition to the regroupment camps, authorities permitted civilians to return to their homes. From a high of some 700,000 in camps in 1997many of them forcibly displaced by government troopsthe number fell to about half a million in February 1998, not quite 10 percent of the population.

The insurgents were weakened by the disruption of their bases in the neighboring Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) in late 1996, following attacks by Rwandan-backed rebels against the Congolese (then Zairean) government. Burundian insurgents were forced to flee, most of them to Tanzania. In 1998, the Burundian government charged that rebels had created new bases in Tanzania, an allegation denied by the Tanzanian government. In one case in March 1998, however, Tanzanian authorities acknowledged that Burundians had been engaged in military activities in a camp near the border and removed them to another location. To help end these activities, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) announced a program to train Tanzanian police to monitor the camps.

The use of bases in adjacent countries was only one facet of the tangled connections among various insurgents and governments throughout the region. The International Commission of Inquiry (Rwanda), which monitored the flow of arms to the area, published proof of links between the FDD and PALIPEHUTU and remnants of the Forces Armes Rwandaises (FAR), the army which had participated in the Rwandan genocide in 1994 and which was attacking the current Rwandan government. Burundian and Rwandan insurgents cooperated in training, procuring arms, and in joint military operations, such as the January attack on the Bujumbura airport . Rwandan and Burundian armies, mirroring the collaboration of the rebels, engaged in joint operations in frontier regions.
In June, Buyoya and the National Assembly agreed to a new constitutional arrangement which enlarged the National Assemblyby some forty seats to be filled by political parties not previously represented and by members of civil society designated by the government. Installed as president under this new system, Buyoya erased some of the discredit of having taken power militarily and gained credibility in the international community.

Despite being enmeshed in the larger conflict within the region, the parties in Burundi persisted in peace negotiations just as military conflict escalated in the DRC. The new government and most of the major insurgent groups arrived at a preliminary agreement and a cease-fire that was to begin at the end of July. But both the government and the FDD immediately reneged on the cease-fire agreement and one part of PALIPEHUTU also declared that it would continue military activity. Several of the already numerous parties involved in negotiations divided further, complicating the process. FRODEBU had been divided into two wings for some time, one inside Burundi and one in exile; the CNDD/FDD split in May; PALIPEHUTU experienced internal difficulties in July; and UPRONA, a largely Tutsi party, divided in October.

Both insurgents and soldiers engaged in substantial military activity from July through October, particularly in the provinces of Rural Bujumbura, Bubanza, Kayanza, Muramvya, and Nyanza-Lac, where military attacks in August caused the flight of 2,000 people to Tanzania. A round of peace negotiations in October produced some progress and the parties were to meet again in January 1999.

Ethnically-motivated attacks marked the memory of all Burundians, many of whom believed that justice for these crimes was essential to peace. The calls to end impunity for these violations originally focused on recent events but grew to include demands for justice for the massacres of 1972, or even before. At the same time, both Hutu and Tutsi increasingly labeled the killings to which they have been subjected as genocide, a term whose emotional impact was amplified by the genocide of Tutsi in Rwanda in 1994.

As of April, nearly 10,000 persons were imprisoned in Burundi, the overwhelming majority of them Hutu charged with crimes against Tutsi. Although hundreds of Tutsi, civilian and military, had killed Hutu, very few were arrested for these crimes. Most judges and higher officials in the judicial systems and police were Tutsi, leading many Hutu to believe that ethnic considerations resulted in an unfair enforcement of the law.

Throughout the years of governmental paralysis, arrests continued but few prosecutions were completed. By 1998 the judicial system was overwhelmed and the prisons were overpopulated to the point of endangering the lives of those incarcerated. The 10,000 inmates were confined in prisons meant to accommodate a maximum of 3,600. In April, only 18 percent had been tried. Thousands of the others were detained without investigations having been completedor even begunand without having seen a judge, as the law required. Hard pressed for funds, the government cut back on food and medical attention to detainees, with the result that mortality among prisoners was close to 10 percent between January and April 1998, according to the local human rights group Iteka. In April, the government released eighty-three detainees against whom there was no credible evidence of guilt, in part because they lacked the food to feed them.

Most trials fell short of international standards of due process. Some took place within the space of one hour or less. Few of the accused had access to counsel. There were fewer than forty lawyers in Burundi and most of them were Tutsi who refused to defend those accused of crimes against other Tutsi. Since 1997, however, both the United Nations Human Rights Center and Iteka had arranged for foreign lawyers to assist the accused, with the result that the quality of some trials improved in 1998. In cases where lawyers were present, for example, the right of the defendant to present witnesses was more likely to be respected. At the end of October 1998 some 250 persons had been condemned to death.

Burundians from various parties called for an international tribunal to try the most serious offenders against international humanitarian law. Because a U.N. commission concluded that the 1993 killings of Tutsi constituted genocide, some Tutsi asserted that such a court should be established on the model of the international tribunal for Rwanda. Hutu expected that an international court might deliver more equitable justice than courts within Burundi.

While justice for civilians functioned imperfectly, army and police violated the rights of citizens virtually unchecked. Dozens of persons disappeared at their hands. Some were apparently detained incommunicado in irregular places of detention, but others were feared dead. Several persons detained by police or soldiers in and around the central market of Bujumbura in early 1998 had not been heard from nine months later.

In March, authorities confiscated the copies of a FRODEBU newspaper, LAube de la Dmocratie, and then closed down NetPress, a news agency which had published a report of the confiscation. The number of newspapers had declined sharply in the previous two years, in part because journalists fear harassment by the authorities. Authorities also enforced a ban on political demonstrations.
THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO
Human Rights Developments
In early August 1998 another war of liberation broke out in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC)less than two years since President Laurent Kabilas Alliance of Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Congo (ADFL) fought to rid the country of the dictatorial and corrupt rule of Mobutu Sese Seko. Civilians bore the brunt of the conflict as both sides resorted to extrajudicial executions and arbitrary detentions, with their perceived ethnic adversaries the main victims. The government maintained a policy of exclusion by strictly enforcing a ban on political activities introduced in 1997.

The Banyamulenge, ethnic Tutsis settled for generations in south Kivu, had spearheaded the ADFL rebellion in 1996 to assert citizenship rights that Mobutus government moved to deny them. They again rose in August, this time against their former ally President Kabila, claiming that he had usurped power and failed to resolve their nationality concerns. Neighboring Rwanda and Uganda intervened on their side, as they did during the first war, exposing a dramatic falling out between them and the man they helped carry to power.

The continued violence during 1997 and 1998 in the eastern provinces of north and south Kivu accelerated the slide to war. During the ADFLs rebellion, its allies from the Tutsi-dominated Rwandan Patriotic Army massacred thousands of Hutu refugees, including women and children. The systematic obstruction by the Congolese government of United Nations investigations into the killings contributed to the countrys diplomatic isolation and prevented the revival of its economy. Extremist Hutus responsible for the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, in which more than half a million minority Tutsis and moderate Hutus were killed, regrouped, and used the Kivus as springboards to launch devastating raids on their country. The Ugandan rebel Alliance of Democratic Forces similarly fought its own government out of north Kivu. The exiled groups had increasingly allied themselves with the Mayi-Mayi, traditional warrior groups opposed to the Rwandan presence and influence in their region, in joint attacks against government troops and ethnic Tutsis. Joint military operations by forces from the three countries failed to flush out the insurgents. The triggering factor in the second war was president Kabilas decision in late July ordering Rwandan troops home.

The rebel Congolese Rally for Democracy drew troops from disenchanted brigades of the Congolese Armed Forces. Its political branch brought together a diverse coalition of anti-Kabila groups, including, in addition to the Banyamulenge, figures from the national opposition and former dignitaries of the Mobutu era. Accusing President Kabila of corruption, nepotism, and failure to bring about democratic reforms, ethnic harmony, and regional stability the rebels vowed to correct these ills and to open the democratization process to other political forces. Their bid to remove the government in a lightening campaign was, however, thwarted when forces sent by the governments of Angola, Zimbabwe, and Namibia came to President Kabilas rescue. Their intervention saved the capital Kinshasa from an imminent fall to rebels attacking it from bases in western Congo.

Labeling the rebellion an invasion of his country by Rwanda and Uganda, President Kabila accused ethnic Tutsis collectively of supporting the aggression on his country. Other officials amplified the accusation by resorting to hate propaganda as they urged the population to help in tracking Tutsis. In the capital and other government-held areas police and the army arrested and arbitrarily detained hundreds of civilians in connection with the conflict, most of them ethnic Tutsis. According to relatives, soldiers raped dozens of detained women. Those picked up at random and later released said afterwards that they were briefly held in overcrowded and filthy lockups. Soldiers denied inmates food and medical care, they said, and tortured and summarily executed some detainees.

In the face of a growing international outcry at the arrests, the government formed an inter-ministerial commission to oversee the detainees and after some delay allowed the International Committee of the Red Cross regular access to those held in the capital. By mid-September, the government said it had reached a decision to expel many of the detainees to countries willing to grant them asylum.

Rebels also targeted civilians. Many humanitarian agencies operating in eastern Congo and the public complained about the confiscation of their vehicles and communications equipment by the rebels. In advance of their attack on the capital, rebels cut its power supply, interrupting the distribution of drinking water to its five million inhabitants, and disrupting health and other essential services, breaching international humanitarian law provisions prohibiting the destruction of objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian population..

All parties to the conflict subjected prisoners detained in connection to the conflict to ill-treatment and extrajudicial executions. When the attack on the capital was pushed back in August, soldiers and angry mobs summarily executed dozens of captured orsuspected rebels. Retreating government soldiers in late August reportedly killed dozens of detained civilians in the town of Kisangani, Congos third largest city. In reprisal for the killing of six of their colleagues in an ambush near Bukavu in August, rebel soldiers rounded up and summarily executed hundreds of villagers including six priests and nuns, in the locality of Kasika and surrounding villages.

Government and rebels systematically recruited child soldiers into their armies. The government mobilized for its counteroffensive thousands of child soldiers already enlisted in the army since the first civil war. It launched a recruitment drive in August that enlisted thousands, many of them as young as twelve. The rebels reenlisted hundreds of former child soldiers they found in transit camps run by humanitarian agencies in Bukavu and Kisangani where they were following skill-upgrading programs prior to their planned reunification with their families. On both sides of the conflict, children typically were attracted into joining armies because of the appeal of the gun and the uniform and the promises of a regular pay and meals.

The year was marked by the escalation of the governments repression of the civil and political rights of the Congolese. The enforcement of a ban on political activities by parties other the ruling ADFL was tightened following a warning in January by the minister of interior to politicians to either abide by the ban or risk trial before a special military court. Authorities dispersed a meeting on January 17 of the youth branch of the main opposition party, the Union for Democracy and Social Progress - UDPS, shortly before a scheduled address by Etienne Tshisekedi, the partys leader. The police arrested dozens of participants, and subjected them to ill-treatment and torture in its headquarters. Citing Tshisekedis persistent defiance, the government in mid-February exiled him to his home village where he was held in conditions of virtual detention. Forty-eight party militants and twelve senior advisors arrested in two raids on his home after his release in mid-July, were ill-treated during their brief detention. During one of many attacks on political parties, police on January 20 stormed the headquarters of the opposition Innovative Forces for Union and Solidarity (FONUS) and arrested its outspoken leader Joseph Olenghankoy.

By late October, about sixty soldiers and civilians convicted mainly of armed robbery were publicly executed following sentences passed by the Court of Military Order and the rejection of their appeals for presidential clemency. Trials before this court lacked the minimum guarantees of fairness since its decisions could not be appealed to a higher court. Initially established in 1997 to discipline Congos unruly military and try civilians charged with armed robbery, the court increasingly became part of the governments arsenal for the intimidation of its political opponents. In January it condemned Kabila Kalele and Jean-Francois Kabanda, both prominent members of the UDPS, to two years imprisonment for a press article critical of the government. In May the court sentenced Joseph Olenghankoy to fifteen years in prison for threatening state security, following hearings in which prosecutors argued for the death penalty.

The government continued to routinely detain journalists and writers for articles on topics it deemed sensitive, such as official corruption and security matters. The editor of the leading Kinshasa daily La Rfrence Plus was briefly detained in late April for covering a claim by a local rights group that the private residences of some military commanders doubled as secret detention places where detainees were tortured and disappeared. He was released only after being obliged to lead other journalists under military escort to one of the houses mentioned to demonstrate that no prisoners were held there. An editorial on the internal exile of the UDPS leader and the publication of a message to the people from him led to brief detentions of the editors of Le Potentiel and Le Palmers in February and April respectively. The government prevented private radios from broadcasting press reviews and political commentaries. For challenging that restriction, and its alleged complicity with the BBC, the government in April shut down Radio Amani (peace), which is run by the Catholic archdiocese of Kisangani.
ETHIOPIA
Human Rights Developments
The Ethiopian government, led by the Ethiopian Peoples Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF), continued to implement an ambitious program of political and economic reforms with significant donor support. Ethnically-based federal regions assumed executive, legislative, and judicial powers provided for under the 1994 constitution. The EPRDF maintained strict control over this process through parties affiliated to it which dominated regional governments. A handful of opposition parties, notably the All Amhara People Organization (AAPO) and the Council of Alternative Forces for Peace and Democracy in Ethiopia (CAFPD), preserved a precarious presence in the capital Addis Ababa, following years of relentless government curtailment of their activities, particularly in the countryside. Tensions persisted between the government and ethnic fronts which withdrew from earlier alliances with the EPRDF over their insistence that constitutionally guaranteed self-determination rights be immediately exercised in their regions. Sporadic clashes occurred in Oromia and Somali regional states between government troops and fighters from the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF) and the Ogaden National Liberation Front (ONLF) respectively. Tension remained high along the borders with Somalia where the government responded to incursions by the fundamentalist Al-Ittihad Al-Islami (Islamic Unity) by striking at its strongholds across the border and by backing armed factions in Somalia opposed to Al-Ittihad.

Wide-scale human rights violations occurred in the context of the governments suppression of armed insurgency and political dissent. The military and rural militia associated with parties affiliated to the EPRDF arrested thousands for months without charge or trial on account of their suspected support of armed insurgencies. Opposition activists, editors of the private press, and leaders of labor organizations who continued to challenge the EPRDFs monopolization of political space were systematically targeted through harassment and repeated detentions. Overcrowding, poor hygiene, and inadequate food compounded the plight of detainees. However, the government granted the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) increasing access to places of detention in 1997 and 1998, and cooperated with its efforts to assist inmates. The humanitarian agency reported visiting by the end of 1997 some 10,980 people held in connection with the 1991 ouster of the former regime or for security reasons, and registering 5,660 newdetainees.

The close political and strategic alliance between Ethiopia and Eritrea collapsed in early May when a minor border dispute flared up into brief violent confrontations. Hundreds were killed on both sides, mainly civilians. The fighting displaced thousands of villagers on both sides of the border. Fighting ceased in mid-June following intense mediation efforts, but a massive military buildup by both states continued as a bitter propaganda war and the pursuit of escalation by extremists on both sides reduced the chances of a negotiated settlement.

Both sides traded accusations of ill-treatment of their citizens whom the conflict had found on the wrong side of the border. Eritrea denied deliberately expelling Ethiopians and said its policy would remain one of welcoming and protecting Ethiopians willing to stay, but a September 26 statement by the Eritrean foreign ministry put the number of Ethiopians who had voluntarily returned to their country at 6,600.

Compelling evidence pointed to a deliberate campaign by the Ethiopian authorities to expel Eritreans and Ethiopians of Eritrean origin to Eritrea. By late October, an estimated thirty thousand, most of them Ethiopian citizens who had not taken up Eritrean nationality in the aftermath of Eritreas 1991 secession from Ethiopia, were deported after experiencing systematic denial of their human rights. The campaign swiftly degenerated from selective targeting to indiscriminate deportations. A government policy statement on June 11 said the 550,000 Eritreans residing in Ethiopia could continue to live and work peacefully there. However, as a precautionary measure, the statement ordered members of Eritrean political and community organizations to leave the country on account of their suspected support of the Eritrean war effort, and gave a mandatory leave of absence of one month to Eritreans occupying sensitive jobs. While authorities initially suggested an option of voluntary departure for the targeted categories, they later began rounding up people on the sole basis of their being Eritrean or of Eritrean extraction, and apparently without making an effort to distinguish between the two categories. Not all who fell in the dragnet were deported. Those of military age were sent to detention camps where an unknown number remained held by late October without charge or trial. Others were trucked, after brief detentions, to remote border posts and ordered to cross into Eritrea on foot. Those detained and expelled included many elderly retired citizens of Ethiopia, mainly businessmen who had lived most of their lives and raised their children in other provinces of Ethiopia while Eritrea fought for its independence. The government ordered the freezing of their assets and revoked their business licenses, stripping them and their families of their livelihood. Many families were separated during the deportations from underage children who were not allowed to leave with them, or, in a few cases, from children who were deported unaccompanied.

Prime Minister Meles Zenawi in an interview with Radio Ethiopia on July 9 said the deportees were foreigners, adding that . . . any foreign national, whether Eritrean or Japanese etc. . . . lives in Ethiopia because of the goodwill of the Ethiopian government. If we say Go, because we dont like the color of your eyes, they have to leave. The issue was, however, more complex than the prime ministers assertion suggested. For the forty years preceding Eritrean independence in 1991 both countries were part of the same internationally recognized state. Strong cultural, religious, and linguistic affinities existed between the two people, and intermarriages were common. The Ethiopian constitution, in its Article 6, grants citizenship by birth to any person with one or both Ethiopian parents. Many Eritreans had retained their Ethiopian nationality when Eritrea became independent, and Ethiopia did not take any legal measure to rescind their citizenship then. As a consequence, the Ethiopian government had no legal basis to consider many of the deportees as aliens. The roundup, detention, and the ill-treatment of which the deportees, whether nationals or aliens, were the victims violated rights of nondiscrimination and freedom of movement that the Ethiopian constitution guaranteed. The deportations and accompanying violations of a range of rights of the deportees also violated Ethiopias obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and other human rights treaties it has ratified and indeed incorporated into the law of the land.

The harassment and imprisonment on political grounds of opposition leaders continued. Professor Asrat Woldeyes, the president of the opposition All Amhara Peoples Organization (AAPO) who was imprisoned in 1994, was hospitalized in January for treatment for diabetes and other health complications; he was nearly seventy, and also suffered heart problems. The government adamantly refused to bend to domestic and international appeals, including from Human Rights Watch, for his release. By late October his condition had improved, but he remained under guard in his hospital room. He was serving consecutive prison sentences of two and three years in Addis Ababa central prison after convictions for inciting armed rebellion. He credibly complained that he did not receive fair trials, but his appeals were rejected. He and another twenty-two AAPO leaders faced another trial which began in 1995 on new charges of armed rebellion. The court refused to examine claims by several codefendants that their confessions implicating the group were obtained under torture. Aberra Yemane Ab, an activist jailed since December 1993 when he returned to Addis Ababa from his U.S. exile to participate in a conference on peace and reconciliation, was allowed in late September only a few minutes encounter with a son he hadnt seen since he was incarcerated. The government denied the son further visits on the grounds that he, a holder of a U.S. passport, was a foreigner.

Security forces on September 17 surrounded the headquarters of the elected Ethiopian Teachers Association in Addis Ababa, and ordered ETAs officials to hand the premises over to a government-sponsored teachers association. ETAs executive committee members present at the time, Shimeles Zewdi, Abate Angore, and Aweke Mulugeta, were detained without a court order and were only released on October 15. The latter two were briefly detained following a similar raid on ETAs compound on August 13. The premises had survived as a symbol of ETAs autonomy, and were a nagging reminder of the associations persistent rejection of ethnic federalism policies, particularly when applied in the field of education. Previous attacks on the association since its conflict with the government started in 1992 included the closure of its regional and local offices, the freezing of its accounts, and the repeated detention of its officials. In May 1996, the associations president Dr. Taye Woldesemayat was arrested and charged, together with five others, with armed conspiracy. Exactly a year later, Assefa Maru, his replacement as head of ETA and a human rights advocate,was gunned down by the police who accused him after the fact of participating in an armed insurgency.

Dr. Taye Woldesemayat was subjected to cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment in Addis Ababa central prison where he was transferred after his arrest and remained. The presiding judge denied bail, and when the teachers leader repeatedly complained that he was being harassed by his guards, the judge failed to act decisively to restrain them. The guards in February placed Woldesemayat in a death-row cell known as the darkness cell. When he again complained about the conditions of his detention in a July 28 hearing, the presiding judge, holding him in contempt, ordered him put in chains for twenty-four hours a day until a hearing scheduled for September 29. The constant stress from these conditions and daily verbal abuse by his guards reportedly exacted a heavy psychological and physical toll on Woldesemayat.

Authorities in March arrested thirty-four individuals and charged them with armed conspiracy with the Oromo Liberation Front. They joined in prison an earlier group of thirty-one prominent members of the Oromo community who were arrested in October and November 1997 and faced similar charges, punishable by from five years imprisonment to death. The government claimed that some of the sixty-five Oromos were OLF fighters and accused the others of membership in OLF support groups. The groups in question included the newly founded Human Rights League; the Oromo Relief Association dissolved by the government in 1995; the newspaper Urji , which ceased publishing after the arrest of key journalists; an Oromo cultural revival association; and a medical clinic catering for the Oromo community in Addis Ababa. Typically, the trial started with a round of adjournments which the government attributed to lack of judges.

Personnel shortages and meager resources indeed led to severe delays in the courts and slowed down the restructuring of the judiciary in line with the federal system. With a backlog of thousands of cases by late 1998 in Addis Ababa alone, and few judges to clear it, one year adjournments became routine in the court system, with suspects and defendants having to spend long months in pretrial detention. The legal rights of prisoners to speedy and fair trials thus remained seriously compromised. Prisoners facing trial on political and security charges credibly claimed that the government was using the near paralysis of the justice system to neutralize them and their parties, associations, and newspapers for years at a time without appearing to be using an iron fist. Long term detention before even coming to trial faced some prisoners held solely for the nonviolent exercise of their freedom of expression and association. Detention for indefinite periods also applied to those accused of serious crimes and violence with political dimensions. A case in point of the latter was the internationally supported trial of officials of the previous Derg regime for crimes against humanity, an initiative once lauded as a major strike against impunity but which was seriously tarnished by its unconscionably slow pace. On September 10, the Office of the Special Prosecutor announced the release of thirty-one defendants who had been in pretrial detention for seven years for lack of evidence.

Repression against the independent press escalated to unprecedented levels in the last quarter of 1997 and in 1998. There were seventeen detained journalists in Ethiopia in late October. The brief but often repeated detentions of journalists observed in most of 1997 gave way to the crippling practice of wholesale arrests of key members of the editorial and managerial staff of vocal publications, a tactic which amounted to the virtual banning of the targeted publications. Five journalists from the pro-Oromo weekly Urji remained in detention since their arrest in the last quarter of 1997, including the editor-in-chief and his deputy and the reporter Garoma Bekele, who at the time was also secretary of the newly founded Human Rights League. Together with other Oromo leaders rounded up during that period, they faced charges of armed conspiracy with the OLF: prosecutors accused Urji of being an organ of the OLF. The crackdown came shortly after an early October article in which the newspaper challenged the official version of the killing of three Oromo activists in Addis Ababa which the government claimed had occurred during a shootout. The newspaper cited eyewitnesses who claimed the three were killed without warning. Urji ceased publishing following the onslaught. The private weekly Tobia suffered a similar fate when four editors were arrested on January 16, 1998 following the papers publication of a leaked internal U.N. memorandum recommending security precautions to its staff. Hours after their arrest, the newspapers offices were burned to the ground, its equipment, archive, and database totally destroyed. The newspaper ceased publishing but reappeared after the release of its journalists in July and August. Despite repeated appeals by media watchdogs for an investigation of the fire, its origin remained undetermined by late October. On July 13, Shimelis Kamal, Berhane Negash, and Teferi Mokennen of Nishan , an independent Amharic weekly newspaper which at the time had published just eight issues, were arrested for an article criticizing the governments deportation of Eritreans. Freed a day later, they were immediately rearrested for issuing a press release criticizing their arrest and detained without a court order for a month. In the interim, police ignored two orders issued by a judge to either charge or release them immediately. The crackdown succeeded in eroding the commitment of the sole financial backer of Nishan: the paper ceased publishing when he withdrew his support. For denouncing in a press release in February the governments muzzling of the independent press, Kiffle Mulate, editor of Ethio-Time and national coordinator of the Ethiopian Free Press Journalists Association, was himself detained for six months. Repeated arrests had forced the leaders of that association and some twenty other journalists into exile.
Kenya
Human Rights Developments
The lead-up to Kenyas second multiparty election, on December 29, 1997, was fraught with violence and intimidation, and marred by government reneging on promised legal reforms to allow genuine political liberalization. Several peaceful pro-democracy rallies were brutally dispersed, an estimated one million eligible youth were denied registration, and over 100,000 people were displaced in the Coast Province following ethnically-driven attacks on groups largely affiliated with the opposition. Under pressure, the government made concessions a month before the election to allow some constitutional reform and to permit the registration of opposition party Safina. While these gestures calmed somewhat the volatile climate and allowed for the election to proceed, they were not sufficient to level the playing field to allow for a genuinely free and fair election. The reelection of President Moi for five more years and the victory of his ruling party was due both to longstanding government obstruction of the opposition as well as to deep divisions within the opposing parties, largely on ethnic lines.

There were hopes that the election would bring an end to the violence that had marred the run-up and that President Moi would finally permit reform after securing a further, and under consitutional term-limits, final term of office. However, 1998 was marked both by deepening ethnic hatred and continuing violence, and a growing political crisis due to the governments unwillingness to allow any reform that would end the absolute executive power wielded by President Moi. The president responded to calls for reform with a characteristic combination of recalcitrance and brutality, all the while making promises to bring about change.

In January, the results of the presidential election were challenged in a court petition by opposition Democratic Party (DP) leader Mwai Kibaki, who subsequently, with his lawyer, received anonymous death threats. Ethnic violence also followed in two DP constituencies in Rift Valley Province. Armed groups of Kalenjin (the presidents ethnic group) attacked ethnic Kikuyu residents in night raids, raping, hacking with machetes, or killing with firearms, before looting and burning their homes. Over one hundred people were reportedly killed and thousands displaced. The initial attacks were well organized and from outside the community.

The attacks mirrored similar violence that had taken place in the run-up to the previous elections in 1992 and afterwards, when members of the ruling party attacked members of ethnic groups considered to support the opposition. In those attacks, it was later found that ruling party members had paid some attackers a fee for each house burned and person killed and that government vehicles had transported some of the attackers. Since 1992, over 300,000 people had been displaced by this violence. The authorities consistently failed to provide adequate security to those under threat or to hold those responsible for the violence accountable. As in the past, the response of the security forces to the violence was slow and although some arrests were made and security temporarily increased, residents remained distrustful of the authorities.

In retaliation, members of the Kikuyu community attacked and virtually wiped out a Kalenjin community at Naishe (Lare), slaughtering men, women, and children. Shortly after the attack on the Kalenjin community, President Moi publicly called for peace and the violence subsided, although sporadic attacks continued through the year.

The renewal of political violence occurred against the backdrop of the calls for legal reform to curb presidential powers. Some significant legislative reforms were passed in November 1997 following talks between the government and opposition politicians in the Inter-Parties Parliamentary Group (IPPG). Prior to the election, a coalition of opposition parties, human rights, religious and nongovernmental groups came together in the National Convention Executive Council (NCEC) to call for constitutional reform. Peaceful rallies and strikes called by the NCEC in 1997 were met with brutal force, however, in what was a major factor in pushingfor the enactment of the reforms prior to the election. The government successfully divided the constitutional reform lobby by selecting the IPPG as a body to deal with and excluding the NCEC from participation in the reform process, reducing its momentum and dividing the reform constituency. By years end, the reform crisis had not been resolved and the post-election environment continued to be characterized by distrust, infighting, and a lack of consensusplaying perfectly into Mois hand.

In August, Kenya became the focal point of the international news following the bombing of the U.S. embassies there and in neighboring Tanzania. The attack on the embassy resulted in the death of some 400 Kenyans as well as twelve embassy staff members; thousands of Kenyans were wounded, many grievously. In addition to the human suffering caused by the bombing itself, the incident had further repercussions for the human rights situation. First, the event drew international attention from the domestic human rights problems in Kenya. Second, the governments response to the bombing was to crack down indiscriminately against foreigners and Muslim-run nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). Refugees without distinction were told to report to the immigration authorities and informed that documents issued by the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees to them were no longer valid. When accredited refugees with UNHCR letters presented themselves at immigration, these letters were taken away and they were given papers that deemed them illegal immigrants.

In September, without making public the basis for the measures, the government canceled the registration of five Islamic relief agencies for allegedly supporting terrorismthe Al-Haramain Foundation, Help African People, the Islamic Relief Organization, the Ibrahim Bin Abdul Aziz Al Ibrahim Foundation, and Mercy Relief International. The authorities claimed that materials for the bomb were smuggled in as relief aid with the help of some Islamic relief agencies. The offices of Mercy Relief International had been raided by the Kenyan police and agents of the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigations (FBI) shortly after the bombing.

Police brutality, bad prison conditions, lack of an independent judiciary, and repressive legislation remained major impediments to respect for human rights in Kenya. No progress was made during 1998 by the legal task forces formed by the attorney general in 1993 to amend or repeal repressive legislation that impinged upon the rights of freedom of speech, association, and assembly.

The independent media also came under attack. In April, the editor of Dispatch was arrested for an article containing alarming information. In July, three publications were refused registration Finance , Post, and Star and a fourth, Kenya Confidential , was told that it was functioning illegally since it had not registered. The same month, newspaper stalls were attacked by unknown assailants who destroyed hundreds of copies of the Daily Nation newspaper, the most outspoken daily.
Liberia
Human Rights Developments
Although President Charles Taylor declared his intention to head a government that respected human rights and the rule of law, the actions of his government during his first full year in office dispelled hopes that this government would live up to its promises. President Taylor took office following an election in July 1997 that ended a brutal seven-year civil war. A former faction leader during the war, he inherited a country deeply divided by the numerous demobilized faction fighters, a shattered economy and political system, and the displacement of over half its population.

During the war, all the factions were responsible for terrorizing the local populations in order to loot and to discourage support for rival factions. The widespread atrocities against civilians included extrajudicial executions, torture, forced labor, and extortion. The factions consisted predominantly of bands of armed fighters, many as young as ten years of age, with no formal military training. The U.N. estimated that some 15,000 to 20,000 children had directly participated in violent acts, were exposed to fighting, and were themselves brutally victimized.

The timetable for disarmament, demobilization, and the election that brought the conflict to an end, under the auspices of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the United Nations (U.N.), was extremely tight. A number of important measures required in the terms of the peace accord were not completed prior to the election, particularly the disarmament and demobilization of combatants and the return of refugees from neighboring countries. The larger context in which the electionwas held placed limitations on how free and fair it could be, and President Taylors victory was due in large part to the implicit threat that he would resume the fighting if he lost.

Moreover, in a bid to negotiate peace in Liberia, international actions dispensed with demands for accountability in an effort to broker a political resolution of the long war, however tenuous. The peace accords granted a general amnesty to faction fighters for abuses committed in the course of actual military engagements, posing a serious obstacle to reconciliation and rebuilding efforts. Those responsible for committing some of the most unimaginable atrocities during the war were neither punished for their actions nor effectively demobilized. Former faction fightersparticularly those of Taylors faction, the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL)continued to act with impunity and remained a serious impediment to continued peace.

The wholesale enrollment of fighters from Taylors former faction into the countrys security forces posed a major threat. Following his inauguration, the new president rejected the peace accord provision that provided for an open and transparent restructuring of the security forces by the West African peacekeeping force. Instead, former NPFL fighters were placed in the security and police forces without serious efforts to provide training or to meet pledges to incorporate members from the other armed factions. The Liberian defense minister stated that the Armed Forces of Liberia consisted of some 14,000 troops, despite the governments estimate that it needed an army of no more than 5,000. After taking office, Taylor also created a new special security unit, known informally as the tie-dye boys due to their blue camouflage uniforms, which quickly became notorious for harassing civilians and looting. Former armed NPFL fighters were also permitted by the government to create security firms for hire by private sector companies. There were complaints of intimidation, extortion, and general lawlessness by both the government forces and the private security companies.

The newly constituted armed forces were responsible for killings, disappearances, and the harassment of government critics and opponents. Throughout the year, tensions escalated. A prominent incident was the in-custody killing of prominent Taylor critic Samuel Dokie, along with his wife and two others, after their arrest by Taylors special security services bodyguards on November 28, 1997. Although the government announced that steps would be taken to hold those responsible accountable, the security officers brought to trial for the murders were acquitted. Nowah Flomo, a market woman, was seized from her home in June 1998 following a confrontation with a security officer; her arrest was never acknowledged and her disappearance remained unsolved as of October 1998. Five security officers were arrested in connection with her case, but released in August. After a public uproar, they were reportedly rearrested but no further steps were taken by the government to investigate the case or to prosecute the responsible officials.

The relationship between the state security forces and supporters of officially disbanded warring faction leader Roosevelt Johnson steadily worsened during the year, culminating in fighting in the capital Monrovia and Mr. Johnsons flight from the country. President Taylor repeatedly accused Mr. Johnson of plotting to overthrow him by force while Mr. Johnson claimed that Taylors forces were attempting to kill him. On June 6, six former fighters of Johnsons ethnic Krahn group, the United Liberation Movement for Democracy in Liberia (ULIMO-J), disappeared at the international airport where they were scheduled to depart on a flight to the Gambia. Their papers were reportedly seized by immigration officials and none of them boarded the plane, although the Ministry of Justice later denied that they had been stopped and claimed that they had reached their destination in the Gambia where they had planned military training to destabilize the government. Throughout the year, there were complaints by members of the Krahn and Mandingo groups of harassment and threats by security forces who accused them of supporting Mr. Johnson, particularly in Lofa and Nimba counties.

There were two outbreaks of violence in Monroviaa sign of how fragile and volatile the situation was. In August, ECOMOG soldiers opened fire to disband an armed group of Johnson supporters on Camp Johnson Road, the home of Roosevelt Johnson, killing one and dispersing the group. Clashes also broke out on September 18 and 19 between government security forces and Johnson supporters in central Monrovia. The crisis began when Liberian troops tried to arrest the former rebel leader, fanning out through his neighborhood stronghold, largely populated by his ethnic Krahn supporters. Small arms, rocket, and mortar battles erupted in the capital and security forces shot into the U.S. Embassy as Mr. Johnson sought refuge there. Some fifty people were reported killed. The U.S. Embassy refused to turn Mr. Johnson over to the Taylor government on the grounds that he would not receive a fair trial; he remained in the embassy for one week before being flown to safety in Sierra Leone. Trials commenced in a military court of twenty-two people on various counts ranging from murder to treason.

The incident was reminiscent of a previous attempt by Taylor to arrest Johnson during the civil war in 1996, sparking fighting which claimed hundreds of lives. At that time, Johnson also fled to the U.S. Embassy which helped him reach Ghana. When Taylor won the presidential election in 1997 he reached a tenuous peace with Johnson who returned to become Liberias rural development minister.

The independent press periodically came under attack by the government. Staff members of the Inquirer newspaper were subjected to arbitrary arrests and detention, while the New Democrat was denied registration. The independent Star Radio station was closed by the government for one month in January 1998, and the government threatened to shut down Radio Veritas of the Catholic Church. In one particularly threatening case, the producer and broadcaster for the Ducor Broadcasting Association, Alex Redd, was abducted and held captive for two days by security forces on December 21, 1997. When he contacted the police to file a complaint after his release, he was detained and later charged with treason for inquiring into the Dokie murder. Shortly afterwards the charges were amended to filing a false report to law enforcement officers on the grounds that he had lied about his abduction. Following his release, he was harassed and received death threats. He eventually fled the country and sought political asylum.

Voluntary repatriation of the estimated one million refugee and internally displaced Liberians continued. In September, the U.N.High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) estimated that since operations began in December 1997 some 80,000 people were repatriated with UNHCR help, and 185,000 returned home of their own accord. According to UNHCR, some 480,000 Liberian refugees were in neighboring countries at the outset of the repatriation program. Of those, 235,000 were in Guinea, 160,000 in Ivory Coast, 17,000 in Ghana, 14,000 in Sierra Leone and 6,000 in Nigeria. Statistics on the return of internally displaced populations were unavailable, although many returned on their own. The Liberian Refugee, Repatriation and Resettlement Commission complained that security personnel at checkpoints were harassing returnees. In September, UNHCR held a meeting to discuss reintegration of returnees and the rehabilitation of damaged infrastructure in host countries. The increased security risks and the growing volatility within the country, led to serious questions by years end as to whether the repatriation program should continue as scheduled and for the need for neighboring governments to remain prepared to host Liberian refugees in the following year.
MOZAMBIQUE
Human Rights Developments
Mozambique continued to consolidate peace and reconciliation, five years after the peace accord, with the 1999 presidential and parliamentary elections to be a litmus test of how sustainable the peace was to be. Despite improvements, human rights concerns including heavy-handed policing and the manipulation of the electoral process remained.

On June 30, the first ever municipal elections occurred after a number of delays. Polls were limited to just thirty-three towns and cities, with nearly 1.5 million eligible voters, about 10 percent of the population. The elections were notable for the boycott by the main opposition parties, voter absenteeism, and poor administration; many polling stations opened late and the National Election Commission (CNE) took two days longer than the fifteen allowed by law to compile and announce the results. Fewer than 15 percent of voters turned out.

The Mozambique National Resistance (RENAMO) and many of the smaller parties which stood in the 1994 multiparty elections called for a boycott and used the two-week campaign period to promote their boycott. This resulted in ruling Front for the Liberation of Mozambique (FRELIMO) candidates being unopposed for mayor ( president ) in nineteen of the thirty-three cities. FRELIMO won the mayoral elections in all thirty-three cities and towns although independent candidates gained significant numbers of seats in Maputo, Beira, and Matola.

Witnesses described some fraud and intimidation. RENAMO cadres forcibly collected and destroyed voters cards in the northern town of Angoche, Nampula province. Police detained ten RENAMO members there on charges of seizing voting cards, who were sentenced to between three and six months in prison. In Chimoio, Manica province, RENAMO members reportedly visited the bars and warned people that if they had ink on their hands - voters hands are stamped to prevent repeat voting - the party would note for future reference that they had voted.

FRELIMO supporters in Maputo threw stones at vehicles full of supporters of Philippe Gagnaux, one of the independent candidates for mayor of the capital, injuring a women. RENAMO, also alleged that six of its members were arrested by the police in Tete city in June, targeted because they were campaigning for a boycott of the elections. RENAMO also published in April a list of eighty-four names of RENAMO members or sympathizers who it alleged lost their jobs or were otherwise victimized because of their political loyalties. By August the Supreme Court had identified six anomalies in the administration of the electoral process at polling stations throughout the country and ordered the CNE to correct the errors.
Arms smuggling was a particularly prominent issue and generated joint South African-Mozambican police operations against it. The head of Chokwe prison was arrested in May, charged with accepting a bribe after releasing four alleged arms dealers. The Mozambican Christian Councils Guns into Hoes project continued to grow with some 27,000 items of weaponry exchanged since 1995 for useful goods such as bicycles, sewing machines, or agricultural tools. Landmines remained a problem, but the government demonstrated its support of the 1997 Ottawa Mine Ban Treaty by ratifying it on August 25.

Police behavior remained a serious concern and continued to be the source of the majority of complaints Human Rights Watch received in 1997. In January police killed one man and wounded four others as they attempted to disperse some 250 security guards who demonstrated for better pay against a private security firm in Maputo run by the United States corporation Wackenhut. Human Rights Watch also received a number of reports of excessive force against suspects by police in Nampula, including shootings. In May, in the Angoche area, a policeman who shot a man suspected of stealing a chicken but he remained in post. In late November 1997 reporter Joo Chamusse tried to interview people about a robbery in which police were alleged to have been too intimidated to intervene. The police detained him on the pretext that he did not have his identity card.

Conscription had ended with the signing of the October 1992 peace agreement, but the Mozambican parliament on November 26, 1997 passed a bill reintroducing military conscription, against strong opposition from RENAMO. According to the law all Mozambicans who reached eighteen must register for military service. The reintroduction of conscription followed failure to attract volunteers to the Mozambican Defense Force (FADM) In 1998, there were reports that renewed conscription had been abused. The commander of the Samora Machel Military College repeatedly denied that youths in Nampula were being violently recruited into the military. The Child-Soldier Campaign, a network of Mozambican NGOs dedicated to childrens welfare, also lobbied parliament to legislate against conscription of former child-soldiers who fought in the war ending in 1992. According to the campaigns coordinator there were some 10,000 ex-combatant youngsters who were at risk of conscription.
Nigeria
Human Rights Developments
The death of head of state Gen. Sani Abacha on June 8, 1998, brought to an abrupt end the discredited transition program that had apparently been designed for his self-succession as a civilian president, and brought the first hopes for several years of a genuinely elected government in Nigeria. New head of state Gen. Abdulsalam Abubakar swiftly repealed the 1996 decrees bringing the Abacha program into existence and announced steps to hold fresh elections to install a civilian government at the end of May 1999. General Abubakar progressively released most civilian political prisoners, and announced that treason charges against some of those in exile (including Nobel laureate Wole Soyinka) would be withdrawn. However, decrees allowing detention without trial, suspending constitutional guarantees of human rights, and barring the courts from reviewing executive acts, remained in force. One month afterthe death of General Abacha, MKO Abiola, the presumed winner of the 1993 presidential elections, died in detention. Independent international pathologists who carried out a postmortem found no evidence of a cause of death other than heart disease, but his death was doubtless hastened by four years of incarceration without proper medical treatment.

Elections to state assemblies were held in December 1997, and to the national assembly in April 1998, under the Abacha transition program. Candidates were screened by the National Electoral Commission of Nigeria (NECON), by the State Security Service, and by the National Drug Law Enforcement Agency. Any candidate with connections to pro-democracy, human rights, or opposition groups was excluded. Turnout for the votes was very low. All five officially-sanctioned parties subsequently adopted General Abacha as their preferred presidential candidate for elections due in August, although by the time of his death Abacha had yet to declare his intentions formally.

Opposition figures who had refused to participate in Abachas transition responded more positively to the new program announced by General Abubakar, but concerns remained, including Abubakars endorsement of the draft constitution of 1995, prepared by a constitutional assembly that was not elected under free and fair conditions, and unpublished by General Abacha. Abubakar did then publish for discussion the constitution which was to come into effect when a civilian government took office. Human rights and pro-democracy activists also argued that any transition program under the control of the military could not lead to genuine elections, and that the new Independent National Electoral Commission (INEC), despite its name, would necessarily remain subject to the militarys wishes. Accordingly, they called for a government of national unity to be established, including representatives from a range of groups opposed to military rule, to govern during the period leading to elections and to convene a sovereign national conference to draft a new constitution. Twenty-four political parties representing more mainstream politicians applied to the INEC to be registered.

A number of high-profile political prisoners were excluded from the releases ordered by General Abubakar during the weeks after he became head of state and remained in detention as of mid-October. They included military personnel convicted after unfair trials before military tribunals of involvement in alleged coup plots in 1990, 1995, and 1997, as well as civilians Niran Malaolu, a journalist convicted of involvement in the 1997 coup plot, and Turner Ogburu, convicted in connection with the 1990 coup plot and still in detention despite court orders for his release. Sheikh Ibrahim El Zak-Zaky, a radical Muslim leader, entered his third year in detention, charged with publication of materials capable of undermining the security of the nation. At least 163 bank executives remained in detention without charge under failed bank decrees passed by the Abacha government, although the government promised to review their cases. A number of close advisers of General Abacha were detained following his death, in connection with allegations of massive theft of government funds.

Decrees restricting freedom of expression remained in force, including the 1993 Offensive Publications (Proscription) and Newspapers decrees, although the new minister of information promised their review. The draft 1995 constitution included provision for a mass media commission to regulate the media, raising concerns over future restrictions on critical reporting. Prior to the death of General Abacha, journalists faced continual harassment from security forces, though the situation improved dramatically following his death. In August, a court ordered the federal government to pay 2.4 million (U.S.$28,235) compensation to Tell magazine in respect of 70,000 copies of the magazine seized in May 1993. However, a journalist was shot dead in a printers office in Enugu, eastern Nigeria, during the same month, by police who had come to arrest the printer. In August, the presidential task force on terrorism alleged that Bagauda Kaltho, a journalist missing since January 1996, had died in a bomb blast in Kaduna for which he was responsible. The publishers of News magazine, where Kaltho had worked, rejected this allegation, claiming that Kaltho might have died after being tortured in police custody.

Opposition rallies held before the death of General Abacha were routinely disrupted. Rallies held after Abachas death and in protest at the death of Chief Abiola were also broken up by police, with dozens of people arrested. Police warned prospective demonstrators that the Public Order Act requiring a police permit for assemblies was still in effect. In July, police also warned Muslim groups protesting the continued detention of El Zak-Zaky not to hold demonstrations; police shot dead five people taking part in demonstrations in support of El Zak-Zaky in Kaduna in September. In August, General Abubakar announced the repeal of decrees dissolving the national executives of unions in the oil sector and in universities and of the Nigerian Labour Congress, the union umbrella organization. Other decrees restricting the right to organize remained in force.

Nigerian citizens not actively involved in politics faced a consistent pattern of human rights violations both before and after the death of General Abacha. The security forces carried out summary executions and torture, and prison conditions remained life threatening. In July 1998 General Abubakar ordered the immediate release of prisoners held for extended periods on criminal charges without trial or held despite having completed the sentences handed down by the courts. Different state governments operated special task forces with names like Operation Sweep or Operation Storm that were among the most abusive units of the Nigerian security forces. Many of those arrested by these units were convicted of armed robbery before special tribunals which did not respect international standards; those found guilty were executed by firing squad without the right to appeal.

The rights of women in Nigeria were routinely violated. The Penal Code explicitly stated that assaults committed by a man on his wife were not an offence, if permitted by customary law and if grievous hurt was not inflicted. Marital rape was not a crime. Child marriages remained common, especially in northern Nigeria, with consequent serious health effects for children subjected to early pregnancy or to intercourse prior to sexual maturity. Women were denied equal rights in the inheritance of property; however, a landmark ruling from eastern Nigeria in September 1997 upheld a womans right to inherit her husbands estate. It was estimated that about 60 percent of Nigerian women were subjected to female genital cutting. Child labor, especially in domestic work, often completely unpaid, remained common.

In Ogoniland, home of the Movement for the Survival of the Ogoni People (MOSOP), of which Ken Saro-Wiwa was leaderbefore his execution in November 1995, severe repression continued during 1998 until the death of General Abacha. The Rivers State Internal Security Task Force, created in response to the Ogoni crisis, summarily executed several people suspected of sympathy for MOSOP during raids carried out following MOSOP demonstrations, killing at least one after General Abubakar became head of state, and others were detained without trial. From September General Abubakar took progressive steps to relax security measures. Twenty Ogonis, held since 1994 on charges of murder before a special tribunal in connection with the same events as those for which Saro-Wiwa and eight others were hanged, were released in early September, and other detainees some days later. At the end of the month it was announced that the Task Force had been withdrawn from the region.

Elsewhere in the oil producing areas of the Niger Delta, police and soldiers responded to any threat of protest against oil company activity with arbitrary arrests, beatings, and sometimes killings. In May, about two hundred youths occupied an offshore platform belonging to Chevron, and closed down production. Soldiers killed two and injured another in the course of reoccupying the platform; Chevron later admitted transporting these troops. In July 1998 eleven youths protesting the failure of Mobil to pay compensation for damage caused by a major spill which took place in January were reportedly shot dead by police. Numerous other less serious incidents took place, and seemed to escalate, during the year.
RWANDA
Human Rights Developments
The Rwandan government and insurgents fought an increasingly brutal and costly war, killing thousandsprobably tens of thousandsof unarmed civilians during 1998. Based largely in the northwest, the insurgents also led major strikes against other regions. They attacked jails to free prisoners and they slaughtered members of the Tutsi minority, government officials, and others who refused to support the rebellion. Soldiers of the Rwandan Patriotic Army (RPA), equipped with helicopters, armored vehicles, and heavy weapons killed unarmed civilians, sometimes in pursuit of insurgents, sometimes in places or at times where no rebels were present but where they suspected the population of supporting them. In an incident in late October that became known only near the end of 1997, RPA soldiers allegedly caused the deaths of hundreds and perhaps thousands of persons who had sought refuge in caves at Kanama.

Estimating the number killed in the course of the year was difficult. Investigators could not travel freely in the area and witnesses often refused to speak for fear of reprisals. Diplomats concluded that between 100,000 and 250,000 persons were unaccounted for out of a population of some 1,500,000 in the two prefectures of Gisenyi and Ruhengeri. Some 200,000 persons did not collect their required identity papers in Gisenyi, suggesting that they were either dead or living on the other side of the frontier, in the forest, or in areas controlled by rebels. Assessing responsibility for the slaughter of civilians was sometimes complicated by misinformation from witnesses or government sources. First reports said that thirty-four persons were slain by insurgents at Tare in July, for example, but eyewitnesses later said RPA soldiers were responsible for the crime.

Early in 1998, the army began gathering residents of the northwest in supervised camps which by the end of October held some 480,000 persons. In some regions, soldiers ordered people to destroy banana plantations and other crops that might provide cover to rebels, thus causing food production to fall. In addition, farmers were too afraid of attackfrom one side or the otherto work their fields in some regions. Faced with food shortages and threats by insurgents, some persons willingly moved to the camps where they hoped to receive food and protection. Others were forced by soldiers to go there. In areas where the insurgency was strong, some residents moved close to rebel bases voluntarily and others were intimidated by the rebels into doing so.

Thus continues the war that seemed to have ended in 1994 when the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF), composed largely of Tutsi refugees who had spent decades in exile, defeated the Rwandan government, made up primarily of Hutu, who form the great majority of the Rwandan population. The Tutsi had been driven from Rwanda during the 1959 Hutu revolution which ended longstanding Tutsi rule. In 1994 the government and army carried out a genocide of more than half a million Tutsi until they were stopped by the RPF.

The former government led some two million Rwandans into exile, more than half of them to Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of the Congo, DRC). In refugee camps there, remnants of the defeated army rearmed, recruited new forces, and began incursions into Rwanda. In 1996, Rwandan troops helped Zairean Tutsi overthrow the Zairean government, in the process dispersing the camps, massacring tens of thousands of unarmed civilians, and killing thousands of soldiers and militia. Some 600,000 camp residents returned to Rwanda, some of them armed and ready to fight the current government. Insurgent attacks, launched originally from Zaire, were organized on an ever larger scale inside Rwanda during the early months of 1997, resulting in a serious threat to the current government by mid-1997.

Some of the insurgents, including several senior officers who led the 1994 genocide, seemed ready to continue annihilating the Tutsi. In December 1997, for example, they slaughtered hundreds of Tutsi at the Mudende refugee camp. Others say they seek to overthrow the RPF, not to continue the genocide. The rebels, backed by many Hutu in the northwest, have used brutal killings to intimidate others in that region and elsewhere into supporting them. The insurgents previously clandestine organization, People in Arms to Liberate Rwanda (Peuple en Armes pour Liberer le Rwanda, PALIR), made several declarations and even circulated a newspaper in 1998. Its armed wing was called the Army for the Liberation of Rwanda (Arme pour la Liberation du Rwanda, ALIR).

The Rwandan government reportedly tried a more political response to the insurgency in early 1998 when military measures proved ineffective. Despite some success by the government, the rebellion continued to be strong enough to mount operations with hundreds of troops in September and October.

In August, Rwanda lent its troops to a new rebellion against the DRC government, citing its own security needs and the need to protect Congolese Tutsi from genocide. The Rwandan government had demobilized some of its soldiers but after mid-year, it recruited more, some forcibly, to meet the need for troops both in the DRC and in northwestern Rwanda. Human Rights Watch received accounts in August and September of young men taken by force, trained briefly, and then sent to the Congo.

The government, citing the need for self-defense against the insurgency, organized civilians to monitor purportedly anti-government activity in their neighborhoods and to participate in night patrols, sometimes in the company of soldiers. These activitiesimplemented also by the previous government, supposedly for the same reasoncaused serious concern to someRwandans and foreign observers. In one case in Umutara prefecture in late December 1997, Tutsi attacks on Hutu, tolerated by and perhaps incited by a local official, killed or drove into exile dozens of people. In other cases in the northwest, RPA soldiers reportedly directed Hutu to pillage crops and other property of Hutu who were thought to back the rebels. In September, residents of the capital chose neighborhood representatives to receive firearms training. Officials had already distributed firearms in various parts of the country, particularly to survivors of the genocide and to former RPA soldiers.

The mid-May assassination of Seth Sendashonga in Nairobi eliminated one leader who bridged the gap between Hutu and Tutsi. An early member of the RPF, Sendashonga resigned as minister of interior in 1995 to protest military abuses of civilians. After a previous attempt to assassinate him, a member of the Rwandan embassy in Nairobi was arrested, gun in hand, in the immediate vicinity, but he was released when he claimed diplomatic immunity. Three persons were charged in the second and fatal attack, but the case against them seemed weak.

Military, police, and some civilian officials took thousands of persons into custody during large-scale security sweeps, residential inspections, and verification of identity papers on the roads. Some of these persons were subsequently released after interrogation that was sometimes accompanied by physical abuse. Some persons who disappeared were found murdered but most have never been located. Many of the 11,000 Rwandan refugees who were registered in Tanzania between January and June said they fled because of unexplained disappearances caused by soldiers.

An increasingly active military justice system tried soldiers for indiscipline and common crimes, sentencing several to prison and even to death after conviction for charges such as theft and murder. Early in the year army officials summarily and publicly executed soldiers in two separate alleged incidents of common crime. Investigations were begun and soldiers arrested in several cases of massacres of civilians, but few of the accused were brought to trial or seriously punished for human rights abuses in the course of military operations. In one noteworthy trial, a major was sentenced to life in prison and a subordinate to a term of forty-five months for having massacred more than thirty civilians in July 1994. Following a report by the Secretary-Generals Investigative Team that implicated RPA soldiers in massacring civilians in the DRC in 1996 and 1997, the Rwandan government was charged with investigating these allegations. A mid-October deadline passed without any significant report on the investigation.

In the crucial domain of civilian justice, the government continued to make arrests but made little progress in trials. Near the end of the year, more than 126,000 prisoners were held in jails and an unknown number in irregular facilities, the vast majority charged with genocide. Thousands were jailed without regard to due process or credible evidence against them. In May 1998 the prosecutor of Ruhengeri prefecture estimated that 15 percent of detainees were falsely accused. In the last months of 1997, judicial officials pressed investigations in order to meet a December deadline for regularizing the files of all detainees. When a law was passed extending the deadline to 1999, the work slowed considerably. Several hundred detainees were released during the year, some of them because they were elderly or ill. The minister of justice announced in October that 10,000 detainees would be provisionally released, but as with similar earlier statements by authorities, no date was set. In some cases, persons released or acquitted were intimidated or attacked in their home communities. Twelve persons were slaughtered in the household of one person who had been recently acquitted of genocide.

During 1997, 322 persons were judged on charges of genocide, a rate which if unchanged would result in fewer than 5 percent of the detainees being tried within their lifetimes. Authorities set a goal of 5,000 persons to be tried in 1998 and began prosecuting larger groups of defendants together, including one group of fifty-one persons. This practice speeded disposition of cases, but also produced confusion and logistical problems that seemed likely to prejudice the rights of some defendants. By the end of October 1998, it appeared that the courts would fall short of the goal of 5,000. Even after numerous training programs had increased the number of personnel, the judicial system still lacked the staff needed to try all those detained. Authorities proposed alternatives, such as community-based mediation to settle cases involving only damage to or theft of property.

More than one hundred persons were condemned to death for genocide. Twenty-two were executed, the first to suffer the death penalty, at the end of April. Many international leaders and organizations opposed the executions, both on general principle and because some of the trials had failed to meet international standards of due process. In several, the accused had no access to counsel and presented no witnesses in their defense. In the case of former prosecutor Silas Munyagishari, political considerations may have influenced the verdict. The executions were carried out in several towns before large and often festive crowds.

Some trials conducted in 1998 showed improvement over those of the previous year in that the accused were represented by counsel, had adequate time to prepare, and called witnesses in their own defense. Prosecutors also more often presented witnesses to substantiate their cases. Lawyersmost of them foreigners provided by a small nongovernmental organizationwould not travel to regions threatened by the insurgency and defendants in such areas stood trial without legal assistance. Witnesses, both for the defense and the prosecution, were threatened and many were increasingly reluctant to testify.

Some 7,000 persons expressed the intention to confess to various crimes as part of the genocide, the first sizable numbers to take advantage of a plea-bargaining arrangement offered since 1996. Judicial officials expended considerable effort in achieving this result. At several prisons, they established separate quarters so that those who confessed would not be harassed by others.

By March 1998, various donors had provided more than U.S. $17 million for the administration of justice and were in the process of disbursing grants amounting to another $13 million. Despite this considerable investment, the judicial system functioned poorly and personnel often lacked the equipment and means of transport to carry out their tasks efficiently.

More than U.S. $3 million was provided for expanding prisons, but conditions in most remained inhumane due to continued overcrowding and lack of sanitary facilities. Local jails were even more crowded and filthy. Detainees in central prisons received one meal a day from the government, aided by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), but detainees in local jails supposedly were fed by their families, many of whom lacked the people to prepare and deliver food to the jails. In the early monthsof 1998, U.N. monitors found that about two thirds of the detainees in local jails were receiving no food from their families. Nongovernmental organizations provided food in several jails and the ICRC delivered high-protein biscuits, but not cooked meals, in three of the eleven prefectures.

In March, the government suspended the president of the court of cassation, who was also a vice-president of the supreme court. He later resigned under pressure. Soon after, five other leading magistrates or counselors attached to the highest courts were also suspended or otherwise removed. They included the highest ranking magistrates in place before 1994 and their removal or suspension left the judiciary largely in the hands of Tutsi, many of whom were recent returnees. In other cases that suggest the risks of attempting to deliver justice, the prosecutor in Gisenyi disappeared in January and remained unaccounted for; a Rwandan lawyer was murdered just after agreeing to defend persons accused of genocide; and the president of the tribunal of first instance in Kigali, a Tutsi survivor of genocide, chose exile in Canada.

The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, much criticized in its first years, worked more effectively and finished 1998 with over thirty leaders of the genocide in custody. One, Jean Kambanda, interim prime minister in 1994, pleaded guilty to genocide and was sentenced by the tribunal to life in prison. Jean-Paul Akayesu, a local official, was pronounced guilty of genocide on September 2, the first person so judged by an international court, and also sentenced to life in prison. Among the nine charges of which he was convicted was that of rape, the first time that this crime had been recognized as an act of genocide.
Sierra Leone
Human Rights Developments
In early February, troops of the Economic Community of West African States Cease-Fire Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) ousted the government of the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council (AFRC) and the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) from Freetown. This ended their nine-month rule, characterized by widespread human rights abuses and a complete breakdown of the rule of law. For the past seven years a vicious civil war has engulfed Sierra Leone, characterized by atrocities against civilians, often committed by the RUF, a rebel group formed in 1991 with support from the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL).

Upon taking power on May 25, 1997, the AFRC suspended the constitution, banned political parties and public meetings, and announced rule by military decree. The ARFC, created by a group of senior military officers, soon joined forces with the RUF. During their joint rule, many judges, lawyers, and police fled the country, causing a total collapse of the judicial system. The AFRC/RUF government arbitrarily arrested and detained its suspected opponents and critics, including students, journalists and human rights advocates, causing thousands to seek asylum.

On March 10, the Nigerian-led ECOMOG reinstated President Tejan Kabbah, first elected in March of 1996, who subsequently declared a state of emergency. After losing political power, the AFRC/RUF alliance engaged in a war of terror against civilians, committing widespread and egregious atrocities in an attempt to regain power. Between February and June 1998 alone, its members raped, deliberately mutilated, or killed outright thousands of Sierra Leonean civilians. The AFRC/RUF abducted men, women and children, probably numbering in the thousands, for use as combatants, forced laborers, or sexual slaves. Women were actively targeted through sexual violence, including rape and sexual slavery. In addition to various forms of physical abuse, innumerable civilians suffered psychological trauma from the rebels choice of tactics and extreme crueltylike the severing of limbsto compound the horror of their attacks.

Civilian Defense Forces (CDFs), civilian militias who supported the Kabbah government, also committed numerous abuses, including indiscriminate killings and torture, but on a significantly smaller scale than those carried out by the AFRC/RUF. The CDFs were created in order to provide local security and targeted for abuse those they claimed were AFRC/RUF combatants or their supporters. The largest and most powerful of the CDFs, the Kamajors, were responsible for the majority of abuses committed by those fighting on behalf of the Kabbah government. In addition to killings and torture, Kamajors also obstructed humanitarian assistance and extorted money or other payment at roadblocks.

Children were victims of gross violations of human rights committed by both sides to the conflict. The AFRC/RUF abducted an unknown number of childrenprobably in the thousandsfor use as laborers, fighters, and in the case of girls, sexual prisoners. Many girls were forced to work for the AFRC/RUF combatants until they reached sexual maturity, when they would be assigned to a fighter as a wife. There were also many child soldiers among the Kamajors, and despite promises by the government to demobilize all combatants under the age of eighteen, the CDFs continued to recruit children at least until July.

The United Nations estimated that over 416,000 Sierra Leoneans fled the fighting as refugees to neighboring Guinea and Liberia or to internally displaced camps. Conditions for both internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees were often severe due to alack of access to camps and poor security conditions. In particular, the close proximity of the camps in Guinea and Liberia to the Sierra Leonean border and the presence of former combatants among the refugee population in Liberia jeopardized humanitarian assistance and protection. Many refugees and IDPs suffered from a host of problems including high levels of malnutrition and disease, as well as occasional attacks from the RUF/AFRC.

The government made repeated gestures in support of human rights, such as its pledge to provide amnesty for child soldiers and intermittent appeals to combatants to lay down their arms in exchange for amnesty. In a climate of public hatred for individuals associated with the AFRC/RUF, the Kabbah government initiated legal proceedings against fifty-eight civilians in regular courts and thirty-eight former soldiers before a military court on a range of charges including treason and murder. In hearings in August and October, the High Court of Sierra Leone sentenced to death twenty-seven civilians convicted of treason, including five journalists and a seventy-five-year-old woman. International observers questioned the appropriateness of the treason charges for the journalists, and criticized the lack of a right to appeal sentencing by the military court. On October 19, the government of Sierra Leone executed by firing squad twenty-four of the soldiers who had been sentenced to death one week earlier. The trials constituted the first major test under the Kabbah government of a justice system which lacked basic infrastructure and support. Many of the over 2,000 prisoners in Sierra Leone were held under the 1998 Public Emergency Regulations, introduced by President Kabbah on March 16 and ratified by parliament, which provided for indefinite detention without trial. Prisons were often overcrowded, unsanitary, and lacking in health care and the regular provision of food.

Section 13 of the Public Emergency Regulations declared that disturbing reports by the media were punishable offences. On June 24, Minister of Information and Cultural Affairs Dr. Julius Spencer stated that any information regarding the security situation must be approved by ECOMOG before publication. Journalists complained further that taxes had been unjustly imposed upon newspapers in an attempt to limit their ability to publish.
South Africa
Human Rights Developments
The African National Congress (ANC)-led government of national unity, in which the Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) also participated, entered its last year before elections scheduled for 1999. As Deputy President Thabo Mbeki prepared to succeed head of state President Nelson Mandela, tensions within the ANC became more apparent. The South African economy suffered from the Asian financial crisis and from concerns at political stability in the region, and the currency collapsed to half its 1994 value against the dollar, putting greater strains on the ANCs fiscally conservative Growth, Employment, and Redistribution (GEAR) strategy, and on its traditional alliance with the labor movement.

The Truth and Reconciliation Commission completed its hearings of witness testimony about past human rights abuses, and was due to present its report to the president in October. Among notable public hearings during the year were those revealing the extent of the previous governments development of chemical and biological weapons. Several thousand applications for amnesty remained outstanding, and hearings of amnesty applications were set to continue well into 1999, when a supplement to the report would be published. Former president P.W. Botha refused to cooperate with the commission to talk about his knowledge of violations during his presidency, leading to a court battle which culminated in his conviction for contempt of court in August.

The Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD), set up in 1997 to investigate or oversee the investigation of complaints against the police, reported 480 deaths in custody or as a result of police action during the first six months of 1998. The ICD investigated a number of high profile deaths during the year, as well as allegations of police involvement in political violence, and police failure to act forcefully in cases such as the shooting of a baby by a white farmer in April. In January a new police code of conduct was launched; in June 1,200 new recruits began their training, which included a human rights curriculum.

The Department of Justice established a new magistrates commission in October, more representative in terms of race and gender than the old, and with a mandate, with the judicial services commission, to spearhead the transformation of the courts. A new position, the national director of public prosecutions, was created as part of a reform of prosecution services; ANC MP Bulelani Ngcuka was appointed to fill the post. New centers for pre-trial services were established at courts in major urban centers, aiming to assist victims through the court system. Legislation dealing with organized crime gave the courts new powers to deal with gang related offenses. In July, the long-awaited Open Democracy Bill was introduced to parliament, which would, among other things, increase public access to government information.

Family courts were established in several provinces, bringing together cases relating to divorce, maintenance, and family violence. A controversial Employment Equity Act was passed, requiring large employers to act against racial and gender discrimination and improve the representivity of workplaces. In July, the High Court in Pretoria dismissed an application to have the 1997 Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Act declared unconstitutional. In August, the Constitutional Court ruled that the criminalization of gay sex under apartheid-era laws was unconstitutional.

In November 1997 the government initiated a national program aiming to keep children out of prisons. In May 1998, however, Minister for Welfare Geraldine Fraser-Moleketi stated that an estimated 1,200 children were still awaiting trial in South African prisons. From that date, the Department of Welfare in each province was supposed to take more responsibility for children in the justice system, and hasten the process of transferring children awaiting trial to more appropriate facilities, though children between fifteen and eighteen charged with the most serious offenses would remain in adult prisons.

A number of super-maximum security prisons were planned or built, in the face of criticism by human rights groups. Prisons remained seriously overcrowded and plagued by prisoner violence. Several prisoners were reported to have died during 1998 following assaults by prison staff. A pilot project for training of prisoners and prison staff in human rights norms was launched in June by the Department of Correctional Services, together with two nongovernmental organizations. In September, the government introduced to parliament important legislation designed to restructure the prison service.

The KwaZulu-Natal region suffered yet another upsurge in political violence during 1998, especially in the long-troubled midlands region. In April, following a three-month trial, former ANC leader Sfiso Nkabinde was acquitted on charges of sixteen murders. Immediately, violence increased in his home territory of Richmond, where he had become a leader in the United Democratic Movement. Serious allegations of police involvement in or failure to stop the violence continued. Soldiers were deployed in July in an attempt to keep the situation under control.

Attacks on foreigners in South Africa continued. In September, three African immigrants were killed on a train near Pretoria by a mob that accused them of taking South African jobs. The ANC condemned this attack, but other statements during the year by IFP leader and Minister for Home Affairs Mangosuthu Buthelezi and other government officials contributed towards xenophobia. The government failed to take sufficient steps to address abuse of foreigners during the deportation process, and the Department of Home Affairs repeatedly failed to engage in organized discussions aimed at addressing such problems. More positively, the department appointed a committee including human rights lawyers to draft legislation introducing new procedures for refugee determination, and introduced a draft bill to parliament which addressed many concerns about defects in the existing system. A committee appointed to draft a white paper and legislation on migration policy in general, however, included no representative with human rights expertise.

South Africas foreign policy lacked direction and a human rights focus. The government apparently regretted its earlier supportfor President Laurent Kabila in the newly renamed Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), and, when new rebels threatened Kabila in July and August 1998, urged Kabila to reach an accommodation. However, South Africa was ultimately forced to back the military support given to Kabila by fellow members of the Southern Africa Development Community (SADC), Zimbabwe and Angola. In August, South Africa welcomed the new Nigerian head of state Gen. Abdulsalam Abubakar, without publicly raising continuing human rights concerns. South Africa led a botched military intervention on behalf of SADC in Lesotho in September, which exacerbated rather than resolved a crisis resulting from disputed general elections. Deputy President Thabo Mbeki was criticized for visiting China in April and failing to raise human rights issues. More positively, South Africa hosted a conference in March among SADC members where a declaration on violence against women was adopted. South African ambassador Jacob Selebi chaired the fifty-fourth session of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, and was later awarded the annual human rights prize of the Geneva-based International Service for Human Rights, in particular for his role in negotiating the Ottawa convention banning landmines.

South Africa was the largest producer of weapons in Africa, exporting weapons and military equipment worth more than R.1.324 billion (U.S.$192 billion) during 1997, a 143 percent rise over the previous year, according to Zoli Kunene of the Aerospace Maritime and Defense Association. In March 1998, the National Conventional Arms Control Committee approved arms sales worth R.173 million (U.S.$25 million) to Algeria, stating that they had obtained guarantees that they would not be used for internal repression. The British Sunday Telegraph reported in June that South Africa had concluded a secret arms-for-oil deal with Libya; both South Africa and Libya denied the report. Elsewhere, it was reported that Saudi Arabia was seeking a similar deal. South Africa stated that arms transfers to Uganda and Rwanda were halted as soon as the war in the DRC began, though it did not deny that arms previously sold to the region might have been used in the fighting. In June, South Africa ratified the Ottawa landmines convention, which it had played a leading role in bringing into existence. The Regulation of Foreign Military Assistance Act came into force, aimed at restricting the activities of mercenaries operating from South African soil. However, South African private security firms continued to operate throughout Africa and South Africans based in the country were still involved in illegal arms trafficking, including to Angola, in violation of a U.N. arms embargo.
Sudan
Human Rights Developments
Government and rebel human rights abuses caused major famines in southern and central Sudan in 1998, where a fifteen-year civil war continued. Militia and army looting of food supplies (cattle and grain), killing or kidnapping of civilians, burning of homes, disrupting relief efforts, and displacing of hundreds of thousands were among the major causes of the famines. The Islamist government fought the southern and Nuba Mountains-based Sudan Peoples Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A) in the south and central Sudan, while facing new challenges nationwide from a broad coalition of armed opposition movements, united since 1995 in the Eritrea-based National Democratic Alliance (NDA). This brought together the SPLA, marginalized peoples of the east, banned northern-based political parties, and secular nationalist forces. What was once portrayed as a war between the Muslim north and the non-Muslim south became more complex, as northern Arab-speaking Muslims  and southerners of various religions  fought on both sides in new areas of conflict.

Government and some opposition forces violated the laws of war through attacks on civilians, summary executions, arbitrary and often unacknowledged detentions, and the looting and destruction of civilian property. Government forces continued to violate international norms by forcibly recruiting underage soldiers and militia. Reports of underage SPLA recruitment dropped off sharply as the SPLA embarked on an agency-assisted program to demobilize underage soldiers and prevent further such recruitment.

The government indiscriminately bombed rebel areas, often causing civilian casualties; it also deliberately bombed civilian structures in rebel territory, such as hospitals and relief sites, and its militias abducted women and children to use as slave labor, as a form of war booty. Outside of the war zones, the government continued a long policy of repression of the rights to peaceable assembly, to free association, and to free expression, while targeting the Catholic Church for its criticism of government policies infringing religious freedom and discriminating against Christians. It arbitrarily detained political opponents and tried them in courts lacking fundamental guarantees of fairness, often using confessions obtained through torture.

The induced famine hit hardest in rebel-controlled areas of Bahr El Ghazal in southwestern Sudan, the Nuba Mountains, and in the southern region of Western Upper Nile, where the rebels were absent but two government militias contended for control. The causes of the Bahr El Ghazal famine included the governments counterinsurgency strategy of targeting civilians believed to support the SPLA, particularly the Dinka, the most numerous of the nineteen major ethnic groups of Sudan. Since 1986 the Dinka of Bahr El Ghazal have been raided, their cattle and other food supplies stolen, and women and children abducted as slave labor by the government-armed muraheleen , an Arab nomad militia. Kerubino Kuanyin Bol, a Dinka former SPLA commander, also pillaged Bahr El Ghazal after he defected to the government in 1994. This laid the ground for the Bahr El Ghazal famine of 1998.

In January 1998, Kerubino rejoined the SPLA, in an unsuccessful attack on Wau, the largest Bahr El Ghazal town. When this failed, most of the towns fearful Dinka population fled with them; government forces reportedly summarily executed several hundred Dinka who remained behind. Their sudden flight into the area where the famine was developing heightened the crisis.

The government crippled the U.N.s cross-border relief program, Operation Lifeline Sudan (OLS), preventing it from meeting the already assessed needs of an estimated 250,000 people in rural Bahr El Ghazal, plus the estimated 100,000 Dinka fleeing expected government massacres. It imposed a ban on OLS flights to Bahr El Ghazal, from February 4 to March 31, with minor exceptions that only exacerbated the food crisis. After the flight ban was lifted, the muraheleen and army continued to strike at the vulnerable rural and displaced population, further depleting their cattle and grain stores, and kidnaping hundreds more Dinka children, this time with the excuse that the SPLA and Kerubino were raiding the muraheleen territory and stealing their cattle. The government and SPLA agreed to a three month ceasefire for the Bahr El Ghazal famine area at the urgent behest of the international community, starting July 15; it was later agreed to extend it to January 15, 1999. The government sought to expand the ceasefire geographically. The famine was expected to last until late 1999; poor rains and insecurity prevented sufficient cultivation in 1998.

By August 1998, the World Food Program was making much larger food airlifts to southern Sudan than ever before, and larger than its previous airlifts anywhere in the world. The very high mortality rate appeared to peak in July and August but still remained high. A ground-breaking joint U.N./SPLA team investigated whether relief was reaching the intended beneficiaries, and found that those shortchanged were the displaced who were without kinship ties or local chiefly representation, and widows. The local chiefs played a larger role in diversion, and SPLA soldiers, previously thought wholly responsible for diversion, a smaller role than thought. The diversion in government areas, historically carried out by army-merchant-militia cartels, remained to be investigated. Because of poor rains and little planting due to insecurity, the need for high levels of food relief is projected to extend until late 1999.

Famine also threatened another area of the south, Western Upper Nile, where two government militias struggled for control of the location of Sudans principal oil fields. The southern pro-government groups belonged to Riek Machar and Paulino Matiep,both ethnic Nuer, a Nilotic people related to the Dinka. Riek Machar, leader of a breakaway SPLA faction, signed a political agreement with Khartoum in 1996. Paulino Matiep, the head of a militia based in the oil field area and never in the SPLA, was armed directly by the government to counterbalance Riek after Kerubinos defection, an example of the governments policy of playing one southern group off against the other. The government arranged four ceasefires; none held. The militias destroyed and looted property, including feeding centers. Hundreds were killed. Operation Lifeline Sudan was unable to reach the estimated 150,000 people at risk of starvation there for months due to this insecurity.

Food shortages threatened Eastern Equatoria in the south even as fighting between the government and SPLA for control of garrison towns there heated up. The United Nations estimated that 2.4 million persons in the south were at risk of famine, almost one tenth of Sudans estimated population of 27 million people.

Not even included in the southern famine total were the approximately 400,000 people of the SPLA-held areas of the Nuba Mountains, located in the center of Sudan. There the government continued its efforts to starve civilians out of rebel-held areas into government peace villages. Army troops and Nuba collaborators captured and relocated or killed civilians. They looted and burned villages, animals, and grain. A permanent government blockade, in place since the beginning of the war, barred all U.N. relief operations and even traders from the rebel areas of the Nuba Mountains. A private assessment in March estimated 20,000 civilians there were at risk of starvation.

In May the government promised the U.N. secretary-general to permit the first ever U.N. needs assessment in the rebel-held Nuba areas, but reneged on this in June following an ambush and the killing of three government-based aid workers by unknown persons. The U.N. continued to supply relief to the governments peace villages but not to the communities on the rebel side.

On the eastern front, the Beja Congress, Sudan Alliance Forces (SAF), and Umma Party fighters, and the SPLA posed a threat to the main road between Khartoum and the Red Sea, and to the Rosaires Dam which provides electricity to Khartoum. Fighting, including shelling, drove tens of thousands of civilians from their homes; government forces detained and tortured others, according to testimonies.

These rebel advances in the east and south led the government to call for more volunteers to fight foreign aggression, as the government claimed Eritrean and Ugandan troops fought with the rebels in the east and south. Eritrea and Uganda in turn accused Sudan of harboring, training, and supplying Eritrean and Ugandan rebels. (Similar charges against Ethiopia apparently were dropped in an attempt to improve relations; Sudan still sponsored Islamist Ethiopian rebels.)

The most notorious abuser among the Sudan-sponsored rebel groups was the Lords Resistance Army (LRA), a Ugandan group based in southern Sudan whose main recruits were Ugandan children it kidnapped and tortured, forcing them to be soldiers or wives (as young as twelve years old) for the LRA officers. Testimony of escaped children made it clear that the LRA was based in several locations in government-controlled southern Sudan and fights inside Sudan against the SPLA as well as in northern Uganda, with arms provided by the Sudan government. In October the Ugandan government claimed that Sudans planes bombed its territory several times, once near Sudanese refugee camps inside Uganda. Sudan claimed that Ugandan troops were fighting inside Sudan (Eastern Equatoria) together with the SPLA. In late 1998, reports circulated that Sudanese troops were fighting on the side of the Congo government inside Congo; Khartoum denied these reports.

The Sudan governments attempts to expand its armed forces and militia to a staggering 665,000 were set back by arbitrary conscription methods and brutality, and by rumors that draftees were poorly trained and disproportionately dying on the southern front. The Sudan governments military conscription campaign ran into resistance by young student draftees; in April some tried to break out of a training camp at Al-Eilafoun south of Khartoum and government soldiers shot into the crowd. Frightened youth were shot or drowned in the Nile as they tried to escape. More than one hundred died; the government said fifty-five drowned in a boating accident. In October the government called for 50,000 more volunteers to defend the country.

The Sudanese war and famine were overtaken on August 20 by the bombing without warning by the United States of a privately-owned pharmaceutical plant in Khartoum on August 20. The attack was in response to the August 7 terrorist bombing of two U.S. embassies in Africa that killed hundreds and injured thousands. The U.S. alleged that Osama bin Laden masterminded these attacks and had an interest in the factory; bin Laden, a financier of Afghan Arabs and other Islamist militants, lived in Khartoum until 1996. He has been stripped of his Saudi citizenship earlier. The U.S. claimed the factory contained a precursor to deadly nerve gas and was linked to Iraq, but would not accept a U.N. chemical weapons inspection of the bombing site after the attack.

The Sudan government bombed its own civilian population in the south, east, and in the Nuba Mountains. Among numerous such bombings was the March 1998 bombing of a hospital in Yei, southern Sudan, killing seven and wounding others; the hospital was bombed again in September, killing one. In the first few months of 1998, fourteen relief sites in southern Sudan were bombed by the government.

The SPLA had not instituted a judicial system or any mechanism for civilians to complain about arbitrary actions by local commanders, which ranged from food diversion or looting to forced conscription, rape, and summary execution. Although some commanders showed greater respect for the civilian populations, this appeared to be the result of personality rather than SPLA policy. SPLM reformers complained that SPLM leader John Garang promulgated a constitution by executive order instead of submitting it for SPLM debate and promulgation. An SPLA military intelligence officer, Maj. Marial Nuor, was accused of many summary executions and the detention in 1996 of a priest and nuns. He was court martialed by the SPLA and sentenced to five yearsfor mutinybut was not sanctioned for the killings or abductions. People reported detained by the SPLA years ago but never acknowledged remained unaccounted for. The SPLA released most of several thousand Sudan government forces it had captured in battle; released prisoners complained of inadequate food and very poor conditions of detention. The government, with few exceptions, did not report any captures of combatants.
Fighting between rebel groups in the south, often pitting predominately Dinka against Nuer groups, had persisted since 1991, when Riek Machar broke away from the SPLA and formed a separate rebel faction. The government took advantage of preexisting rivalries among southerners, accomplishing a divide and conquer goal in 1996 by signing a Political Charter with two southern faction leaders who had been fighting the SPLA for years: Riek Machar and Kerubino Kuanyin Bol. A Peace Agreement with them and others in 1997 formalized an understanding that their forces would fight with the government against the SPLA: by late 1998, however, many of the signatories were dead and a major player in the Peace Agreement, Kerubino, had defected back to the SPLA.

Trying to end intertribal violence, the New Sudan Council of Churches (comprising church leaders from rebel territory) held a consultation in June with Nuer and Dinka leaders. This grassroots initiative sought to heal splits along ethnic lines.

Arms flows to all sides continued to fuel the war. Both sides used antipersonnel landmines, despite the governments signature of the Mine Ban Treaty on December 4, 1997.

In northern Sudan, the National Islamic Front (NIF) continued to hold the power it seized in a 1989 military coup that overthrew a (multiparty) elected government. The government continued to exert control by criminal trials of its political opponents, often on charges carrying the death penalty. Confessions coerced through torture and ill-treatment were admissible in trials, and the government intimidated and arrested defense attorneys. The opposition slate for the December 1997 bar association elections, composed of non-NIF lawyers, alleged that government agents and NIF advocates rigged the elections.

Thirteen men, mostly detained in Port Sudan in 1997, were accused in a specially constituted criminal court for violations of the state of emergency law, inciting war against the government, conspiracy to prepare bombings and assassinations of public figures, conspiracy to recruit active and retired officers for the opposition armed forces, and espionage for a foreign country. Two persons were tried in absentia with them. Nine were convicted in August 1998 after a trial based on coerced confessions and other violations of due process. Their sentences ranged between five and ten years imprisonment. In Wad Medani four young civilian men (ages sixteen to twenty), denied counsel of their choice, were being tried in a military tribunal.

Following some nine detonations of bombs in Khartoum in June, which the government claimed caused little damage and no casualties, the government detained more than thirty people for sabotage, including former political party activists, former trade unionists, former high-ranking government officials, military officers, businessmen, and Muslim leaders. Also detained was the secretary general of the Ansar movement, a large Sunni Muslim sect linked to the banned Umma Party, who had been sentenced to five months in jail in January for a homily critical of the Islamist ruling party. After months in detention, he and an Umma Party official were released.

Others detained during that crackdown were not so fortunate. On October 5 the government began a trial of twenty of these detainees (and six in absentia). They were accused of planning and executing a bombing campaign in June, waging war against the state, endangering Sudans independence, opposing the authorities by use of force, and holding illegal meetings. The ringleader of the plot was alleged to be a Catholic priest, Father Hillary Boma, chancellor of the archdiocese of Khartoum; also accused was his colleague, Father Lino Sebit. Father Boma was reportedly coerced to confess in order to stop the torture of Father Sebit. The defendants were not permitted to speak to counsel before the opening of the trial. Of the twenty accused and present in court, eighteen were said to be Christians; although tried by a military tribunal, all but one were civilians.

The government also repressed all political meetings and demonstrations not sponsored by it or the National Congress, the new name for the NIF. In December 1997, less than one hundred women peacefully protesting forced conscription were set upon by security agents and beaten, in full view of U.N. employees. Some thirty-eight of them were detained, tried by a Public Order Court the same night, flogged, and released.

Attempting to impose its interpretation of Islam on women, the government enacted laws providing for sex segregation in public transport, tailoring shops, and hairdressers, although women did regain the right to drive government vehicles. In a departure from Sudanese custom, the government forbade women from dancing with men or in their presence during folklore celebrations or wedding parties. Four women reportedly faced the death penalty on adultery and other charges in December 1997 until an international outcry was raised; only women were known to have received death sentences for adultery in recent years.

Hopes for a restoration of civil and political rights were dashed in the final stages of drafting a new constitution. In mid-1998 NIF leader Hassan al Turabi removed from the draft constitution an article explicitly permitting political parties and substituted a vague and rarely used archaic Arabic term, al-tawali, whose meaning is concatenation, rather than the standard Arabic word for political party, hizb , used in the draft. To test the limits of the wording, would-be political party activists announced they would reopen their party offices, banned since 1989; many party activists were detained on sabotage charges shortly thereafter. Two were released in October when government and National Congress officials announced a draft bill permitting political organisations to register; the bill should take effect in January 1999 and would bar political participation by individuals who had been convicted of treason, among other things.

The government continued to deny permits for the construction of any Christian churches, while readily issuing permits to build mosques. In late December 1997, it confiscated the building erected by and housing the Catholic Club of Khartoum, and refused to compensate the church. The archbishop of Khartoum, detained briefly in connection with a long-dormant civil suit by a merchant, was thereby prevented from attending SPLA-government peace talks in May in Nairobi. In July 1998, government bulldozers razed an accredited Catholic school built on archdiocese land at an official displaced persons camp. Other Christian schools and churches were razed on the pretext of slum clearance.

A Nuba teacher living in the north was reportedly charged with apostasy (converting from Islam to another religion) in July 1998; apostasy carries the death penalty. In contrast, in June 1998, about 1,600 men and women from southern Sudan and the Nuba mountains converted to Islam at a mass ceremony in Khartoum, where a government official exhorted them to be the vanguard forIslam in the south, a reflection of the governments Islamization policy. An estimated 60 percent of Sudan is Muslim and the rest adherents of Christian or traditional African religions.
	Uganda
Human Rights Developments
The National Resistance Movement (NRM) of President Yoweri Museveni came to power in 1986, bringing to an end fifteen years of massive violations of human rights by the governments of Idi Amin and Milton Obote. The NRM government in 1998 governed through what it called the movement system of politics. The NRM claimed the system was an effective means to increase political participation by the Ugandan people and prevented renewed descent into warfare along ethnic lines, but restrictions on political activity prevented those opposed to the governments policies from organizing and canvassing for support to bring change through electoral action, while rebel movements of several years standing fought in the north and west of the country. These rebels continued to carry out brutal assaults on civilians, abducting children, and mutilating and killing adults and children alike. The Ugandan army was also responsible for serious abuses against civilians in these regions for which individuals were rarely held to account.

The Ugandan constitution, adopted in 1995, restricted freedom of association and assembly by allowing political parties to exist in name but prohibiting them from opening and operating branch offices, holding delegates conferences or public rallies, or sponsoring candidates. The ruling NRM, while effectively operating as a party, was exempted from these restrictions. The Political Parties Bill, introduced in October 1997 remained under consideration and spelled out in more detail many of the restrictions established by the constitution. A referendum on the future of political parties was planned for 2000, but observers noted that continuing restrictions on the right to campaign against the movement system would mean that voters would not be able to make a well-informed choice. Elections for movement structures held in July 1998 resulted in the unopposed reelection of the chair, Museveni, and vice-chair, Moses Kigongo. However, opposition candidates supporting multipartyism won several important positions in local government elections in April, including the mayorship of Kampala.

Following the July movement elections, Speaker of Parliament James Wapakhabulo was appointed National Political Commissar (NPC) of the NRM, and announced that ChakaMchaka , the national political education program suspended since the 1996 presidential and parliamentary elections after protests by western diplomats, would resume. ChakaMchaka teaches the NRMs view that political parties are destructive and sectarian organizations responsible for Ugandas past woes.

The NRM government prevented those opposed to its policies from organizing publicly throughout the year, although interference with political activity seemed to increase following President Clintons March 24 and 25 visit to Uganda. An attempt by the National Freedom Party (NFP) to organize a hunger strike on March 20 was prevented by police, and NFP leader Herman Ssemuju was briefly detained. A March 25 attempt by the Convention for Multi-party Democracy (CMD) to organize a peaceful assembly advocating a return to pluralism was called off after the organizer, CMD coordinator and member of parliament John Lukyamuzi received a letter followed up by a visit by police officers ordering him to desist. In May, police halted at least one peaceful discussion of controversial land reform legislation, and detained and charged two members of parliament, John Lukyamuzi and Yusuf Nsubuga, with incitement and promoting sectarianism after a rally opposing the land reform bill.

A series of four seminars on the topic of Human Rights and Democracy, sponsored by the Foundation for African Development (FAD) and the Uganda Young Democrats (UYD), were broken up by police. On June 19, armed police in riot gear violently dispersed a peaceful FAD/UYD seminar in Tororo, injuring six participants. On July 6, a FAD/UYD seminar in Kamuli district was declared illegal by police, and the venue was surrounded by plainclothes security officials. On July 10, a Mbarara FAD/UYD seminar was dispersed on the grounds of being illegal, even though the organizers claim they had obtained prior approval for the seminar from the District Police Commissioner, and the Resident District Commissioner had been invited as a guest of honor. The UYD attempted to organize a peaceful rally in Mbarara on July 21 to protest the incidents, but was prevented from doing so by a heavy deployment of police. A July 23 FAD/UYD seminar near Masaka was also dispersed, and police reportedly whipped participants with branches stripped from nearby trees while running them off the campus of Uganda Martyrs University.

Police also disrupted and halted a July 25 public lecture on the proposed land act at Islamic University in Mbale, sponsored by Uganda Peoples Congress (UPC)-aligned Young Congress of Uganda (YCU). A July 27 Masindi seminar for paralegals sponsored by the Foundation for Human Rights Initiative (FHRI), one of Ugandas most respected human rights organizations, was interrupted because the police mistakenly believed the seminar was sponsored by FAD, in keeping with the governments zeal to prevent all opposition political events. An August 9 seminar on poverty alleviation in Iganga, at which former presidential opposition candidate and Justice Forum (JF) leader Kibiringe Mayanja was scheduled to speak, was prevented from taking place by armed policemen.

Conflict with rebel forces continued in many areas of Uganda. Active rebel groups in 1998 included the West Nile Bank Front (WNBF), Uganda National Rescue Front II (UNRF-II), and the Lords Resistance Army (LRA), all operating from Sudan rear bases, and the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), operating in the Rwenzori mountains in Western Uganda and Eastern Congo.

The LRA continued its campaign of terror in northern Uganda, brutalizing, killing, and looting the people of Northern Uganda, abducting their children, and burning their homes. In June 1998, the LRA attacked St. Charles Lwanga School in Kitgum district, abducting thirty-nine girls. Military and humanitarian sources estimated that as many as 1,200 children had been abducted from Kitgum district between August 1997 and April 1998. Sudan continued its active support for the LRA, allowing the LRA to operate from Sudanese government-controlled territory, supplying the LRA with food and weapons, and often placing Sudanese soldiers inthe vicinity of LRA camps.

The Ugandan army, known as the Ugandan Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF), continued its policy of moving civilians into protected camps in the north. During this process, begun in 1996, civilians were often ordered to move and beaten if they refused to comply. The majority of the population in the north continued to live in these camps, where civilians were more secure, but LRA attacks continued and protection was often inadequate, as was access to housing, water, food, health care, and education. The camp populations remained almost completely dependent on international humanitarian organizations for nutrition. In April 1998, the LRA stated that it would consider nongovernmental aid workers legitimate military targets because of their support for what the LRA termed Musevenis concentration camps. The LRA attacked food convoys of the World Food Programme (WFP) and Oxfam, and heavy fighting in Kitgum district coupled with renewed threats by the LRA led to a temporary withdrawal by most nongovernmental organizations from Kitgum district during May to June 1998. A WFP staff member driving a clearly marked WFP vehicle was killed by unidentified rebels near Pakelle in July.

The ADF, engaged in a guerrilla war against the Ugandan government in the Rwenzori mountains in Western Uganda since November 1996, was responsible for many abuses against civilians, including killings, looting, abductions, and physical abuse including mutilations. The ADF attacked civilian settlements throughout 1998. During a typical attack on Kichwamba on April 9, the ADF killed sixteen people and abducted about forty-five. Like the LRA, the ADF has engaged in mass abductions of children. On February 19, thirty girls and three boys where abducted from a school in Mitandi. On June 9, the ADF attacked Kichwamba Technical School. When students locked themselves into their dormitories to prevent being abducted, the ADF burned three dormitories to the ground, burning to death an estimated fifty to eighty students. The ADF then retreated into the mountains with an estimated one hundred abducted students and other civilians. The bodies of ten more victims were reportedly recovered in the vicinity over the next days.

Urban terror attacks, which first occurred in Kampala in August 1997, continued in 1998. The National Army for the Liberation of Uganda (NALU) claimed responsibility for several of these attacks, and the government blamed the attacks on the ADF, a coalition rebel group incorporating NALU. Two bombs exploded in Kampala in April 4, killing four people, and a third bomb on April 11 injured five. In July, another two bombs exploded, including one in a crowded bar during a World Cup soccer game, killing two people. On August 25, at least twenty-eight people were killed when explosives detonated on three separate buses traveling from Kampala to Rwanda and other destinations.

The army, the police, and other security organizations were also responsible for serious human rights violations, and were rarely called to account for abusive behavior. In February, J. Okot was arrested by army troops as a suspected rebel sympathizer, kept in an underground pit, and tortured at Awer detach in Gulu district. Several cases of rape by UPDF soldiers were reported in the north. The UPDF continued to detain civilians illegally at army facilities, often for periods of months, without oversight by civilian authorities. Over a thousand persons remained on pretrial remand in Ugandan prisons on charges of treason, some having been detained for several years. On several occasions, the 360-day maximum limit on pre-trial detention for treason offenses was circumvented when police rearrested suspects promptly after they were released on court orders. In May, eighteen WNBF treason suspects were released and rearrested, and two weeks later twenty-seven ADF treason suspects were similarly released and rearrested.

Treason suspects in Western Uganda were tortured by UPDF soldiers, beaten with heavy canes, and in at least one case burned on exposed skin with the drippings of a burning plastic jerrycan. Some treason suspects remained incarcerated on the basis of confessions coerced under torture. A number of children were detained on treason charges and claimed to have been physically abused while in police or UPDF custody.
Zambia
Human Rights Developments
Zambia, once promoted as a model for democracy in Africa, was distinguished by human rights abuses in the wake of a military coup attempt on October 28, 1997 when soldiers seized the national radio station in the governments Mass Media Complex. A few hours later Zambian army commandos stormed the complex, regained control, and captured the rebel soldiers. The following day, a state of emergency was declared by President Chiluba and a crackdown ensued on suspected accomplices in the coup attempt and leaders of the legal opposition. A number of opposition politicians were targeted, including Zambia Democratic Congress (ZDC) leader Dean Mungomba and, on December 25, ex-president and United National Independence Party (UNIP) leader Kenneth Kaunda.

Constitutional guarantees of many basic human rights were suspended in the months that followed the coup attempt. In early January 1998 the number of detainees peaked at 104 people; by September this had declined to seventy-six as detainees were gradually released.

Human Rights Watch received information that at least fourteen of the detainees, including Mungomba, were tortured or beaten by police while in detention in early November 1997, although the government does not acknowledge this. One of the detainees, Corporal Robert Chiulo, died on November 7 at Lusakas Maina Soko Military Hospital. The hospital said that he had died of malaria, but other medical sources at the hospital told us that he died of injuries resulting from torture and that a post mortem had not been done. Some of the detainees were reportedly tortured with the kampelwa (the swing), described as being suspended from a metal rod thrust between two tables, with hands handcuffed to the rod and rope binding their legs to it. Police officers reportedly beat them while they hung.

In late November Human Rights Watch sought to independently verify the allegations of torture but was denied access to the detainees. In March we gained access to two detainees, Kaunda and the ruling-Movement for Multiparty Democracy (MMD) womens chair, Princess Nakatindi Wina, but failed again to gain access to most, although we monitored their presence in court. Amnesty International was also denied access to most of the detainees in April, although it too gained access to Kaunda.

Charges were dropped against UNIP leader Kenneth Kaunda and his head of security, Moyce Kaulungombe on June 1. Kaundas release followed a deal struck between the government and his family in which Kaunda was to agree to retire from politics. On July 3, Kaunda told a UNIP Central Committee meeting that he would leave domestic politics.
On June 9, the treason trial of seventy-seven soldiers and two politicians (Mungomba and Nakatindi Wina) began. Detentions continued in the run-up to the trial: Ndola businessman and former Finance Bank Chairman Rajan Mahtani was detained on June 6 and charged in connection with the attempted coup and then released on July 15 with all charges dropped.

In July Human Rights Watch monitored the treason trials progress and was able to meet in court with Dean Mungomba, who said he had been tortured and that he was being treated for TB which he contracted in prison. A number of other detainees in this case have collapsed in court due to illness brought about or exacerbated by poor remand prison conditions.

The government-appointed Permanent Human Rights Commission submitted a report to the government on March 30, naming several individuals who detainees say were torturers. They included, police chief Teddy Nondo, who on June 25 was confirmed as Drug Enforcement Deputy Commissioner. The reports key recommendation was: Immediate retirement in the public interest of officers involved in torture of detained or remanded persons and, reflecting the HRCs semi-official status, that the authorities work out a retirement package for such officers.

In a positive move, the government announced on August 11 that it had set up an independent commission of inquiry to probe into allegations of torture of the suspects in the failed 1997 coup and appointed High Court Judge Japhet Banda to head it, although he will only take up the post when the trial of the coup suspects has ended. In another welcome move, the cabinet in August approved the ratification of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.

The state of emergency was also marked by restrictions of the rights to freedom of expression, assembly, and association and by prolonged arbitrary detentions. Lawyers defending detainees linked to the coup attempt were harassed by police. Robert Simeza, Dean Mungombas lawyer, was harassed in early November 1997: he received anonymous phone calls, his supermarket business was raided, and he was aggressively followed until he complained to the inspector general of police. Mwangala Zaloumis and Sakwiba Sikota, lawyers defending Kenneth Kaunda also alleged police harassment in January.

During this period the police acted in an arbitrary manner, allowing progovernment rallies to be held but banning opposition or independent demonstrations. NGOs also had their requests for parade permits turned down. A request by civic leaders for authorization of a march to mark Human Rights Day, December 10, 1997, was also turned down by the police. Police Service Commissioner Wynter Kabwiku said the planned march could not take place due to the current security situation in the country.

Freedom of expression was also curtailed by the state of emergency and there was harassment of journalists. On January 2 police physically assaulted and attempted to seize a camera from a CNN camera crew. A few days later, on January 6, four reporters -from Reuters, Agence France Press, Pan African News Agency, and the Zambia Daily Mail - were prevented by police from covering part of the Kaunda case because the court room, including the press gallery, was reportedly full, although other journalists inside the court disputed this. State journalists that were working at the time of the coup were also brought under scrutiny and a number lost their jobs.

In May, Zambia Daily Mail reporter Joy Sata faced disciplinary action by the paper after stating on a television discussion show that this government-owned newspaper practiced a policy of censoring stories critical of the government. Zambia Daily Mail acting news editor Justine Mwiinga was a few days previously indefinitely suspended for leading an editorial protest against the managements decision to limit coverage of the October 28, attempted coup.

The state of emergency was extended on January 29, 1998 but lifted on March 17, following strong E.U. and U.S. donor protest and a clear message from the World Bank that a consultative group meeting could only occur once the state of emergency ended. President Chiluba announced that the measure was intended to assure the outside world that Zambia was a democratic country.

Human rights abuses declined after the lifting of the state of emergency, but there remained areas of concern including extraordinary tax demands made against opposition leaders. Soon after Pastor Nevers Mumba declared in late 1997 that he was considering contesting the 2001 presidential elections as the candidate of the National Citizens Coalition, the Zambian Revenue Authority issued him a tax demand for around U.S. $1.5 million, a figure backdated to 1993 based on the income of the church he heads, Victory Ministries International, which like other churches had been tax exempt.

Reports of police brutality continued in the urban areas. Cases of illegal detention, torture in cells, killings, and custodial rape occurred during the year. On May 27, police officers picked up Steward Mwantende with four other suspects in connection with house breaking and burglaries in Mindolo Police Camp. For two days Mwantende was subjected to severe beatings by interrogating officers, he was also burned between his legs before dying of multiple injuries. In this case the Human Rights Commission acted and seven police officers reportedly involved were arrested in July in connection with the killing.

Conditions in Zambias prisons for the average daily population of 12,500 inmates remained a serious concern. Most of these prisons, especially in urban areas, were overcrowded, with a growing prison population.

Kabwe prison, built for 300, had 528 inmates. It had a serious water problem and only fifteen toilets. Conditions appeared little better in Mukobeko maximum security prison, which had over 800 inmates, including those condemned to death. Those held on death row increased in 1998 to over 150, all of them held in small two meter square cells. Some convicts had been on death row for over twenty years, and none know whether they were scheduled for execution. The last execution was in January 1997, when eight condemned prisoners were hanged.

Mukobeko also lacked provisions to isolate sick prisoners with communicable diseases thereby increasing the risk of illness spreading quickly. On September 17, Judge Japhet Banda, who presided over the treason trial, threatened to release the accused on bail if the state did not improve the appalling prison conditions at the prisons they were kept. A chronic respiratory infection at Lusaka Central and Kamwala Remand prisons had spread to many detainees. Judge Banda also disclosed that the Commandant at Maina Soko Hospital had stated in a report on the medical profiles of all detainees that a rogue bacteria had become uncontrollable because of congestion in the cells.

The Human Rights Commission
The Zambian Human Rights Commission showed some initiative in this period and publicly condemned the use of torture in December. However it made this statement the government withdrew its offer of a government property, Ndeke House, as the commissions premises, a warning to the semi-autonomous body to be more compliant. The commissions composition and its limited resources and power still raised questions concerning its independence. Although the commission obtained permanent premises in June, it complained in July that the government had cut most of its funding to it.

In June the commission also announced that its probe into alleged police gunfire during an opposition rally, injuring Kenneth Kaunda and self-exiled Liberal Progressive Party chairman Rodger Chongwe in Kabwe in August 1997, was shelved because the commission had not raised the K65m (U.S. $50,000) needed for the enquiry. Human Rights Watch published its own findings from ballistic and forensic analysis in May and concluded that a bullet from an assault rifle struck and seriously injured Rodger Chongwe. Fragments from the bullet reportedly slightly wounded Kaunda and an aide. According to eyewitnesses interviewed by Human Rights Watch no warning had been given prior to live ammunition being used by police. A small number of police that day carried AK-47 assault rifles, senior officers had revolvers, and a few G-3 assault rifles were held by a police mobile unit.

Americas
Human Rights Developments
Multi-party democracies remained stable throughout most of Latin America and the Caribbean, with the notable exception of Cuba, where the government of Fidel Castro approached its fortieth anniversary in power with no sign of a significant political opening on the horizon. The anti-democratic tendencies of Perus President Alberto Fujimori became more pronounced as he maneuvered to seek an unprecedented third term in office, despite a constitutional limit of two consecutive terms for any president. Fujimoris machinations to perpetuate himself in power continued to undermine the rule of law and independence of the judiciary: the entire National Magistrates Council (Consejo Nacional de la Magistratura, CNM) resigned in March to protest laws restricting its powers passed by the Congress, dominated by members of Fujimoris party. The rubber-stamp congress also altered the composition of the National Electoral Board (Jurado Nacional de Elecciones, JNE) in December 1997 in a way that gave the government greater influence over its decisions.

In Mexico, important gains in electoral pluralism followed unprecedented reforms prior to July 1997 elections and resulted in the loss of once-monolithic political power by the Institutional Revolutionary Party (Partido Revolucionario Institucional, PRI). However, these changes did not lead to an improvement in the human rights situation in Mexico. Indeed, serious human rights problems including torture, arbitrary detention, and a justice system unresponsive to human rights violations  continued to take place throughout the country. President Ernesto Zedillo failed to develop a strategy to respond adequately to individual cases of abuse, strengthen human rights safeguards, or promote the rule of law.

The internal armed conflicts that only a few years ago engulfed countries including El Salvador, Nicaragua, Guatemala, and Peru were all but ended, with the notable exception of Colombia, which continued to experience high levels of political violence targeting civilians. Peru experienced continued insurgent attacks but on a greatly reduced scale compared with the early part of the decade. Guatemala joined Nicaragua and El Salvador as the last Central American conflict to end with peace negotiations and an integration of former guerrillas into political life. Like its neighbors, Guatemalas peace was uneasy, as soaring rates of common crime replaced political violence as the greatest threat to public security. In Guatemala as in the regions other transitions from political violence, impunity remained the Achilles heel of the peace process. Violent crimes continued to go unpunished, and the shocking assassination of Bishop Juan Jos Gerardi showed the limits of a peace process that failed to establish accountability for egregious human rights violations.

Impunity for powerful, violent criminals, a yawning gap between rich and poor, and corrupt and ineffective police and judiciaries conspired to leave many Latin American and Caribbean nations victim to seemingly uncontrollable crime. The inability of police and courts across the continent to control common crime by legal means led to serious setbacks in human rights in 1998. Amid intense public pressure for crime control, several governments made the rights of defendants a scapegoat for the failure of law enforcement. Some elected leaders made irresponsible public statements that seemed to justify or even invite police brutality. Others went so far as to enact legislation to curtail defendants rights in criminal proceedings. Meanwhile a defiant movement in the Caribbean and Guatemala to expand the use of the death penalty threatened to seriously undermine regional adherence to international instruments of human rights protection.

The notion of restricting defendants rights appealed to governments beset by common crime as a less expensive and perhaps more politically expedient option than making the reforms necessary to professionalize police forces and courts. Yet it was most unlikely to prove effective: countries with corrupt and violent police and weak courts were unlikely to succeed in curbing delinquency by restricting defendants rights. Many of the countries with the most serious crime problems were also those in which law enforcement officers were known to work hand-in-hand with criminal gangs. In Brazils Alagoas state, for example, dozens of police officers were found in January to have been involved in contract killings, bank robberies, and car theft rings. When state and federal authorities took the unprecedented step of arresting more than thirty police involved in the so-called uniformed gang, investigations led to the discovery of the remains of thirty-two bodies, presumed victims of the gangs homicides.

Argentine President Carlos Menem articulated the willingness to sacrifice human rights protections in the service of fighting crime during a series of interviews with the daily Clarn in September in which he vowed to adopt a hard line towards delinquents. Although some human rights defense organizations can object, Menem complained, in Argentina criminals have more protection than the police or the people. In a later interview he went on, When I talk about hard line and zero tolerance, immediately some people say that would mean a return to the easy trigger, but we cant leave the easy trigger to the criminals. In a country like Argentina, where policy brutality is so ingrained as to appear endemic, these statements can easily be read as a green light for ill-treatment and even extrajudicial executions.

Even more serious, Mexico and Peru developed legislation that chipped away at due process rights of individuals suspected of common crimes. Arguing that human rights guarantees constituted a strait jacket in the fight against increasingly sophisticated crimes, President Ernesto Zedillo sent new anti-crime proposals to the Congress that would facilitate detentions based on slim evidence a serious problem in a country noted for illegal arrests, fabrication of evidence, and a barely functioning system of public defenders.

In addition to Argentina and Mexico, police brutality remained notorious in Brazil, Venezuela, Haiti, and the Dominican Republic, where police in August killed an unarmed Catholic priest, Father Jos Antonio Muoz, apparently mistaking him for a criminal suspect. A police captain and sergeant were arrested and held for imprudent conduct in connection with the extrajudicial execution, but at this writing had not been charged with a more serious offense. Dominican police continued the practice of arresting family members of criminal suspects and holding them hostage until the suspect surrendered to authorities.
More drastic measures were taken by Perus President Alberto Fujimori. Following an upsurge in kidnappings, bank robberies, and armed burglariessome ending in fatalitiesin affluent Lima neighborhoods, the Congress gave Fujimori decree-makingauthority on national security matters for fifteen days. The president issued a number of decrees that severely eroded basic due process guarantees for common crime suspects and reproduced some of the worst features of the now-defunct faceless court system that had been used to try terrorist suspects. Under the new system, those accused of gang-related activities could be detained without charge for up to fifteen days and under no conditions could be released before trial. Those accusedincluding minors between the ages of sixteen and eighteen were subject to trial by military courts. Juveniles faced a minimum sentence of twenty-five years in prison if convicted by these courts, while adults faced a mandatory penalty of life in prison, even if only accused as accomplices. Other decrees drastically reduced the effectiveness of habeas corpus against arbitrary arrest.

Also with an eye to deterring common crime, Guatemala and several Caribbean nations sought to expand use of the death penalty in defiance of international human rights norms. Two appeals courts in Guatemala cleared the way for the first executions of a prisoner for the crime of kidnapping, even though this action would bring the nation in direct violation of the American Convention on Human Rights, ratified by Guatemala in 1978. At this writing, the cases were pending before the Supreme Court. The American Convention prohibits nations from extending the scope of the death penalty to crimes that were not subject to capital punishment at the time of ratification; in Guatemala, only those abductions resulting in the victims death were at that time punishable by execution. At this writing, Guatemalas Constitutional Court was considering a motion to declare unconstitutional Guatemalas ratification of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, which handles cases involving violations of the American Convention.

In an equally dangerous move for the regional system of human rights protection, Prime Minister Basdeo Panday of Trinidad and Tobago announced in May his governments withdrawal from the American Convention, a step that would take effect in May 1999. Death row inmates in Trinidad and Tobago had appealed aspects of their cases to the bodies of the inter-American human rights system, a route of appeal the government wanted to eliminate in order to speed up executions. This move  unless reversed, as Human Rights Watch requested in June  would restrict the rights of all victims of human rights abuse in the country to seek the protection of the inter-American system for a wide range of violations. The government had also reportedly considered withdrawing from the First Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), a step that would leave citizens of Trinidad and Tobago without recourse to the United Nations human rights system as well as that of the Organization of American States.

This action by Trinidad and Tobago followed the negative precedent set by Jamaica in 1997 of withdrawing from the ICCPRs First Optional Protocol, also in an effort to avoid international scrutiny of its increased recourse to capital punishment and its appalling prison conditions. In October, the Bahamas hanged two convicts, its first execution in two years, even though their cases were pending at the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. On July 20, St. Kitts and Nevis carried out its first execution since independence in 1983. Some 250 prisoners awaited death sentences in the English-speaking Caribbean at this writing.

Although President Fidel Castro told Human Rights Watch in 1995 that he intended to abolish the death penalty, Cuba executed prisoners as recently as 1997 and publicly renewed its commitment to retaining the death penalty in a September 1997 report to the United Nations secretary-general. Cubas reliance on the Council of State  an entity presided over by President Castro  as the ultimate arbiter of death penalty appeals undercut any appearance of judicial independence in capital cases. Because the Cuban government withholds information about capital punishment, we were unable to determine whether additional executions were carried out in 1998.

Colombia alone in the region remained awash in political violence as all parties to that countrys internal armed conflict continued to commit egregious violations of the laws of war. Renewed discussions of peace under the new government of President Andrs Pastrana, elected in June, did not include initiatives to control these abuses or end the prevailing impunity enjoyed by their authors. The greatest portion of atrocities in Colombia were attributed to paramilitary groups, which continued in many instances to receive support from the armed forces. When not directly participating in paramilitary massacres, government security forces did nothing to protect the population from them. In the case of Puerto Alvira, Meta, local officials and the Office of the Public Advocate (Defensora del Pueblo) alerted authorities over a dozen times of an imminent paramilitary attack. Nonetheless, paramilitaries seized the town unhindered on May 4 and reportedly slaughtered at least twenty-one people, including a five-year-old. Rather than being prosecuted, army officers who assisted or failed to pursue paramilitaries continued to be protected and in some cases promoted. A notable exception to the impunity enjoyed by military and paramilitary forces for atrocities was the February 25 capture of Vctor Carranza, a powerful paramilitary commander. Meanwhile Colombian guerrillas continued systematically to violate the laws of war, executing police officers and soldiers after their capture or surrender, launching indiscriminate attacks, and taking hostages.

In Peru, serious armed conflict affected a reduced portion of the country compared with previous years. We did not learn of any extrajudicial executions or disappearances by Perus government forces related to counterinsurgency in the first nine months of 1998, but Shining Path forces continued to use vicious methods against civilians. On August 8, a Shining Path unit attacked an electoral meeting in Saposoa, in the department of Huallaga, assassinating a man and woman. From there they traveled to Atarraya, where they seized an electoral candidate and, in front of a town meeting, forced him to kneel. Ignoring pleas for his life, they shot him dead. Perus non-governmental Institute for Legal Defense (Instituto de Defensa Legal, IDL) reported thirty-six such assassinations by the Shining Path in the combat-ridden Huallaga region in the first seven months of 1998.

In a positive development, Perus Congress in February passed a law specifically outlawing torture, providing appropriate penalties, and ensuring that military and police officers accused would be tried in civilian courts. Nonetheless, the practice of torture continued, as evidenced by the death following torture by police of criminal suspect Willi Llerena Macedo that same month in Ucayali. The officers responsible were charged with fatal assault and abuse of authority.

Conditions of detention remained horrendous in much of Brazil, Venezuela, and Central America. Throughout the region, thepractice of holding detainees in pretrial detention created situations in which the vast majority of the prison population was unsentenced, usually sharing overcrowded cells with convicted criminals. In Venezuela, prisons were severely overcrowded and understaffed, above all, violent. Even by local standards, the first few months of 1998 witnessed a shocking barrage of incidents of prisoner-on-prisoner violence, facilitated by rampant guard corruption in allowing the entry of weapons into prisons and the abysmal failure of authorities to protect prisoners lives. In police lockups in Belo Horizonte, Brazil, torture was routinely applied, including such methods as electric shock and near-drowning. Meanwhile severe overcrowding, official violence, and appalling conditions continued to provoke rebellions in Brazils prisons, jails, and police holding centers, some of them ending in extrajudicial executions of escaped prisoners by police.

Argentina
Human Rights Developments
Police brutality continued to be the principal human rights concern in Argentina in 1998, followed by threats and attacks on independent journalists and the governments unwillingness to provide justice for abuses committed under the military dictatorships in power from 1976 to 1983. Of particular concern were statements by President Carlos Menem suggesting a willingness to tolerate human rights violations by law enforcement agencies in the name of fighting common crime. In an interview published in thenewspaper Clarn on September 13, President Menem repeated his view that the only solution to rising crime was zero tolerance. Hard line. He added that some human rights defense organizations can object, but I think that here criminals have more protection than the police or the people. Menem returned to this theme on September 23 (quoted in Clarn the following day), saying that when I talk about hard line and zero tolerance, immediately some people say that would mean a return to the easy trigger, but we cant leave the easy trigger to the criminals.

Buenos Aires' provincial governor and probable 1999 presidential candidate Eduardo Duhalde responded to these statements by saying, We cant confuse a firm line with a hard line. That was why at the time I dissolved the then Buenos Aires Police, because I dont want to have in my province a hard line police like there was during the period of repression under the last dictatorship. Menems statements were used by members of the ruling party bloc in Congress to try to speed up passage of laws that would impose higher sentences for repeat offenders, reduce the number of cases in which bail would be granted, and define the act of criminal conspiracy, which would allow police to detain individuals on the basis of their suspicious attitudes.

Argentine law enforcement remained in the hands of twenty-three provincial police forces and the Federal Police, which had jurisdiction in the capital, Buenos Aires, and delegations throughout the country. Although reforms were initiated in a number of forces, including the two most widely questionedthe Federal Police and the Buenos Aires Provincial Policehuman rights violations by police remained frequent, and investigation and prosecution rare. Dozens of such cases remained unresolved years after their occurrence.

Police abuses in Argentina included excessive use of force in controlling demonstrations, such as an August 13, 1998 incident in which the provincial police in Jujuy province used batons, tear gas, and rubber bullets against public employees demanding payment of back salaries, leaving thirty wounded. Other cases included killings in alleged shoot-outs with the police, in which investigations often demonstrated that the police shot the victims point-blank and then fabricated evidence of a shoot-out (such as the planting of a gun on the victims body); the killing of innocent bystanders during armed confrontations between the police and criminal suspects; deaths in police custody, frequently after beatings to force confessions, later often described as suicide; so-called easy trigger cases in which police officers shot to kill rather than seeking to detain suspects (sometimes due to minor provocations); disappearances in police custody; and harassment of or attacks on witnesses to these crimes.

On January 9, 1998, police detained Carlos Andrs Sutara at the bus station in the northern city of Jujuy (in the province of the same name) on the pretext of verifying whether he had a criminal record and took him to a police station in the city, where he later died. A witness detained with Sutara alleged that he had died as a result of beatings at the hands of the police. In October 1998 five police officers of the Investigations Brigade in Jujuy were detained on charges of torture followed by death, and three other officers were charged with torture through negligence.

On January 15, 1998, Walter Repetto was shot dead by a corporal of the Buenos Aires Provincial Police, Carlos Docampo, who was at the time in civilian clothes. Repetto had parked his car in the area of Ciudad Evita, Greater Buenos Aires, when Corporal Docampo approached him, apparently believing him to be a thief. Corporal Docampo did not identify himself as a police officer, according to witnesses, and did not give an order to halt. When Repetto attempted to drive away, believing that the other man planned to assault him, Corporal Docampo shot Repetto dead.

According to his relatives, sixteen-year-old Diego Pavn was executed by two agents of the Buenos Aires Provincial Police on May 22, 1998, in Avellaneda, Buenos Aires province, following a chase. This case was presented before a local criminal court, on the grounds of abuse of authority, abuse of a weapon, and homicide, but the agents Hector Pealva and Osmar Dalmiro Morena were not detained.

On September 17, Federal Police Sgt. Marcelo Havrylein suffered an attack on his home, in which a police guard was wounded. On August 18 another police guard had been wounded in a similar incident at Havryleins home. The attacks, as well as death threats, followed Havryleins public denunciation of corruption at the 16th police station in Buenos Aires, including bribes taken by the police for the protection of prostitutes, transvestites, and others, as a result of which the police guard had been assigned to his home. Havrylein was subsequently moved to a hidden location.

Members of the gay and lesbian community and sex workers such as prostitutes and transvestites were among the principal victims of police abuses arising from the security forces discretionary powers to carry out preventive detentions, including for verification of identity or police record. Many were subjected to torture or other physical and verbal abuse, as well as extortion of bribes in exchange for not being detained. In the city of Buenos Aires, police detention powers were curtailed by a new Misdemeanors Code (or Code of Urban Co-Existence) that came into effect in March 1998. This code effectively limited the power to detain those allegedly offering sexual services in public (re-classified as a misdemeanor), except in cases where they were also alleged to be guilty of disorderly conduct or other offenses that could produce danger or damages. In these cases, the detainee had to be brought before a judge immediately if a public prosecutor considered that he or she should remain in custody.

Similarly, reforms began in the Buenos Aires Provincial Police, including the placing of the entire force under civilian control in December 1997 and the removal of 300 superior officers from police functions for a variety of reasons, including corruption and covering up criminal activity. Special brigades set up to fight specific crimes such as drug trafficking were also dissolved, having been determined to have become accomplices rather than enemies of this type of crime. In August 1998, a Law for the Organization of the Police of the Province of Buenos Aires was promulgated, which modified the forces questionable methods of recruitment and training (alleged to favor the recruitment of individuals with a predisposition to violence and to include training in abusive and unprofessional police tactics), modified the system of custody and transfer of detainees, and created three separate types of police force: road safety police, investigative police, and the security (crime prevention) police.

At the same time, on September 28, 1998, a new Code of Penal Procedure entered into force in Buenos Aires province that,among other provisions, passed responsibility for criminal investigations from judges to public prosecutors and transferred cases currently in the hands of the provincial police to investigating lawyers. The new code also required criminal investigations to be completed within four months from the date of detention of an accused or up to a maximum of fourteen months in exceptionally complex cases, both reducing pre-trial detention periods and ensuring that criminal cases (including those involving accused police officers) would not be dragged out indefinitely.

Although formal restrictions on the right to freedom of expression did not exist in Argentina, threats and attacks on journalists continued to occur. From 1995 through October 1998, forty-three journalists were attacked in Argentina, according to the Committee to Protect Journalists. These attacks ranged from legal harassment to physical assault. One of the most famous cases, in which the Buenos Aires Provincial Police were accused, was the January 25, 1997 kidnapping and murder of journalist Jos Luis Cabezas. Cabezas had been investigating links between the Buenos Aires Provincial Police and organized crime, as well as the activities of the controversial businessman Alfredo Yabrn, later accused of having hired former provincial police officers to threaten Cabezas. Following the failure of the provincial police to preserve evidence and the arrest of various individuals (later released) on the basis of evidence allegedly invented by the police, as of late 1998 four former police officers, a police informer, and four civilians were detained in connection with the case.

On January 26, 1998, the vice-president of the Photojournalists Association (Asociacin de Reporteros Grficos, ARGRA) received telephoned death threats, a day after he had been the final speaker at a ceremony commemorating the anniversary of Cabezass murder. Dozens of journalists, in particular from local or provincial newspapers, suffered threats or attacks during the year, some in connection with reporting on the Cabezas case. Among the most serious assaults was on the Salta province-based journalist David Leiva, whose home was fired on in February after he had already received a number of death threats by letter and telephone. The threats and assault followed publication of an article concerning the actions of the Gendarmera police force. In March, the car of Chaco province-based journalist Bernardo Balbuena was set on fire, the second attack on a director of his newspaper, El Diario . In many other cases, journalists were threatened or accused of being subversives, and a number of public functionaries either denounced journalistic endeavors as invasions of their privacy or directly threatened journalists reporting on their activities. Although in August 1998 two police officers of the Rio Negro provincial police were convicted (to suspended sentences) for having beaten three journalists covering a demonstration in December 1995, most instances of persecution of journalists resulted in neither ongoing investigations nor prosecutions.

Other actions limiting press freedom included a series of court rulings ordering journalists or their publications to pay damages for published material relating to investigations of political figures (even where, in the case of a lawsuit against the magazine Noticias by President Menem, the court considered the information published to be true), as well as the repeated dismissal from their posts of journalists considered to be uncomfortable for the authorities.

In September 1998 the Supreme Court ordered an actress to pay U.S.$30,000 in damages to a judge whose name was used in a Channel 13 television sketch satirizing the family court system in a comedy program in 1991. Three of the nine judges dissented, and one noted that the use of caricature falls within the freedom to criticize. The ruling was one of several which infringed press freedom during 1998, including a Supreme Court decision ordering the newspaper Pgina 12 to publish a reply rectifying an article which was not proved to have been inaccurate and a civil court ruling ordering the magazine Noticias to pay U.S.$150,000 in damages for publishing information on President Menems illegitimate son. According to the court, this invaded Menems private life, although the court itself considered the information accurate.

Another Supreme Court ruling in October 1998 had a chilling effect on investigative journalism in the country. The court sentenced the editor of Humor to one month of imprisonment for an article on corruption that implicated the presidents brother, Senator Eduardo Menem. Humor had reprinted information published in an Uruguayan magazine and included Senator Menems denial with the article. The Supreme Court based its ruling on the unsubstantiated argument that the magazine acted with actual malice in publishing the information.

Another episode involving threats against a journalist returned Argentines attention to the outstanding human rights cases from the period of military rule. In January 1998 the magazine trespuntos published an interview with retired Navy Capt. Alfredo Astiz, of the former clandestine detention center at the Navy Mechanics School (Escuela Mecnica de la Armada, ESMA). In that interview, Astiz admitted that the armed forces had adopted the policy of murdering detainees in order to prevent their later release. At the same time, Astiz bragged that he was the person best prepared technically in this country to kill a politician or a journalist and warned that journalists should be careful, or they would end up badly. Astiz also insinuated that Cabezas had been killed with some official involvement. Astiz was expelled from the Navy as a result of his statements, and a federal judge brought charges against him for having made threats in the interview. After the interview was published, the journalist involved, Gabriela Cerruti, received telephoned death threats on two occasions, both couched in language typical of what used to be the military style.

In 1998 Argentina participated in the drafting of the convention leading to the establishment of an international criminal court set up to deal with war crimes, genocide, and crimes against humanity. Yet this positive international action contrasted with authorities reluctance to press for domestic investigations or prosecution of the crimes against humanity that had occurred under military rule. The Argentine government consistently refused to collaborate with the judicial investigation opened by Spanish judge Baltazar Garzn into the disappearance of 600 Spanish citizens under the Argentine dictatorship, claiming that the Spanish courts did not have jurisdiction. The government also argued that the cases could not be opened because of the full stop and due obedience laws of December 1986 and June 1987, which precluded judicial proceedings against all armed forces personnel involved in those human rights violations except those responsible for rape or for abduction and misappropriation of children. Argentine Justice Minister Ral Granillo Ocampo repeatedly refused to cooperate with the investigations of Judge Garzn (including throughextradition of former Argentine junta members) and rejected his competence in these cases. President Carlos Menem also accused Garzn of harassing accused members of the Argentine armed forces and instructed ministers to block the investigations.

Within Argentina, attempts to investigate violations under the dictatorship continued, although with little success. In July 1998 federal Judge Roberto Marquevich ordered the detention of former de facto president, Gen. Jorge R. Videla, in connection with cases of the kidnapping and falsifying of the identity of children of the disappeared (most of them born in clandestine detention centers and handed over to military families), one of the few crimes not covered by the full stop and due obedience laws. Although Videla was allowed to remain under house arrest after refusing to testify, public prosecutor Eduardo Treiler later urged the court to charge him, Adm. Emilio Massera, and other former junta members on the same basis, arguing that the practice of the kidnapping of children born in the Campo de Mayo and ESMA detention centers had been ordered by Videla and that he and other junta members had knowledge of the events. A public prosecutor later determined that the issue fell under the jurisdiction of the Armed Forces Supreme Council and should be transferred out of Judge Marquevichs hands.

In a similar case, in August 1998 the Permanent Assembly for Human Rights (Asamblea Permanente de los Derechos Humanos, APDH) in Tucumn province announced that it would present cases relating to five missing children born in detention to disappeared mothers in the province in the period 1976-1978. These cases would involve charges against Gen. Antonio Domingo Bussi, then-military governor of the province and chief of the V Infantry Brigade in charge of fighting subversion in the province. (Bussi had since become currently the elected governor of Tucumn.)

Another obstacle to investigation of past violations was imposed by a Supreme Court decision on August 13 to the effect that the mother of a disappearance victim, Carmen Aguiar de Lapac, did not have the right of access to official records in order to learn the fate of her daughter, Alejandra Lapac. The court denied access on the grounds that the case been legally closed, although prosecution was stated not to be the aim of the plaintiff. Faced with calls for impeachment of the five judges who voted in favor of this decision, Supreme Court Judge Augusto Belluscio denied that the decision closed the possibility of investigations, which he said could be sought via a petition for protection of constitutional rights, but not via the federal courts. In late September, the Supreme Court upheld the right of another relative to access to government files in order to determine the whereabouts of his brother (a guerrilla leader killed in a confrontation in 1976 and whose body was subsequently hidden by the military government).

Brazil
Human Rights Developments
In contrast to previous years, no single horrific event constituted the principal human rights development in 1998 in Brazil. Instead, the year was characterized by a series of incidents of police abuse, continued disturbances in Brazils overcrowded prisons and police lockups, the ongoing failure to prosecute vigorously prior incidents of gross abuse by state agents, and the governments failure to implement the ideals embodied in the National Human Rights Program, released in May.

The issue of police violence continued to seize headlines as officers throughout Brazil killed suspects in incidents that they classified as instances of legitimate use of deadly force. The police in the greater So Paulo area killed 405 civilians in 1997 and 197 in the first five months of 1998. In Rio de Janeiro, State Secretary of Public Security Col. Noaldo Alves Silva, appointed in April, continued to promote the suspect policies of his predecessor Gen. Nilton Cerqueira, including pay raises and promotions for acts of bravery which Human Rights Watch had demonstrated were awarded to police for killing suspects, despite the existence, in many cases, of evidence contradicting official accounts of the circumstances. Since 1995, more than 3,000 military police and another 1,000 civil police had received pay bonuses for bravery; more than 950 officers had been promoted for bravery in the same period. An October 1997 study by the Institute of Religious Studies (Instituto de Estudos Religiosos, ISER), a leading Rio-based research institute, demonstrated that during this period, the number of civilians killed by police in the city of Rio soared from sixteen to thirty-two per month. In June, following two years of pressure from human rights groups and the media, the Rio de Janeiro State Legislative Assembly took the promising step of voting to suspend both the pay raises and promotions for bravery, overriding Gov. Marcello Alencars veto of the legislation. Although its impact would take time to evaluate, the vote represented a strong protest to the governor and state secretary of security regarding the stunning homicide record of Rios police. According to official figures released in September, in the first forty weeks of the year the police in the state of Rio killed 511 civilians, roughly sixty per month and nearly twice as many, per capita, as their So Paulo counterparts. Though less severe than in Rio, the problem of police violence in So Paulo was demonstrated to have been underreported by roughly 30 percent for the decade in official figures which So Paulo authorities recognized in April had systematically failed to include certain types of killings by officers.

So Paulo police continued to be subject to the control of the Police Ombudsmans office (Ouvidoria), which received and processed complaints of police violence, and a separate program, which required those officers involved in homicides to be removed from street duty for three months and subjected to psychological evaluation before returning. No similar programs existed in Rio. In this regard, the appointment in August of long-time human rights activist Jos Roberto Rezende to initiate the work of the newly created police oversight body (Ouvidoria) in neighboring Minas Gerais constituted an important advance.

The northeastern state of Alagoas made national and international news in January when dozens of police officers were found to be involved in contract killings, bank robberies, and car theft rings. To their credit, state and federal authorities took the unprecedented step of arresting more than thirty police involved in the so-called uniformed gang, including its reputed leader, Lt. Col. Manoel Francisco Cavalcante, on January 16. Around the time of the arrests, investigations led to the discovery of the remains of thirty-two bodies, presumably victims of the gangs homicides. After the arrests, however, the investigations stalled. A surprise visit to the state morgue in May by Human Rights Watch and local human rights groups exposed the burial of the remains of ten to twelve victims before they could be identified by DNA and other expert examinations. Meanwhile, dozens of crimes attributed to the police in recent years in Alagoas continued without convictions or even judicial proceedings.

Death squad violence, marked by police involvement, continued in the northwestern state of Acre and along Brazils border with Paraguay in the state of Mato Grosso do Sul. According to Acre State Supreme Court President Gercino Jos da Silva Filho, whohas received death threats and is under Federal Police protection, three death squads composed of civil police, military police and taxi drivers continued to operate in the state of Acre and have been responsible for the executions of at least thirty people in the past eleven years and possibly others among another 110 whose homicides remained unsolved. Recent crimes attributed to these death squads were the killings of Srgio Rodrigues Soares, eighteen, executed with fifteen shots on March 28, and the early March shooting death of Francisco dos Santos Rocha.

The Maral de Souza Human Rights Center reported that in 1997, 129 homicides with indicia of executions had been committed in the Grande Dourados Region of Mato Grosso do Sul, along the Brazilian border with Paraguay. Local human rights groups and state authorities suspected the involvement of the special border operations division of the state police in many of these killings.

Police continued to practice torture as a routine method of investigation throughout Brazil. The propriety and effectiveness of the use of torture became issues of national debate in light of a series of high-profile cases in which the police extracted confessions from defendants who were later shown to be innocent. Most prominent among these was the case of eighteen-year-old student Ana Carolina da Costa Lino, brutally murdered in an affluent section of Rio, some 200 meters from the governors mansion on April 14. Public pressure to resolve the crimeas well as the governors irresponsible statements to the press that no police investigation would be opened should the police kill the perpetrators in a shootoutled five teams of police to investigate the crime. Days after the event, a group of detectives presented Delson Santana, a twenty-three-year-old technician, as one of the assailants. According to his statement, shortly after his arrest Santana had been taken to a deserted area where police threatened him, fired shots nearby to terrorize him, beat him and placed a plastic bag over his head repeatedly, to the point of near-asphyxiation. On May 21, a day after announcing that the crime had been clarified, the police publicly admitted that Santana had not been involved in it, and subsequently released him after their dubious efforts to establish his involvement in another robbery produced no evidence. In July, Willian Rosa Cinelli, one of those subsequently arrested in connection with the crime, escaped from his cell at the 26th precinct, reportedly after paying police nearly U.S.$90,000.

In the course of research conducted in late 1997 and 1998, Human Rights Watch took scores of credible statements of torture from detainees in police lockups, jails and prisons in seven Brazilian states. Particularly notable were the police lockups in Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais. In that citys Thefts and Robberies Precinct, detainees provided detailed accounts of daily torture sessions with electric shock and near-drowning in a special room adjacent to, and within earshot of, the holding cells. Not surprisingly, police authorities initially blocked access to the precinct for a delegation composed of state deputies, a member of the State Human Rights Council, and Human Rights Watch; they permitted the visit three days later pursuant to a state prosecutorial order.

On May 27, Alcioni Serafim de Santana, a Federal Police precinct chief in the internal affairs division, was gunned down in front of his house in So Paulo by hired killers, allegedly contracted by Federal Police officers whom Santana was investigating for involvement in contraband and narcotics trafficking. Santanas killing prompted investigations into the Federal Police forceconsidered Brazils most professionalthat demonstrated that 106 Federal Police officers in Rio and forty-six others in So Paulo were facing criminal charges but had not been dismissed. An undisclosed number had already been convicted yet continued on the force.

On August 31, Carlos Antnio Ruff, a forty-three-year-old former drug trafficker, was murdered shortly after agreeing to provide information to federal authorities about thirty-three state and Federal Police officers from Rio and So Paulo involved in drug trafficking. Investigations subsequent to Ruffs death confirmed the veracity of his allegations. The utter failure of authorities to guarantee Ruffs security underscored the need to create an effective witness protection program at the federal level and in the state of Rio de Janeiro.

In high-profile cases of police brutality, impunity continued to be the rule, with a few notable exceptions. More than six years after the 1992 massacre at Carandiru prison, in which 111 inmates were killed, no one had been brought to trial, although in March, the ordinary courts ordered eighty-five of the police officers accused to stand trial. The prosecution of the some fifty police officers responsible for the August 1993 massacre of twenty-one residents of the Vigrio Geral favela (shantytown) failed to advance in 1998, after the November 1997 conviction of Military Police Officer Arlindo Maginrio Filho. On December 28, 1997, Sirley Alves Ferreira, one of the defendants in the case, escaped from Ari Franco prison in Rio de Janeiro state. In April, a technical error forced the nullification of the trial of ten others.

One positive note was the August 25 conviction and stiff sentence (204 years imprisonment) imposed on former military policeman Marcos Aurlio Alcntara, the final defendant to be tried for his role in the July 1993 killing of eight street children in the Candelria plaza in downtown Rio de Janeiro. Another important advance in the battle against impunity was the May conviction and forty-seven-year sentence to Rio Grande do Norte police officer Jorge the smotherer Fernandes, for the killings of two and injuries to four others in a March 1995 incident known as the massacre of the Me Luiza favela in Natal, the state capital. Fernandes was suspected of involvement in at least a dozen other killings for which he still faced trial.

In July a military court in So Paulo convicted seven of the police officer defendants involved in the March 1997 videotaped scenes of beatings, extortion and murder in the Naval favela in Diadema, So Paulo. In August, the same court convicted an eighth defendant, Otvio Gambra, the officer who fired the shot that killed Mrio Jos Josino in the videotaped incidents. All the defendants received relatively light sentences (between one year and eight months and three years and nine months) in the military tribunal but still faced prosecution, along with two others, in the ordinary courts for the crimes of murder, attempted murder and abuse of authority.

Severe overcrowding, official violence and appalling conditions in Brazils prisons, jails and police holding centers continued to provoke riots and rebellions, several of which resulted in the loss of life. After a record year of riots (195 in So Paulos lockups and jails alone in 1997), the national prison census for 1997released and then recalled in early 1998demonstrated a significantgrowth in inmate numbers and a prison capacity deficit of 96,010. This deficit (2.3 persons were maintained in detention for every space in the prison system) forced many states to intensify their use of temporary police holding cells as long-term detention centers. The lack of infrastructure, extreme overcrowding and endemic violence in both police lockups and the regular prison system triggered riots throughout the year, several of which were controlled with excessive, often deadly force.

On December 24, 1997, a group of twenty-three prisoners at the Paulo Sarasate prison ( Instituto Penal Paulo Sarasate , IPPS) in Cear took three representatives of nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and one police lieutenant hostage and initiated a standoff that lasted some twenty-five hours. After much negotiationincluding the release of the police lieutenant but not the civiliansthe prisoners and hostages were allowed to flee in four vehicles provided by the police. Shortly after the cars exited the prison, the police opened fire on them, killing seven prisoners and wounding two hostages with gunfire. Surviving prisoners and hostages told Human Rights Watch that the police summarily executed at least two prisoners after they had surrendered.

On February 5, a group of approximately thirty prisoners attempted to escape from the Joo Chaves prison in Natal, Rio Grande do Norte. The police responded to the escape by gunning down six apparently unarmed prisoners, some of whom received as many as fourteen shots, all from behind. Three days later, police recaptured escapee Moisaniel Oliveira da Silva, killing him with a single shot to the temple at point-blank range.

The Joo Chaves prison had been the subject of reports of extreme prisoner-on-prisoner violence, allegedly promoted or at least tolerated by authorities. Between March 1997 and January 1998, ten prisoners were killed by other inmates. In at least two of these cases, authorities were made aware of the threats facing the endangered prisoners yet failed to take steps to prevent the killings. Prisoner-on-prisoner abuse claimed the lives of dozens of others in 1998. A two-day rebellion at the So Jos prison in Belm, Par state ended with the death of three prisoners, whom authorities contended had been killed by other detainees. On May 29, at least twenty-two prisoners died during fights in the Barreto Campelo prison in the northeastern state of Pernambuco.

Detention conditions for minors, generally separated from adults in Brazil, fell well below minimum standards. In April, some 370 juveniles held in the Moniz Sodr detention center in Rio de Janeiro took three staff members hostage and began a riot that lasted just over an hour. During that time, the youths set fire to mattresses and destroyed part of the facility. A visit by the State Bar Associations Human Rights Commission the following month showed that repairs had not been made, hundreds of minors had been sleeping on the floor of a gymnasium and many of them bore signs of recent beatings.

Violent disputes over land continued to be widespread. According to the Pastoral Land Commission (Comisso Pastoral da Terra, CPT), in 1997 land conflicts numbered 658, a slight increase from the 653 registered in 1996 and a significant rise from the 440 in 1995 or the 379 of 1994. Figures for 1998 were not available at this writing, but press reports suggested that this trend continued throughout the year. On March 26, two landless labor leaders who had survived the April 17, 1996 massacre of nineteen landless squatters in Eldorado dos Carajs, Onalcio Arajo Barros and Valentin da Silva Serra, were shot to death in an apparent execution shortly after they were evicted along with 520 families from the Gois II ranch in southern Par state. Subsequent investigations established that eleven police officers had participated in the expulsion and the subsequent shooting. Several of these officers had also participated in the Eldorado dos Carajs massacre but continued to serve on active duty, pending trial in that case.

Through August 1998, at least nineteen persons had been killed in rural conflicts, including several leaders of the landless movement. In February, a group of eighty hooded gunmen and landowners attacked a group of landless laborers involved in an occupation in Paran state, killing sixty-five year-old Sebastio Camargo Filho and injuring two others. In March, the body of Adelson Brito, a landless leader in Barra Mansa, Rio de Janeiro state was found on the side of a road near the fazenda (plantation) whose occupation he had organized, riddled with five bullets.

The number of instances and persons involved in the practice of forced labor fell dramatically (from twenty-one cases involving 26,047 persons in 1995 to nineteen cases involving 2,487 persons in 1996 and to seventeen cases involving 872 persons in 1997), due largely to the efforts of federal labor investigation teams in conjunction with civil society. Nonetheless, the CPT registered sixty-six cases of extreme abuse of worker rights in 1997, including forced labor and hyper-exploitation involving 25,660 people.

Indigenous peoples continued to suffer invasions on their traditional lands by loggers, miners and others, often violent. On May 20, Xucuru indian leader Francisco de Assis Arajo was shot by a hired gunman in Pesqueira, in the northeastern state of Pernambuco, in what appeared to be a targeted assassination. Arajo had led a campaign to increase the area demarcated as Xucuru land. Some 181 fazendas had occupied the areas claimed by the tribe.

In March, Federal Police authorities took steps to expel Dutch missionary Winifridus Overbeek from Brazil on unfounded charges that Overbeek encouraged indigenous tribes to invade private lands. The response of NGOs dedicated to indigenous rights and civil society forced the government to reconsider and allow Overbeek to continue his work with the Tupiniquim and Guarani indians in Esprito Santo state.

The issue of grave human rights violations committed during the military dictatorship continued to provoke revelations and reaction by civil society in 1998. In February it became known that Ricardo Fayad, a doctor who oversaw torture sessions of political dissidents during the dictatorship, had been promoted to health director for the Army. In April, President Cardoso ceded to the pressure of human rights groups, including Human Rights Watch, and reversed Fayads promotion. The Special Commission on Deaths and Disappearances, a governmental body established by a December 1995 law, continued to hold state agents responsible for custodial deaths previously mischaracterized as shootouts, resistance to arrest or otherwise, and authorized compensation to victims survivors in a total of 148 of the 234 cases decided from its creation in December 1995 through May 1998. In April, the Rio daily O Globo ran a special series of articles based on security force documents from 1970 to 1981 released by the family of Army Gen. Antnio Bandeira. The documents provided details about the conduct of the military campaign to eliminate the Araguaiaguerrilla movement in the 1970s, demonstrating state responsibility for the detention and death of persons whose whereabouts the military had consistently denied knowing. In the cases of leftist leaders Carlos Danielli and Joaquim Cmara Ferreira, for example, the documents established that both men had been arrested and were thus killed after detention, not while resisting arrest as authorities had contended at the time. The revelations prompted renewed calls for the release of all documents held by governmental authorities concerning the abuses of security forces and the military during the dictatorship (1964-1985).

Throughout 1998, important measures set forth in the National Human Rights Program failed to gain approval from the federal Congress or state authorities. At this writing, measures to limit the jurisdiction of military courts, to grant Federal Police and courts jurisdiction over certain human rights violations, to create a federal witness protection plan, to revise the penal code (particularly sex offenses), to establish a statute to govern indigenous areas and dozens of others remained stalled in Congress. Almost all Brazilian states failed to establish mechanisms of external control of the police or to reduce prison overcrowding, as recommended by the program.

Brazil continued to seek a permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council, adopting initial measures to demonstrate a commitment to international human rights standards. In December 1997, the Brazilian government signed the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and On their Destruction (1997 Mine Ban Treaty). At this writing, however, it had not yet ratified the treaty. In July, Brazil voted to support the Rome treaty to establish an International Criminal Court (ICC). Although press reports indicated the governments intent to recognize the jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights in San Jos, Costa Rica, at this writing authorities had not deposited an instrument to that effect. Throughout 1998, the government showed an increased willingness to negotiate friendly settlements in cases pending before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) and recognized the existence of grave human rights violations as reported by that body in a special report released in December 1997. In September 1998, President Cardoso issued a decree granting amnesty to thousands of foreigners residing illegally in Brazil.
Colombia
Human Rights Developments
Despite increased national and international attention to human rights and laws of war violations, the civilian toll in Colombias war remained high in 1998. Presidential elections in June prompted calls for peace, but both guerrillas and paramilitaries, the latter often working with the acquiescence or open support of the security forces, launched offensives that dimmed hopes. At this writing, a new president, his cabinet, and a new military high command had yet to make the first steps necessary to end impunity and bring human rights criminals to justice. For their part, guerrillas continued to flout the laws of war even as they criticized government forces for violations.

Although exact figures remained difficult to confirm and many cases went unreported or uninvestigated, the Data Bank run by the Center for Research and Popular Education (Centro de Investigacin y Educacin Popular, CINEP) and the Intercongregational Commission of Justice and Peace (Justice and Peace), human rights groups, reported that 619 people were killed for political reasons in the first six months of 1998. In cases where a perpetrator was suspected, 73 percent of these killings were attributed to paramilitaries, 17 percent were attributed to guerrillas, and 10 percent to state agents. These figures did not include combatants killed in action.

Efforts to pass crucial human rights legislation stalled in Congress, including a military penal code reform and a bill criminalizing forced disappearances. The outgoing administration of Ernesto Samper failed to promote these measures aggressively, ignoring an opportunity to achieve crucial human rights reforms. That obligation passed to the government of Andrs Pastrana, who had not, at this writing, announced a plan for addressing issues like continuing military support for paramilitary groups and impunity.

The Colombian army continued to commit serious violations with little apparent will to investigate or punish those responsible. As in the past, at the root of these abuses was the Colombian armys consistent and pervasive failure to enforce human rights standards and distinguish civilians from combatants. In eastern Colombia, where paramilitary forces were weak, the army was directly implicated in the killing of civilians and prisoners taken hors de combat , as well as torture and death threats. In the rest of the country, where paramilitaries had developed a pronounced presence over the past decade, the army still failed to move against them and tolerated their activity, including egregious violations of international humanitarian law; provided some paramilitary groups with intelligence and logistical support to carry out operations; and actively promoted and coordinated joint maneuvers with them.

High-ranking army officers continued to claim that soldiers were directly implicated in fewer abuses than in years past even as the armys use and tolerance of paramilitaries persisted. As the Bogot-based office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights noted in its March 1998 report, Witnesses frequently state that [massacres] were perpetrated by members of the armed forces passing themselves off as paramilitaries, joint actions by members of the armed forces or police and paramilitaries, or actions by paramilitaries enjoying the complicity, support or acquiescence of the regular forces.

Throughout the year, paramilitary threats of massacres were ignored by the security forces, which took few measures to protect civilians. In the case of Puerto Alvira, Meta, local officials and the Office of the Public Advocate (Defensora del Pueblo) warned authorities over a dozen times of an imminent attack. Nevertheless, paramilitaries seized the town unhampered on May 4 and reportedly killed at least twenty-one people, including store owners and a five-year-old child.

The Colombian armys Twentieth Brigade, which centralized military intelligence, was among the most feared units in Colombia until it was suspended pending a reorganization on May 19, 1998, in part because of human rights violations. Government investigators linked the Twentieth Brigade to the 1995 murder of prominent leader lvaro Gmez Hurtado, an apparent plot to provoke a military coup detat.

In November 1997 four Twentieth Brigade intelligence officers were passed over for promotion, effectively ending their careers, and the military retired a former brigade commander. However, we are not aware of any criminal investigations of Twentieth Brigade commanders who presided over the unit when it amassed its homicidal record.

Impunity remained the rule for officers who violated human rights. Typical is the case involving the Naval Intelligence Network No. 7, responsible for dozens of extrajudicial executions in and around the city of Barrancabermeja, Santander from 1991 through 1993. Despite overwhelming evidence showing that Lt. Col. Rodrigo Quiones and seven other soldiers planned, ordered, and paid hit men and paramilitaries to carry out these killings, all eight were speedily acquitted by a military tribunal in 1994.

A civilian court convicted two civilian employees of Naval Intelligence Network No. 7 for murder in 1998. In his ruling, the civilian judge described himself as perplexed by the military acquittals of the officers involved, since he considered the evidence against the officers irrefutable... With [this acquittal] all that [the military] does is justify crime, since the incidents and the people responsible for committing them are more than clear, he wrote. In September, Colombias Internal Affairs office (Procuradura) also concluded that naval officers had formed, promoted, led, and financed paramilitary groups in order to carry out dozens of extrajudicial executions.

Although Colombias Constitutional Court ruled in 1997 that cases involving members of the armed forces accused of violations of human rights and the laws of war should be prosecuted in civilian courts, the Superior Judicial Council, the body charged with resolving jurisdictional disputes between civilian courts and military tribunals, continued to rule frequently in favor of the military. The few cases transferred to civilian jurisdiction mainly involved police officers, not soldiers, and none ranked above the level of major.

As of this writing, the Pastrana administration had yet to announce its position on a bill, stalled in the Colombian Senate, to reform the military penal code. However, cases like the one involving Naval Intelligence Network No. 7 underscored the urgent need to pass such legislation to end the impunity so far guaranteed for officers by military tribunals.

Army officers who failed to arrest or even pursue paramilitaries continued to be shielded and even promoted. Instead of being sanctioned for allowing repeated paramilitary massacres in his jurisdiction in 1997, Seventh Brigade Commander Gen. Jaime Usctegui was promoted to an elite unit in the department of Caquet in 1998.

The National Police were also implicated in abuses, among them the extrajudicial executions of young men suspected of sympathizing with guerrillas. In areas where paramilitaries were present, police officers were directly implicated in joint army-paramilitary actions and sometimes organized paramilitaries and supplied information to them to assemble death lists. For instance, government investigators concluded in 1998 that police in La Ceja, Antioquia organized and deployed paramilitaries considered responsible for at least thirty killings in 1996 and 1997.

After the Catholic Church sponsored workshops on human rights in El Peol, Antioquia in March 1998 and invited local police, organizers learned that police planned to attend only to take notes and photograph those present, suggesting an attempt to identify and later persecute human rights defenders or simply discourage residents from taking part. Subsequently, the workshop organizers began receiving telephone death threats.

After a flood of reports of abuses, including massacres, perpetrated by Special Vigilance and Private Security Services (Servicios de Vigilancia y Seguridad Privada, CONVIVIR) groups of civilians licensed by the government to provide local security, outgoing President Ernesto Samper suspended the creation of new associations. Renamed Community Services (Servicios Comunitarios), these associations were barred by the Constitutional Court from collecting intelligence for the security forces and receiving military-issued weapons, formerly common practices.

Meanwhile, government investigators launched investigations of army officers who set up and supported these associations without government approval. For example, the Las Colonias association in Lebrija, Santander was set up without government authorization by Gen. Fernando Milln at the Fifth Brigade base he commanded. The association regularly extorted money from residents and allegedly committed a series of killings, robberies, and death threats. Among its members before its dismantlement were several known paramilitaries from the Middle Magdalena region. The army high command prevented prosecutors from questioning Milln, then interposed a jurisdictional dispute, claiming that since Milln was on active service and carrying out his official duties, the case should be tried before a military tribunal. In October, the case, like hundreds before it, was sent to a military tribunal.

For their part, paramilitaries continued to commit massacres, murders of civilians and combatants hors de combat, torture, the mutilation of corpses, death threats, forced displacement, hostage-taking, and looting, among other violations. In the first eight months of 1998, for example, paramilitaries were linked to most of the massacres committed, meaning the killing of four or more people at the same place and at the same time. In many cases, bodies were also dismembered, decapitated, and mutilated with machetes, chain saws, and acid.

Among the most brazen massacres occurred in the city of Barrancabermeja, Santander. On May 16, 1998, the Santander and Southern Cesar Self-Defense Group killed eleven residents and arbitrarily detained at least thirty-one others. Subsequently, the group, one of seven allied under the United Self-Defense Groups (Autodefensas Unidas de Colombia, AUC), took responsibility for murdering most of the men they had arbitrarily detained and burning their bodies. The Attorney Generals Office (Fiscala) later linked at least one army soldier to the preparation for the paramilitary incursion.

Although the Attorney Generals Office issued a growing number of warrants for paramilitary leaders, including AUC leader Carlos Castao, the security forces made few arrests. A notable exception was the February 25 capture of Vctor Carranza, a powerful Castao ally. Significantly, Carranza was captured by the civilian security agency attached to the Attorney Generals Office, theTechnical Investigation Unit (Cuerpo Tcnico de Investigacin, CTI), which did not notify security force agencies beforehand for fear they would alert Carranza.

Guerrillas also committed serious abuses in 1998. When the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia, FARC) perceived a political advantage, it emphasized its respect for the laws of war. However, when no political advantage was apparent, the FARC made little if any attempt to abide by these standards. For instance, Human Rights Watch received credible and consistent information about the FARCs use of the bodies of slain combatants as booby traps, an act of perfidy under the laws of war. After combat near Fomeque, Cundinamarca, on February 16, 1998, the army collected the bodies of three soldiers, which were flown by helicopter to Santaf de Bogot. There, the explosives hidden in the body of Capt. Luis Hernando Camacho detonated, killing two soldiers and wounding five.

The Camilist Union-National Liberation Army (Unin Camilista- Ejrcito de Liberacin Nacional, UC-ELN) routinely executed soldiers and police officers taken hors de combat, often in front of dozens of witnesses. In the first six months of 1998 alone, the UC-ELN killed at least thirty-two civilians and combatants hors de combat according to the Data Bank.

In that same time period, the UC-ELN reportedly bombed the 770-kilometers-long pipeline linking Colombias eastern oil fields with the Caribbean port of Coveas over forty times. The UC-ELN targeted the pipeline not for military reasons but to extort money and make a political point about its opposition to the way Colombia deals with the multinational corporations.

The Popular Liberation Army (Ejrcito Popular de Liberacin, EPL) also engaged in persistent and egregious violations of international humanitarian law, including the murders of the relatives of deserters. For instance, after EPL kidnap victims Mara Constanza and Juan Carlos Morales Ballesteros escaped with the help of an EPL militant, EPL guerrillas hunted down the mans family on November 18, 1997, and killed his mother and brother and wounded another brother in reprisal.

All guerrilla groups continued to engage in hostage-taking for extortion or to press a political point. According to the Pas Libre Foundation, a nongovernmental group that collects information on kidnaping, guerrillas are responsible for half of the estimated 1,088 kidnapings registered in the first seven months of 1998.

All parties to the conflict continued to use land mines. For instance, the UC-ELN used land mines in populated areas of Antioquia, Arauca, and Santander, among others, endangering the civilian population and causing casualties among farmers and children. Although Colombia signed the Mine Ban Treaty in December 1997, it has yet to ratify it.

Forced displacement continued to be a serious problem. According to the Displaced Support Group (Grupo de Apoyo a Desplazados, GAD), an alliance of human rights, church, and humanitarian aid groups, over one million Colombians have been displaced by violence. Chief among the causes of forced displacement were violations of human rights and the laws of war. Displacement was also caused by powerful business interests, which joined forces with paramilitaries to force poor farmers from their land, then occupied it or bought it for paltry sums.

Several regions buffeted by massacres, fighting, targeted killings, and threats produced forced displacement in 1998: the northern departments of Antioquia, Bolvar, Cesar, and Norte de Santander; the Middle Magdalena region; and the region known as Urab, bordering Panama and including northern Choc department. Forced displacement also spread to new areas formerly at the margins of conflict, including the departments of Choc and Putumayo.

Another relatively new phenomenon in 1998 was the persecution of leaders of displaced communities, accused by combatants of sympathizing with the enemy or arranging displacements as a military maneuver. On April 28, 1998, armed men claiming to belong to the ACCU seized six men from a Bello, Antioquia, settlement of forcibly displaced families, killing at least four and forcibly disappearing the rest.

Government measures to assist the displaced fell prey to lack of funding, insufficient coordination among government agencies, and poor information. Most displaced Colombians continued to live in misery and fear. Colombias cities absorbed displaced families into their growing slums, and the displaced often lived on the margins of these already marginal settlements. Others took shelter in temporary camps. In August, hundreds of displaced families from southern Bolvar began arriving in Barrancabermeja, Santander, and negotiated an accord with the government for their safe return. However, even as families began the trek back to their homes and farms, new concerns were raised about their safety in a region still torn by combat.

In some cases, the government compelled the displaced to return to their communities despite its inability to guarantee their security. For example, according to virtually all informed observers and the displaced themselves consulted by the U.S. Committee for Refugees, from the moment that the hundreds of Riosucio displaced arrived in Pavarand and Turbo in late 1997, the government began pressuring them to return home. While many displaced people said that they wanted to return, they insisted that the government guarantee their security. In November 1997, the government announced that the displaced in Pavarand had agreed to return home and would sign an agreement to that effect. But the displaced people refused to sign, because the agreement did not guarantee their security.

According to the Office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights in March 1998, return has been promoted even though minimum conditions of security could not be guaranteed and the causes which gave rise to the displacement had not been eliminated.

Prison conditions remained grim, especially for individuals believed to occupy middle to lower-level positions within insurgent organizations. While leaders were provided with virtual suites within maximum security facilities and access to foods and medicines of their choosing, rank-and-file prisoners lived in severely overcrowded cell blocks where acts of violence were common along with chronic shortages of food, water, and medical care. In a bloody incident that took place in April, fifteen inmates were killed in a gang clash in La Picota prison south of Bogot.

According to the National Penitentiary and Jail Institute, which runs Colombias prisons, 49 percent of prisoners overall hadnot yet been convicted of any crime. Although Colombias prison were built to hold about 32,000 prisoners, the actual population was well over 43,000.
Cuba
Human Rights Developments
Pope John Paul IIs January 1998 pilgrimage to Cuba sparked hope that the government would ease its repressive tactics. The papal visit provided unprecedented opportunities for public demonstrations of faithin a country that imposed tight restrictions on religious expression in 1959 and was officially atheist until 1992and was attended by an enormous international press contingent. Although Cuba refused visas to some foreign journalists and pressured some domestic critics, the popes calls for freedom of religion, conscience, and expression and the release of political prisoners created an unprecedented air of openness. Following the papal visit, Cuba released some one hundred political prisoners, but most of these had served the majority of their sentences and police required them to refrain from opposition activities. Cuba freed seventeen prisoners on the condition that they accept exile in Canada, violating their right to remain in their homeland. As 1998 drew to a close, Cubas stepped-up prosecutions and harassment of dissidents, along with its refusal to grant amnesty to hundreds of remaining political prisoners or reform its criminal code, marked a disheartening return to heavy-handed repression.

Cuban laws allowed the government to silence opponents under a veil of legality. The government rejected pleas to repeal offensive provisions such as the crime of enemy propaganda and spreading false news, which criminalized dissent and independent reporting. Cuban law broadly defined sedition as including nonviolent opposition that perturb[ed] the socialist order. Cubas laws against insulting public figures, mass organizations, and dead heroes also sweepingly denied freedom of speech. Justice Minister Roberto Daz Sotolongo justified the restrictions by explaining that, as Spanish laws protected the monarch, Cuba also had laws to protect its king, Fidel Castro. Cubas provision against contempt for authority (desacato ), which barred truthfulness as a defense, punished those who offended high-ranking authorities with one to three years in prison. The criminal codes dangerousness ( el estado peligroso ) and official warning ( advertencia oficial ) provisions permitted authorities to imprison or mandate police surveillance of individuals who demonstrated criminal tendencies but had committed no criminal act. Cuba retained on its books the crime of illegal exit, which prohibited unapproved emigration. Cubas associations law effectively barred the establishment of independent groups, leaving members at risk of up to one year in prison.

Cuban legislation also undercut the right to a fair trial by allowing political figures to control the courts, granting broad authority for warrantless arrests and pre-trial detentions and restricting the right to a defense. Charging dissidents with state security crimes, such as sedition or enemy propaganda, afforded authorities the legal right to impose lengthy pre-trial detentions and to conduct closed trials.

Several trials in 1998 demonstrated Cubas willingness to use the criminal code to crush dissent. On August 28, 1998, a Havana court sentenced Reynaldo Alfaro Garca, vice-president of the Association for the Struggle Against National Injustice (Asociacin para la Lucha Frente a la Injusticia Nacional) and a member of the Democratic Solidarity Party (Partido de Solidaridad Democrtica, PSD), to three years for spreading false news. Police had arrested him on May 8, 1997, after he called for the release of political prisoners and denounced prison beatings. On April 24, 1998, a Santiago court found Julio Csar Coizeau Rizo, a member of the Club of Ex Political Prisoners Geraldo Gonzlez (Club de Ex-Presos Polticos Geraldo Gonzlez), guilty of contempt for authority. The court sentenced him to three years for posting some twenty anti-government flyers.

On February 13, 1998, a Santa Clara tribunal sentenced Cecilio Monteagudo Snchez, a PSD vice-delegate, to four years in prison for enemy propaganda. Cuban police arrested him on September 15, 1997, after he had drafted, but not published, a document calling for abstention from local elections. The same tribunal convicted Juan Carlos Recio Martnez, a local journalist with the Cuba Press agency whom Monteagudo Snchez had asked to type the document, of failing to comply with his duty to denounce ( incumplimiento del deber de denunciar ) and sentenced him to one year in a labor camp without internment ( correccional sin internamiento ).
In late September 1998, Havana prosecutors charged the four leaders of the Internal Dissidents Working Group (Grupo de Trabajo de la Disidencia Interna, GTDI), economists Marta Beatriz Roque Cabello and Vladimiro Roca Antnez, professor Flix Antonio Bonne Carcasses, and attorney Ren Gmez Manzano, with sedition. Cuban authorities already had held them for over fourteen months in maximum security prisons, since their July 16, 1997 arrests. At this writing, Cuban prosecutors sought a six-yearterm for Roca Antnez and five-year sentences for the other three leaders. In June 1997 the GTDI released The Homeland Belongs to All ( La Patria es de Todos ), a paper that analyzed Cubas economy, proposed reforms to the Cuban constitution, discussed human rights, and challenged Cubas exclusive recognition of one political party. Throughout 1998 Cuba ignored high-level appeals for their release, including pleas from the pope and the Canadian prime minister.

On November 18, 1997, a Santiago tribunal tried Dr. Dessy Mendoza Rivero, president of the Independent Medical College of Santiago (Colegio Mdico Independiente de Santiago), found him guilty of enemy propaganda, and sentenced him to eight years. Cuban police arrested Dr. Mendoza in June 1997, shortly after he alerted the international press of a dengue fever epidemic in Santiago. On November 11, 1997, a Santiago court sentenced Orestes Rodrguez Horruitiner, a local leader of two opposition groups, to four years for enemy propaganda. Police arrested him in July 1997 after searching his home and seizing books by prominent leaders of Latin American independence movementsJos Mart, Mximo Gmez, and Antonio Macowhich later served as evidence of his crime.

Whether held for political or common crimes, inmates endured severe hardships in Cubas prisons. Most prisoners faced malnourishment on the prison diet and suffered in overcrowded cells without sufficient medical attention. Prison authorities insisted that all detainees participate in politically oriented reeducation sessions, such as chanting Long live Fidel or Socialism or Death, or face punitive measures including beatings and solitary confinement. Prison guards in mens facilities relied on prisoners councils ( consejos de reclusos ) to maintain internal discipline with beatings and control over the meager food rations. Prison authorities restricted inmates access to receiving religious guidance, in some cases with interrogations about their religious beliefs. In some prisons, pre-trial detainees were held together with convicts and minors with adults. Minors also risked indefinite detention in juvenile facilities.

Cubas refusal to allow prison monitoring made arriving at a precise number of political prisoners impossible. In recent years, the numbers of political prisoners declined due to a general trend toward shorter prison terms. One Cuban human rights group estimated that, following the papal releases, approximately 400 political prisoners remained. Human Rights Watch interviews with former political prisoners, dissident groups, and prisoners family members revealed that Cuban political prisoners face serious human rights abuses. Cubas confinement of nonviolent political prisoners with prisoners convicted of violent crimes was degrading and dangerous. Guards imposed undue restrictions on political prisoners visits with family members. Prison authorities also punished political prisoners who denounced prison abuses or failed to participate in political reeducation or wear prison uniforms.

Many Cuban political prisoners spent excessive periods in pre-trial detention, often in isolation cells. Following conviction, they faced additional punitive periods in solitary confinement. Police or prison guards often heightened the punitive nature of solitary confinement with additional sensory deprivation, by darkening cells, removing clothing, or restricting food and water. The punitive and intimidatory measures against political prisoners that caused severe pain and suffering and the retaliations against those who denounced abuses violated Cubas obligations under the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, which it ratified in 1995.

The July 1998 death of Reinery Marrero Toledo, while he was in police custody, raised concern about police brutality and torture. On June 30, 1998, Havana police arrested Marrero Toledo, accusing him as an accessory to sacrificing livestock ( sacrificio ilegal de ganado mayor ). On July 9, 1998, agents of the Technical Department of Investigations in Havana (Departamento Tcnico de Investigaciones) told his family that he had committed suicide by hanging himself with a sheet. However, a family member who viewed his corpse noted that it was heavily bruised, calling the police claim into question.

In early 1998, Guantnamo Provincial Prison authorities reportedly ordered beatings of political prisoners who denounced prison conditions, including Nstor Rodrguez Lobaina, Jorge Luis Garca Prez (also known as Antnez), Francisco Herodes Daz Echemenda, and Orosman Betancourt Dexidor. On April 11, 1998, Capt. Herms Hernndez and Lt. Ren Orlando allegedly beat severely Bernardo Arvalo Padrn, a journalist serving a six-year sentence for contempt for authority at the Ariza prison in Cienfuegos. In a positive step, Cuban military prosecutors accused both officers of wrongdoing in early May, but at this writing, it remained unclear whether the two had been arrested or tried. On April 5, 1998, common prisoners at the Canaleta Prison in Matanzas beat Jorge Luis Cruz Arancibia. Prison authorities reportedly refused to provide Cruz Arancibia with medical care for his injuries.

Cubas criminal code retained the death penalty for many crimes. Although Cuba tightly guarded information about the application of death sentences, Human Rights Watch received credible reports that a firing squad executed Daniel Reyes, an inmate in the Las Tunas Provincial Prison, on October 29, 1997. Cubas reliance on the Council of Statea political entity presided over by President Castroas the ultimate arbiter in death penalty cases undercut any appearance of judicial independence.

After an apparent opening early in 1998, Cuba took firm action against nonviolent government critics as the year progressed with surveillance, harassment, and intimidations. Cuba used short-term arbitrary detentions together with official warnings of future prosecution to urge activists to leave Cuba, abandon their opposition activities, or distance themselves from counterrevolutionary colleagues or family members.

On August 28, 1998, about twenty people protested the Havana trial of activist Reynaldo Alfaro Garca. In early September, Havana police arrested seven of the protesters and detained them for twelve to forty-eight hours. The detentions prohibited the activists from participating in a September 8, 1998 march celebrating the feast day of Cubas patron saint, Our Lady of Charity of Cobre. Police questioned the detainees about the Alfaro Garca demonstration and about their plans for the march. The detainees were: Nancy de Varona, a leader of the Thirteenth of July Movement (Movimiento 13 de Julio); Ofelia Nardo, of the Confederation of Democratic Workers of Cuba (Confederacin de Trabajadores Democrticos de Cuba); Vicky Ruiz Labrit, of the Committee of Cubans in Peaceful Opposition (Comit Cubano de Opositores Pacficos); Leonel Morejn Almagro, the national leader of the CubanCouncil (Concilio Cubano); Miriam Garca Chvez, of the College of Independent Teachers (Colegio de Pedagogos Independientes); and Dr. Oscar Elas Bicest Gonzlez and Rolando Muz Yyobre, of the Lawton Human Rights Foundation (Fundacin Lawton de Derechos Humanos). State security agents also impeded thirty human rights and other activists who had gathered at the Havana home of Isabel del Pino Sotolongo, of the Christ the King Movement (Movimiento Cristo Rey), from taking part in the feast day celebrations.

Cubas independent journalists faced mistreatment throughout the year. State security officials in Havana arrested Luis Lpez Prendes, director of the Independent Press Bureau of Cuba (Buro de Prensa Independiente de Cuba, BPIC), on September 7, 1998 and detained him for over forty-eight hours. Police detained Luis Alberto Lazo, a reporter for the New Press Agency (Agencia Nueva Prensa, ANP) in Artemisa for approximately twenty-four hours on June 17, 1998 and gave him an official warning. Santiago-based state security agents briefly detained Margarita Sara Sosa Llero, a senior correspondent with the Independent Press Agency of Cuba (Agencia de Prensa Independiente de Cuba, APIC) on November 17, 1997. The government also appeared to single out independent reporters with the discriminatory application of legal measures. On September 23, 1998, for example, officials told ANP journalist Mercedes Moreno that she could not reside legally in her sisters Havana home and imposed heavy fines on both women. In June 1998, Cuba denied Raul Rivero, Cuba Presss founder and director, permission to travel to Spain on a personal visit.

The government exercised strict control over labor rights and refused to legalize independent unions and agricultural cooperatives. Havana police detained Jos Orlando Gonzlez Bordn, of the Federation of Cuban Workers (Federacin de Trabajadores Cubanos), for twenty-four hours in July and for several hours on September 8 and 23, 1998. On July 2, 1998, Havana police detained Evaristo Prez Rodrguez, vice-president of the Cuban Union of Independent Workers (Unin Sindical de Trabajadores Independientes de Cuba, USTIC) and the president of the Patriotic Union of Independent Christians (Unin Patritica de Cristianos Independientes), for twenty-four hours. In early May 1998, Cuban authorities prevented a conference of independent cooperatives from taking place in Santiago. On May 5, over one dozen police and members of a Rapid Response Brigade (Brigada de Respuesta Rpida) blocked access to the home of Jorge Bjar, president of the Transition Cooperative (Cooperativa Transicin) and host of the conference. Police arrested Bjar and his wife, holding them for several hours. On May 3, police arrested Reynaldo Hernndez, president of both the National Alliance of Independent Farmers of Cuba (Alianza Nacional de Agricultores Independientes de Cuba) and the Progreso I agricultural and fishing cooperative in Guantnamo, holding him for two days.

In recent years, Cuba has adopted several laws that tightly control labor rights in businesses backed by foreign investment. Under these laws, the Cuban government played a prominent role in the selection, payment, and firing of workers during 1998, thus barring employees from forming unions or even from entering into independent, direct discussions of labor rights with their foreign employers. In the tourist industry, on-the-job racism emerged as a persistent problem.

Cuba maintained its extensive system of prison agricultural camps and ran clothing assembly, construction, furniture, and other factories at its prisons. Cubas insistence that some political prisoners participate in work programs and its inappropriate pressuring of inmates to work without pay in inhuman conditions violated international labor and prison rights standards.
Guatemala
Human Rights Developments
Nearly two years after the signing of the final peace accord between the government of President Alvaro Arz and the Guatemalan National Revolutionary Union (Unin Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca, URNG), hopes for an end to impunity and greater respect for human rights were overshadowed by the assassination of a senior human rights figure and the governments poor handling of the murder investigation. Moreover, the June 1998 human rights report by the Mission the United Nations for Guatemala (Misin de las Naciones Unidas en Guatemala, MINUGUA)  installed in late 1994 to oversee implementation of a human rights agreement between the parties to the conflict  revealed an increase in extrajudicial executions and torture. On a more optimistic note, however, the MINUGUA report found a decline in violations of the right to liberty, due process, and freedom of association.

The tragic murder of Bishop Juan Jos Gerardi, one of Latin Americas most prominent human rights figures, on April 26, served as a reminder that Guatemala had not yet escaped its past. The resolution of the bishops killing presented a challenge to the government to demonstrate the seriousness with which it would pursue judicial reform and combat impunity; the results, at this writing, were extremely disheartening. Apart from the Gerardi case, most of the victims of grave human rights abuses were poor and often suspected of criminal activities.

Congress approved several long delayed constitutional reforms agreed to as part of the peace accord in October, including a formal end to the militarys constitutional role in internal security. The reforms did allow, however, a temporary role for the military in law enforcement for limited periods and under civilian control. Meanwhile, the desperately needed enactment of a new Minors Code was put off until the year 2000.

The continued authority of Governmental Decree ( acuerdo gubernamental ) No. 90-96, authorizing military involvement in the maintenance of internal security, contradicted both the letter and the spirit of the commitments made in the peace accords to place law enforcement entirely under civilian control. MINUGUAs June 1998 report indicated that the combined military and police forces permitted under the decree did not reduce crime and their actions at times violated human rights. When the decree was issued in 1996 the government stated that the army would be used only to support police officers while the new National Civilian Police (Polica Nacional Civil, PNC) was being formed. However, the PNC became operational in 1998 without any end to the use of joint military-police patrols. And although the police were nominally in command of the joint patrols, both military and police sources agreed that the army truly controlled and numerically dominated the patrols.

The military also continued to play a central role in crime control through the Presidential General Staff (Estado Mayor Presidencial, EMP), an intelligence unit with a history of egregious human rights violations. In 1996, the Archivo, the clandestine intelligence branch located within the EMP, was formally dissolved and replaced by the Center of Strategic Analysis and the Anti-Kidnapping Command or Crisis Committee. The civilian-directed center provided the president with weekly reports of political, economic, and intelligence analysis. While its director was a civilian, the second and third posts were filled by army officers.

In contrast, the Anti-Kidnapping Command, whose existence the government continued to deny, was divided into three parts: intelligence gathering, criminal investigations, and operations. The intelligence component continued to use the network of informants that was set up as part of the counterinsurgency strategy. MINUGUAs June report attributed the September 11, 1997, disappearance of two individuals, Ricardo II Figueroa Delgado and Issac Valds Mayen, to government security forces.

The involvement of the Anti-Kidnapping Command in combatting organized crime backfired in the courts, which often rejected evidence it collected as illegally obtained and in some cases overturned convictions on those grounds.

Meanwhile, the failure to curb common crime prompted many citizens to take justice into their own hands. MINUGUA calculated that between March 27, 1996, and April 1, 1998 there was an average of more than one lynching per week. Accordingto MINUGUA, most lynchings occurred in rural areas with little police presence, and in areas where the officially disbanded civil patrols had been prevalent, former patrollers often instigated the attacks.

Of equal concern were the instances of social cleansing reported by MINUGUA and local human rights groups. In these cases, there was more apparent premeditation than with lynchings, as in the case of La Libertad, Petn, where in January 1998 a list appeared of persons condemned to death. During the first three months of 1998, ten men on the list were murdered, their corpses often left with notes stating that the victims were thieves who should die. In its verification of these killings, MINUGUA discovered that they were committed by an organized group which included at least two ex-army officers.

The administration of justice in human rights-related cases showed little improvement. The prosecution of the suspected authors of the 1995 Xamn massacre finally went to trial on April 21, 1998. The trial, however, was suspended on its seventh day when the prosecution complained of a lack of impartiality of the three-judge trial court.

In August 1997 the prosecution of the intellectual authors of the assassination of anthropologist Myrna Mack experienced an important advance when Guatemalas highest court, the Court of Constitutionality, ruled the generals and other officers accused of planning the killing were to be tried under the new Penal Code and not under the old code or in a military tribunal. This court held that all prior evidence collected under the old code and by the military judge remained valid and should serve as the foundation for the second phase of the investigation. There were also a number of setbacks in the case, however. The new judge, Isaas Figueroa, exhibited partiality in favor of the military defendants and against both Special Prosecutor Mynor Melgar and the victims sister, Helen Mack, prompting the special prosecutor to seek the judges removal. If successful this would be the twenty-fifth time a judge assigned to the case either resigned in fear or was removed.

Nor was there progress in the prosecution of a series of pending human rights cases that began with the exhumations of clandestine mass graves. The Rio Negro, Rabinal case, a 1982 massacre of one hundred children and seventy-two women, was prepared to go to trial when on May 27, 1996, the three defendanttwo former civil patrollers and one soldierapplied for amnesty under a 1988 law. Their amnesty application was rejected by every lower court until February 1997, when it went to the Court of Constitutionality. That court had a maximum of fifteen days to resolve the petition, yet at this writing it had still not been resolved. The Center for Human Rights and Legal Action (CHRLA) reported that the government lost evidence regarding similar atrocities in the early 1980s in the villages of Plan de Snchez and Chichupac, Rabinal. During hearings on the case in February 1997, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights admonished the Guatemalan government to actively investigate the 1982 Plan de Snchez massacre of 268 people. The only visible response was the disappearance from the Public Prosecutors Office of forensic reports and ballistic evidence. Meanwhile, in the case of the Chichupac massacre of thirty-five men in which various soldiers stood accused, the entire file of the case disappeared during 1998 with the Public Prosecutors Office and judiciary blaming each other. Implementation of a crucial component in the struggle against impunity, a judicial protection program, was postponed for the second consecutive year. The dire need for such a program became sadly apparent with the murder of public prosecutor Silvia Jerez on May 20. In addition to serving as the special prosecutor investigating the disappearance of American attorney Jennifer Harburys husband, Guatemalan guerrilla leader Efran Bmaca, Jerez was also prosecuting a band of kidnappers who had killed Spanish citizen Danita Blank on December 30, 1997. In June 1998, several of these kidnappers escaped from jail. One month later, the only witness to the case, Blanks husband, Dr. Edgar Orellana, was murdered. Meanwhile, the trial for the 1982 massacre in Dos RRs, Petn was postponed because the key witnessestwo ex-members of the Guatemalan Special Forces refused to testify without protection.

The expansion of the death penalty to new crimes in Guatemala threatened at this writing to bring the Arz government into direct conflict with the inter-American system for protection of human rights. The American Convention on Human Rights, ratified by Guatemala in 1978, precludes member states from extending the use of the death penalty to crimes to which it did not apply at the time of ratification. In 1995 Guatemala amended its criminal code to punish abduction with the death penaltypreviously only applicable in those kidnappings that resulted in the death of the victim. Although some lower courts in 1997 commuted death sentences citing Guatemalas obligations under the American Convention, in October 1998 two appeals courts cleared the way for the first official executions under the expanded death penalty. At the time of this writing, the cases were pending before the Supreme Court. In an apparently related move, an attorney with close ties to the military sought a ruling from the Constitutional Court challenging the legality of Guatemalas acceptance of the compulsory jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, where Guatemala would ultimately face censure for violating the American Convention through expansion of the death penalty.
Haiti
Human Rights Developments
Police abuses and impunity for past human rights violations remained Haitis most pressing human rights problems during 1998. Haitis unresolved political crisis, which left the country without a prime minister after Rosny Smarth resigned in June 1997, impeded progress on human rights concerns. Disputes over the controversial April 1997 elections persisted, and the Provisional Electoral Council, which had dwindled to two of its nine members, was inoperable. Hundreds of United Nations Civilian Police and United States troops helped stabilize the uncertain environment.

The Haitian National Police (HNP) beat detainees with disturbing frequency in 1998, although the number of police killings was lower than in 1997. The United Nations (U.N.)/Organization of American States (OAS) International Civilian Mission in Haiti documented thirteen killings by police using excessive force in the first five months of 1998, in contrast with twenty-two during the same period of 1997. From January to May 1998, the mission confirmed 150 reports of police brutality, including cases of police clapping their hands over detainees ears and burning them with cigarettes. Many beatings occurred as police were carrying out arrests or when they held detainees in police lock-ups. Persistent police violence angered the public, sparking several retaliatory attacks. On August 6, 1998, an off-duty officer killed a resident of Cabaret, reportedly after a minor disagreement. In protest, local people burned tires, damaged the police station, and freed detainees from the local police lock-up. Two police units, the Company for Intervention and Maintaining Order (Compagnie dIntervention et de Maintien de lOrdre, CIMO) and the Intervention Group (Groupe dIntervention), emerged as particularly abusive elements within the HNP. The units, which were modeled after U.S. Special Weapons and Tactics (SWAT) teams and received U.S. equipment and training, violated Haitian police law by carrying heavy weapons. Rather than defuse crises, the units aggressive practices, which included gratuitous destruction of property and beating and kicking passersby, often worsened tense situations.

On April 5, CIMO ransacked the Womens Clinic (Klinik Fanm) in Port-au-Prince, claiming that the staff had hidden weapons in boxes of medicine. CIMO found no weapons but caused extensive damage, destroying medical equipment, medicine, and furniture. Several months after the intervention, the clinic, which had provided womens health care and assistance to rape survivors, including those who had suffered politically motivated rapes under Haitis military government, from 1991 to 1994, remained closeddue to CIMOs destructive actions. In March, the HNP sent CIMO to respond to an ongoing land dispute in Milot. CIMO officers entered a radio station run by the Milot Peasants Movement (Mouvman Peyizan Milo) after midnight on March 19, ransacked the station, and shot the janitor. In February 1998, a melee erupted in Mirebalais after local police killed a resident, in unclear circumstances. The police had been trying to disperse a crowd that included members of Put Order Into Disorder (Met Lod nan Dezod), an organization linked to the political party of former President Jean-Bertrand Aristide. Angered by the death, the crowd entered the police station and killed the police chief, Ricelin Dormeus. Hours later, the Intervention Group and CIMO arrived in Mirebalais, carried out some forty warrantless arrests, and beat many detainees severely.

The HNP arrested several individuals charged with plotting against state security, including former soldiers and members of the paramilitary organization, the Front for the Advancement and Progress of Haiti (Front pour lAvancement et Progrs dHati, FRAPH), but the governments extra-legal measures against these individuals did nothing to advance the rule of law. Several developments, including FRAPH leader Emmanuel Constants statements that the organization was still active and the August deaths of Father Jean Pierre-Louis, an activist priest, and Versaille Clotaire, a member of the presidents security detail, had raised concern about Haitis internal security.

On November 16, 1997, a police unit carrying heavy weapons entered the home of former police chief and presidential candidate Lon Jeune, beating and arresting both Jeune and his driver, Lony Benoit. The police acted without a warrant and, despite claims that the two men had threatened state security, the government never provided evidence of such activities. Authorities released the men on December 11, 1997. At this writing, several detainees charged with plotting against the state remained in police lock-ups or the National Penitentiary despite judges having ordered them to be freed. Whether prosecutors, police or prison authorities, or other government actors were responsible for their continued detention remained unclear. The HNP arrested former army Gen. Claude Raymond in July 1996 and, despite a July 1988 release order, he remained in detention at this writing. Evans Franois, the brother of one of the leaders of the 1991-1994 military government, Michel Franois, remained in the National Penitentiary despite an order to free him dated May 1997. Others detainees with judicial orders for their freedom reportedly included Guetchy Henri and Thomas Sabath, ordered released in July 1998 and Eric Dertulien and Patrick Mose, ordered released in December 1997.

During 1998, Haiti received increased international attention as a key transshipment point for drug trafficking between South America and the United States. The involvement of numerous HNP officers in drug scandals damaged public confidence in the force. The HNP inspector generals office disciplined several officers implicated in the burgeoning drug trade. The inspector general also investigated and disciplined officers for other criminal activities and violations of police rules but lagged in pursuing the dozens of cases of police beatings and killings. The office referred only a handful of its many drug trafficking and other criminal and human rights cases to the justice system for criminal prosecution.

Haitis prisons remained overcrowded in 1998. Approximately 80 percent of Haitis inmates were in pre-trial detention. The U.N./OAS mission noted that the National Penitentiary Administration (Administration Pnitentiaire Nationale), which became part of the HNP in 1997, had sanctioned few prison guards for mistreating prisoners. Overcrowding aggravated the poor physical conditions for prisoners and contributed to cases of physical and sexual abuse among prisoners, including those held in the Fort National facility for women and minors.

The Haitian justice system failed to address these and other human rights concerns effectively. Haitis weak courts pursued few criminal charges against abusive police or prison guards. Human rights activists demonstrated weekly outside the National Palace, demanding an end to impunity and reparations for human rights victims, but no major human rights case went before a Haitian court. Government attorneys continued to prepare the case against some twenty defendants implicated in the April 1994 massacre of at least fifteen individuals in Raboteau. In February 1998, government lawyers alleged that the former military governments top leaders, Raul Cedras, Philippe Biamby, and Michel Franois, who had fled Haiti to Panama, the United States, and Honduras respectively, had played a role in the Raboteau attack. The government attorneys sought the extradition of the former officials, but Honduras promptly refused Haitis plea, and the other requests had not proven successful at this writing. In September 1998, the abrupt resignation of the judge assigned to the Raboteau case, Abraham Thlusme, shortly after he had freed one of the defendants, raised concerns of possible interference with the case and delayed setting a trial date.

The judicial systems outdated, inefficient structure impeded prompt, fair trials. But the Haitian Parliaments May 1998 passage of a judicial reform law offered hope for improvements. In late 1997, Haiti had opened two government offices to address citizens human rights concerns. The Office of Citizen Protection (Office de la Protection Citoyenne) offered Haitians a new avenue to present human rights complaints against the government but had received limited funds and was barely operational in 1998. The government also created the Office for Pursuit and Follow-up (Bureau des Poursuites et Suivi) to address the concerns raised in the 1,200-page final report of Haitis National Commission of Truth and Justice (Commission de la Vrite et de Justice), which had documented human rights violations under the military government, including extrajudicial executions and torture. The office had minimal impact in 1998.

On a positive note, in November 1997 a broad coalition of womens and human rights organizations sponsored an International Tribunal Against Violence Against Haitian Women. The mock tribunal provided a historic opportunity for victims of political, sexual, and domestic violence and violence against women with disabilities to speak publicly about their experiences. The Haitian Parliament received recommendations from the tribunals judges and, at this writing, was considering draft laws to eliminate discrimination against women in cases of rape, sexual harassment, and adultery.
Mexico
Human Rights Developments
Although President Ernesto Zedillo recognized in the abstract that human rights violations took place in Mexico, his government failed to develop a strategy to respond adequately to individual cases of abuse, strengthen human rights safeguards, or promote the rule of law. Long-simmering human rights problems received government attention only after becoming national and international scandals, while other deeply troubling practicessuch as torture, rural violence, abuses by the military, and attacks against human rights monitors and journalistscontinued apace. At the same time, the Zedillo administration undertook two initiatives that undercut human rights protections, establishing new restrictions on international human rights monitors and initiating constitutional reforms designed to fight crime through the limitation of the rights of criminal suspects. As the international community paid increasing attention to human rights concerns in Mexico, the government selectively reacted to what it deemed foreign intervention in Mexican human rights affairsstrongly rejecting some human rights entities while demonstrating an openness to dialogue or work with others. Authorities consistently failed, however, to implement recommendations made by United Nations and Organization of American States human rights monitoring bodies.

President Zedillos fourth year in office began with intense national and international scrutiny of human rights violations in the southern state of Chiapas, following the December 22, 1997 massacre by pro-government armed civilians of forty-five people in the mountainside hamlet of Acteal, in Chenalh municipality. In the context of intense community conflict over resources and political loyalty, an estimated sixty armed civilians gathered on the morning of the attack and converged on the community, opening fire on and killing mostly women and children. The victims were unaffiliated with either of the two political groups with the strongest backing in the municipality: the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (Partido Revolucionario Institucional, PRI) and supporters of the Zapatista Army of National Liberation (Ejrcito Zapatista de Liberacin Nacional, EZLN), the leftist guerrilla group that launched an uprising in Chiapas in January 1994.

The immediate motive for the massacre appeared to have been revenge for the murder of a PRI supporter just days before, part of a pattern of tit-for-tat attacks between PRI and EZLN supporters. Nineteen partisans of the ruling party had reportedly been killed in the municipality during the year prior to the massacre, more than twice the number of murdered supporters of the EZLN.

Even though violence in the municipality had been two-sided, the state government had repeatedly favored supporters of the PRI. Before the massacre, for instance, Chiapas state security police had given protection to PRI supporters, accompanying them for safety to their fields for harvesting. Moreover, at least one commander had helped the civilians who carried out the attack obtain weapons. Government officials who were warned of the impending massacre on the morning of December 22 downplayed initial reports, ensuring that no effective actions were taken to stop the bloodbath. During the massacre, state security police in Acteal didnothing to impede the bloodshed; when state officials arrived afterward, they failed to preserve the crime scene.

As in other areas of Chiapas, the state justice system had consistently failed over the years to handle cases of rural violence properly in Chenalh; prosecutors responsible for investigating crimes, for instance, did not do so. Between May and December 1997, for example, at least thirty-four incidents of violence were reported in Chenalh municipality, including murders, expulsions from communities, and kidnappings. All members of the community suffered, regardless of political affiliation. According to the Office of the Federal Attorney General (Procuradura General de la Repblica, PGR), however, none of the cases had been properly investigated, despite formal complaints lodged with prosecutors. Atypically, federal investigators who had assumed responsibility for the cases following the massacre had reportedly made progress in gathering evidence for prosecution of the unresolved rural violence incidents from Chenalh.

Although the massacre fit the patterns of violence and impunity found in other regions of Chiapas, it was dissimilar in one fundamental way. Unlike other areas of Chiapas, such as the states northern zone, the state justice system in Chenalh had failed for supporters of the PRI as well as partisans of the EZLN. The relative strength of the EZLN in Chenalh may have posed as strong a deterrent to prosecutions of their supporters as PRI support did for its followers throughout the state.

Following the massacre, the federal government assumed jurisdiction of the case, acting swiftly to investigate and jail the material authors. By May 1998, the PGR had taken legal action against 124 people, sixty-nine of them for their alleged active participation in the killings and the others for aiding or covering up for the aggressors. Unfortunately, like their state counterparts, federal officials had ignored signs that the massacre was imminent. Just three weeks before the killings, a group of national and international human rights defenders visited Chenalh and warned of impending violence. At almost the same time, the governments own National Human Rights Commission (Comisin Nacional de Derechos Humanos, CNDH) had also issued a decree calling on the Chiapas state governor to provide protection to likely victims of violence in the municipality.

Put on the defensive after the massacre, the federal government responded not by reining in PRI supporters willing to use violence but by aggressively moving against EZLN supporters and international observers in Chiapas. Pro-EZLN communities known as autonomous municipalities were raided by state and federal police acting with army backup. The communities, which had been set up in areas where guerrilla supporters refused to recognize the legitimacy of local governments controlled by pro-government politicians, had established independent government structures that were not officially recognized by state authorities. On April 11 and 13, for instance, authorities dismantled an autonomous municipality within Taniperla, called Ricardo Flores Magn by EZLN supporters, detaining sixteen Mexicans and twelve foreigners. The former were charged with crimes ranging from usurpation of authority to kidnapping. Among the Mexicans detained were several human rights defenders. The foreignerslike others before and after themwere summarily expelled from the country in violation of basic due process principles.

The CNDH reviewed the April 11 and 13 detentions, confirming the allegations of Mexican nongovernmental human rights organizations of a lack of evidence against the detainees. Chastising the state government for prosecuting the detainees without even showing that any crime had taken place, the commission suggested that authorities desist in their prosecution. At this writing, all but four or five of the detainees had been released on bail, but the prosecutions continued.

Officials in the Ministry of Government expelled the foreigners, whom they accused of participating in the creation of a Zapatista autonomous municipality, and barred them from ever returning to Mexicodespite a court order providing them injunctive relief against expulsion. According to Mexicos Miguel Agustn Pro Jurez Human Rights Center (Centro de Derechos Humanos Miguel Agustn Pro Jurez, or PRODH), which filed the request for injunction, authorities were notified of the court decision in time to ensure that it was enforced for most of the foreigners. During the year, there were other troubling expulsions made without due process guarantees. They included French priest Michel Chanteau, who worked in Chenalh; Tom Hansen, an American working in support of indigenous communities in Chiapas; and Peter Brown, a U.S. citizen supporting an education project. In September, Hansen won a constitutional challenge to his expulsion, but the Government Ministry vowed to appeal the decision.

Mexicos human rights problems extended far beyond the occurrences in Chiapas. In many parts of the country, serious human rights violations, including torture and illegal arrests, continued to take place in incidents related to counterinsurgency, drugs, and common crime.

United Nations Special Rapporteur on Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment Nigel Rodley issued a report on Mexico in early 1998, following an onsite visit the prior year. He determined, Torture and analogous mistreatment occur with frequency in many parts of Mexico, although the information received by the Special Rapporteur does not permit the conclusion that it is a systematic practice in all parts of the country. The special rapporteur concluded that torture often took place during efforts by authorities to gather information that would allow prosecution of the victim and that the institutional safeguards designed to protect against torture routinely failed.

Abuses tended to take place in three interrelated stages in human rights cases: violations of individual guarantees prior to violent abuse, including illegal arrest and detention in excess of legally mandated limits; the violent human rights violations that followed, such as torture and disappearance; and due process violations in subsequent criminal procedures, including the use of coerced confessions. In case after case studied by Human Rights Watch, prosecutors seemed disinterested in evidence of illegal arrests, detentions in excess of legally mandated limits, ill-treatment, and torture. They failed to ensure that statements made by witnesses or defendants had not been coerced. Judges, too, overlooked evidence of illegal or prolonged detention and well-founded allegations of torture in order to find the victims guilty.

Given the lack of effective safeguards for detainees in Mexico, a set of government proposals to fight crime promised only to complicate human rights problems. Faced with a growing incidence of common crime, President Ernesto Zedillo sent several newanti-crime proposals to the Senate in December 1997, arguing essentially that human rights guarantees constituted a straitjacket in the fight against increasingly sophisticated crime. Among the most questionable proposed reforms were changes in the requirements for obtaining an arrest warrant and for a judge to jail a suspect. If ultimately approved, the reforms would make it much easier for police and judges to act on weaker evidencea serious problem in a country noted for illegal arrests, fabrication of evidence, and an ineffective system of public defenders.

Mexicos armed forces continued to engage in abusive practices in fighting insurgency and common crime. In retaliation after a soldiers weapon was stolen in Jalisco state, elite soldiers, some trained in the United States, arbitrary detained and tortured some twenty people between December 14 and 15, 1997. One of the victims was killed. The soldiers, from the Mobile Air Special Forces Groups (Grupos Aeromviles de Fuerzas Especiales, GAFE), planned the attack in advance and tortured the victims at the military base. They were arrested but faced trial in military, not civilian, court. On June 7, soldiers engaged in an alleged armed confrontation with an offshoot of the leftist Popular Revolutionary Army (Ejrcito Popular Revolucionario, EPR) calling itself the Popular Revolutionary Army of the Insurgent People (Ejrcito Popular Revolucionario del Pueblo Insurgente, ERPI). According to PRODH, which, investigated the clash in El Charco, Guerrero state, the army appeared to have extrajudicially executed some of the eleven people killed. The official investigation into the incident was plagued by irregularities, PRODH reported.

As in past years, independent labor activists and journalists came under government pressure during 1998. In part, the governments system of labor tribunals limited freedom of association, as happened in the Baja California union struggle within Han Young, a factory that assembles truck trailer chassis for Hyundai. In a report on the incident issued in April under the authority of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), the U.S. Department of Labor determined that the state labor tribunal had engaged in manipulation to favor the pro-government union. The department found, It is apparent that independent unions can experience difficulty in obtaining registration and collective bargaining rights. Other labor rights violations included widespread sex discrimination in export-processing factories and the governments failure to address the problem ( see Womens Human Rights section).

At least one journalist was killed in retaliation for his work during the year, and others were threatened, physically attacked, prevented from doing their jobs, or questioned by immigration authorities. Luis Mario Garca Rodrguez, a reporter for the Mexico City daily La Tarde , was shot to death on February 12; he had reported on corruption in the federal attorney generals office. Jess Blancornelas, editor of the Tijuana, Baja California weekly Zeta , was luckier. He survived a shooting attack on November 27, 1997. According to the New York-based Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ), reporters covering insurgencies in Chiapas and Guerrero states suffered restricted access to the scenes of clashes. CPJ also complained to President Zedillo of broad restrictions placed on reporters, writing in a July letter, We have received a number of complaints from journalists in the Untied States who have requested visas at Mexican consulates. According to journalists reports, consular officials questioned them about who they planned to interview and what they planned to write about. Often their visas are held up for weeks.
Peru
Human Rights Developments
President Alberto Fujimori and the political party he leads, Change 90-New Majority (Cambio 90-Nueva Mayora, C90-NM), continued to undermine the rule of law and independence of the judiciary during 1998. At the same time, they impeded the exercise of political rights. Although political violence and human rights violations associated with counterinsurgency continued to decline, the incidence of criminal violence increased, provoking the C90-NM-controlled Congress to delegate powers to the executive branch to impose tough new anti-crime decrees likely to lead to violations of the rights of criminal suspects. The decrees permitted the use of military courts to try serious crimes, systematic restrictions of suspects rights and due process guarantees, and a special coordinating role for the abusive National Intelligence Service, which was responsible for grave human rights violations committed in combatting leftist insurgencies.

Judicial independence, already precarious in Peru, suffered a major setback in March, when the entire seven-person National Magistrates Council (Consejo Nacional de la Magistratura, CNM), an autonomous body established in the constitution to appointand dismiss judges and prosecutors, resigned in protest over a law restricting its powers to investigate irregularities committed by judges and to dismiss those it found culpable. The CNM had already suffered progressive limitations of its authority; in 1996, executive commissions headed by government appointees were given control of the reorganization of the judiciary and the public prosecutors office, and in January 1997 the CNM lost its constitutional powers to appoint prosecutors. The March 1998 law was reportedly prompted by an impending investigation by the CNM into the conduct of six judges who were alleged to have signed a forged ruling ordering the Central Reserve Bank to pay a U.S.$40 million compensation claim to a private corporation.

The overwhelming presence of the executive branch was also seen in electoral matters during the year, as President Fujimori continued to maneuver to permit himself to stand for election a third time despite a constitutional limit of two consecutive terms for any president. In December 1997, Perus rubber-stamp congress altered the composition of the National Electoral Board (Jurado Nacional de Elecciones, JNE) by giving provisional judges the same powers as tenured judges, thereby allowing them to vote for and be elected to the JNE. The appointment of judges without tenure to the JNE, envisaged in the constitution as an autonomous body that monitors the legality of elections, gave the government powerful influence over its decisions. In August 1998, the JNE ruled that a congressional vote was required to authorize a referendum on Fujimoris right to stand for reelection, contradicting a ruling it had made prior to the alteration of the boards make-up and ensuring that congress would be able to block a citizens initiative to force a referendum. Citizens groups had already collected the required 1.4 million signatures needed for the referendum, and polls in Lima indicated that 70 percent of the citys population supported it, but Congress voted not to authorize the initiative.

Human rights and civil liberties groups continued to allege that the shadowy National Intelligence Service (Servicio Nacional de Inteligencia, SIN) was behind persistent harassment of opponents of the Fujimori administration, especially journalists. Meanwhile, SIN agents enjoyed impunity for serious human rights abuses committed in previous years. During 1998, several intelligence officials accused of human rights crimes in 1996 and 1997 were released or absolved, while a congressional board of inquiry cleared the SIN of responsibility for electronic surveillance of opposition leaders, despite overwhelming evidence of its involvement.

In mid-1998, over one-fifth of the Peruvian population and 16 percent of the nations territory were still governed under emergency powers, maintained on the grounds that leftist guerrilla groups continued to carry out attacks. Emergency powers subordinated civilian authorities to political-military commands and limited enjoyment of rights such as personal liberty, inviolability of the home, and freedom of movement. During 1998, serious armed actions by anti-government guerrilla forces were not reported in all the areas regulated under emergency decrees. Such activity was generally limited to isolated pockets of the departments of Ayacucho, Hunuco, Junn, Pasco, San Martn, and Ucayali, where columns belonging to the Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso) continued to attack soldiers and to commit grave abuses against the civilian population.

According to the Institute for Legal Defense (Instituto de Defensa Legal, IDL), Sendero Luminoso assassinated thirty-six civilians, mostly lower-level community officials and leaders of social movements, in the Huallaga valley area between January and July. Sendero Luminoso was also responsible for an August 8 attack that took place during an electoral meeting in Saposoa, in the department of Huallaga, and shot to death a man and a woman. From there they traveled seventy-five kilometers to the town of Atarraya, where they broke in on another electoral meeting being held by the Lets Go, Neighbor (Vamos, Vecino) group, seized Celso Rodrguez Vargas, the mayor of Saposoa and an electoral candidate, tied him up, and subjected him to a summary trial. A witness said that the villagers pleaded for his life, but the guerrilla chief told them he was being brought to justice for being a candidate for the governments party. According to the witness, they made him kneel and fired a shot into his head. Before leaving, they burned Rodrguezs truck and warned the villagers to stop supporting government candidates. The Shining Path also delivered threatening leaflets to the homes of mayoral candidates in several provinces of Hunuco and San Martn departments.

At this writing, Peruvian human rights groups had not reported any political disappearances or extrajudicial executions by government forces, compared with two cases reported in 1997, neither of which resulted in the conviction of those responsible. Violent abuses carried out in the name of fighting common crime, however, including at least one extrajudicial execution, did take place.

As political violence continued to decline, public concern grew about an apparently dramatic increase in violent common crime, much of it attributed to organized gangs operating in large cities, particularly Lima. While in previous years criminal violence had been associated mainly with poor urban neighborhoods, during 1997 the citys affluent residential areas were increasingly threatened by the activities of heavily armed gangs. Bank robberies, armed burglaries, and kidnappings for ransom become increasingly common. Some victims were shot and killed by their attackers. Many former or off-duty police and military personnel participated in organized crime, using military-style procedures that made detection more difficult. To deal with criminal violence, the executive branch of government introduced ten decrees under powers delegated to it by Law No. 26950, enacted by Congress on May 19. Equating national security with public order and crime-prevention, Congress gave the Fujimori administration fifteen days to pass decrees on questions of national security. The government announced that its measures were designed to deal with a situation of growing violence that has been a product of the actions of ordinary criminals organized in gangs using combat weapons and explosives and provoking a state of alarm and permanent insecurity in society.

Taken together, the decrees eroded the due process guarantees of criminal suspects in numerous ways, opened the doors to arbitrary prosecutions. At the same time, they transferred powers to enforce law and order away from civilian courts and the National Police (Polica Nacional, PN) to military tribunals and the SIN. Decree No. 895, for instance, created a new crime of aggravated terrorism, applicable to those who belong to or are accomplices of a gang, association, or criminal grouping that carries or uses combat weapons, grenades, or explosives to carry out a robbery, kidnapping, extortion, or other crime... Police were allowed to detain suspects without charge for up to fifteen days, and no pre-trial release would be permitted for any reason. Civilians accusedof aggravated terrorism were to be tried by military courts, including minors between the ages of sixteen and eighteen, who would previously have been tried by specialized juvenile courts. Military courts, which already have jurisdiction over civilians accused of treason, are made up of serving military officers without adequate judicial training, and they have been consistently criticized by international human rights bodies for systematic denial of due process. Juveniles faced a minimum sentence of twenty-five years in prison if convicted by these courts. For adults, the mandatory penalty for aggravated terrorism was life in prison, both for people who committed the crime and those who aided them. Included in the latter category would be anyone who provided information used in the commission of the crime, whether or not that information was provided with the intent of aiding the criminal. The breadth of possible circumstances that could be construed as aiding a terrorist opened the door to unfounded prosecutions and convictions. The effectiveness of habeas corpus against arbitrary arrest was limited by two provisions in the decrees. In cases of aggravated terrorism, habeas corpus petitions were to be heard by military judges, who lack the guarantees of independence necessary to rule against an arrest made without reasonable legal grounds. Decree No. 900 transferred competence to hear habeas corpus petitions in other cases from the more than forty criminal judges in the Lima area to one specialized judge, a measure likely to make habeas corpus even less rapid and expeditious than in the past.

The anti-crime decrees borrowed features from laws designed to fight leftist guerrillas, even though those laws had been shown to lead to human rights violations and impunity. Decree No. 897, for instance, prohibited courts from calling police officers who interrogated suspects to give evidence in their cases, a feature of current anti-terrorist laws that has drastically reduced the possibility of proving that a confession was forced. Decree No. 901, allowing immunity or reductions of penalties to those volunteering intelligence on criminal activities, was identical to a provision in anti-terrorism law that had led to scores of wrongful convictions because authorities had failed to establish effective means to eliminate coerced or otherwise false statements from the judicial process. Decree No. 904 created a National Directorate of Intelligence for Social Protection and Tranquility (Direccin Nacional de Inteligencia para la Proteccin y Tranquilidad Social), an Orwellian-sounding body dependent on the SIN that was given responsibility for coordinating and directing police intelligence. The role allotted to the SIN was particularly troubling in view of well-founded evidence of the intelligence organizations involvement in the harassment of political opponents of the current government.

Police, soldiers, and intelligence units received greater authority to fight common crimewhile being subject to fewer institutional safeguardsdespite the fact that torture and brutality already characterized the way police treated criminal suspects. On February 7, two officers belonging to the National Police detained Willi Llerena Macedo and Paolo Herrera Lesama in the town of Pucallpa, Ucayali department. The police allegedly beat both men on arrest and during the journey to the police station. They eventually released Herrera but refused to provide Llerenas relatives with information about his whereabouts or condition. On February 9, the police told them that Llerena had been taken to a hospital, where his family found him in the morgue. According to the death certificate, he had suffered serious head injuries. As had happened in cases in previous cases involving death under torture, both police officers were charged with fatal assault and abuse of authority. In non-fatal cases, however, such charges continue to be very rare.

To its credit, in February the Congress passed a law making torture a specific offense in the criminal code. Advocated for years by human rights groups, this reform was first proposed by an opposition congressman in April 1996. Torture, along with genocide and disappearances, was classified as a crime against humanity. The law prescribed penalties ranging from five years in prison for less serious instances to twenty years if the victim died as a result of the torture. Doctors who assisted in torture were subject to the same penalties. The law explicitly provided that police or military officers accused of torture would be tried by civilian courts; in the past, military jurisdiction had been a major obstacle to successful prosecution of torturers.

The Fujimori government did make progress on cases of people wrongly accused or convicted of terrorism. Following recommendations made by a commission appointed in 1996 to review such cases, President Fujimori continued to pardon innocent prisoners. Seventy-eight had been pardoned during the year by September 1, bringing the total number released to 438. The mandate of the commission was set to expire on December 31, 1998.

Journalists who exposed wrongdoing by public officials continued to face anonymous threats and reprisals meted out through the legal system. Critics of the Fujimori government suffered similar problems. The victims attributed the attacks to direct or indirect actions of the SIN. Jos Arrieta Matos, a well-known reporter on Channel 2 television (Frecuencia Latina), left the country in January after learning that he was about to face arrest on bogus charges of obstructing justice and contempt. Arrieta had led an investigation in 1997 into the case of Leonor La Rosa, a former agent of the Army Intelligence Service (Servicio de Inteligencia del Ejrcito, SIE) tortured by her superior officers after they suspected her of informing journalists about human rights violations. In March he was charged in his absence for allegedly inducing another former intelligence agent into making false allegations of army participation in a 1991 attack on the home of opposition congressman Javier Diez Canseco. The agent, Jos Luis Bazn Adrienzen, was detained by the army in April 1997 for revealing state secrets, and after his release in December retracted the statements he had previously given Arrieta, evidently under pressure. In March 1998 the Second Criminal Court of Lima ruled that there was no evidence to prosecute Arrieta, but his family continued to suffer intimidation. In May, in a pattern of harassment now familiar in Peru, tax officials visited his home and allegedly tried to persuade his mother to sign documents that might have implicated him in tax evasion. In July, Arrieta was granted political asylum in the United States.

Other reports of harassment of journalists centered on the newspaper La Repblica , an outspoken critic of the Fujimori administration. Angel Pez, one of the papers leading investigative reporters, received anonymous death threats in April following the publication of a photograph of a former army intelligence agent in an office the paper alleged was used for tapping the telephonesof opposition leaders. During the same month, journalists began to suspect that Peruvian intelligence services were behind a smear campaign against La Repblica journalists mounted in four popular tabloids: El Chino, El To, La Nueva Chuchi, and El Maanero . In addition to Pez, the targets included Fernando Rospigliosi, Edmundo Cruz, and the newspapers owner, Gustavo Mohme, who were accused of being traitors to the nation, false democrats, communists, or guerrilla sympathizers. Given the fierce and often abusive measures taken by authorities against people suspected of sharing these characteristics, the smear campaign posed a serious risk to its subjects.

In May, journalists from El Dominical , the Sunday supplement of one of Limas longest established dailies, El Comercio , were reported to have received death threats. The threats preceded the publication of an interview with Julio Salas, a former police officer who fled Peru in 1997 because of harassment after he had denounced the SINs involvement in a bogus tax investigation against the owner of Channel 2 television, Baruch Ivcher Bronstein. Representatives of the newspaper suspected that information about the impending news story had been obtained by illegal interception of telephone calls. Also in May, an anonymous caller threatened to kill Cecilia Valenzuela, another renowned reporter working for Andean Television (Andina de Televisin).

The Fujimori administration made no attempt to reverse the negative effects of the amnesty passed in 1995 to protect military and police personnel accused of human rights violations from prosecution, despite condemnation of the measure by the United Nations and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. Impunity was the rule with regard to human rights crimes committed by members of the security forces since the amnesty, even though crimes committed since 1995 were not covered by its terms. In January, the First Criminal Court of Puno acquitted seven men of terrorism in connection with an October 1996 bomb attack on the Puno branch of Channel 13-Global Television (Canal 13- Global Televisin). Five of the men were soldiers, and one was reputed to be a member of the so-called Colina group, an army death squad responsible for disappearances and selective political killings in recent years. On September 8, the Supreme Court reversed the decision on appeal and ordered a new trial of the accused, but by that time they had already been released. No one was detained or charged in relation to the murder in March 1997 of Mariella Lucy Barreto Riofano, a former SIE agent believed to have been killed by members of the Colina group for revealing to the press information about human rights violations committed by the death squad.

On May 28, the congressional Committee on National Defense, headed by Fujimori loyalist Marta Chvez, issued a final report on its investigation into alleged wiretapping by SIN agents of opposition leaders and journalists, which had been denounced in 1997 by Channel 2 television and other media, in part on the basis of testimony by former intelligence agents who claimed to have been involved. The report found no evidence of involvement by the army or the intelligence services in the wiretapswhich had affected nearly 200 politicians and personalitiesand it claimed that the equipment needed to intercept calls was neither expensive nor sophisticated, implying that anyone might have been responsible. While finding no executive branch culpability, Chvez accused journalists of refusing to cooperate with the investigation and called for a debate to consider limiting the confidentiality of journalists sources.
Venezuela
Human Rights Developments
Venezuelas intractable human rights problems, especially the ingrained abuses that have long been a feature of law enforcement work, remained of primary concern to human rights defenders during 1998. Police continued to use excessively violent methods against criminal suspects, including unjustified lethal force. Although Venezuelan human rights groups reported a significant decline in the number of deaths in such circumstances compared with previous years, the total number was still over one hundred for the first seven months of the year. Both police and military personnel beat and tortured suspects with little fear of punishment, given the virtual absence of prosecutions for this type of abuse. Although a vagrancy law that had been used to arbitrarily detain suspects was declared unconstitutional in October 1997, widespread arbitrary arrests were still reported during police anti-crime sweeps. At the same time, archaic judicial procedures and an underpaid and inefficient judiciary contributed to long delays in the trials of criminal suspects. Pre-trial imprisonment often extended for years, and two-thirds of the prison population had not even received a final sentence.

Prison conditions were among the grimmest on the continent, due to overcrowding, lack of staff, corruption, and extreme levels of inmate violence.

A more constructive position adopted by the government of President Rafael Caldera toward nongovernmental human rights groups created a favorable climate for measures to improve respect for human rights. Paradoxically, however, the greater legitimacy and official acceptance enjoyed by human rights defenders was offset by an increase in the number of death threats and other forms of harassment they suffered during the year.

The Venezuelan Program of Action and Education in Human Rights (Programa Venezolana de Educacin y Accin en Derechos Humanos, PROVEA), a respected human rights monitoring group, reported 104 deaths resulting from the illegal use of lethal force in the first seven months of the year. This alarming figure represented a drop of more than 30 percent from the annual average of such cases reported since 1994. More than half of these cases were attributed to members of state and municipal police forces, the worst offenders being the Metropolitan Police (Polica Metropolitana, PM) and municipal police forces in Caracas and the state and municipal police forces of Zulia and Lara states. All three police forces that operated at a national level were also blamed by human rights groups and in press reports for deaths: the Technical Judicial Police (Polica Tcnica Judicial , PTJ), which is responsible for criminal investigations, the National Guard (Guardia Nacional, GN), a volunteer force that is part of the Venezuelan armed forces, and the Directorate of Services of Intelligence and Prevention (Direccin de Servicios de Inteligencia y Prevencin, DISIP), dependent on the Interior Ministry and responsible for investigation of subversion and drug trafficking. Approximately half of the deaths recorded were apparent extrajudicial executions, while twenty-two criminal suspects were reported to have died in custody.

In some instances, police appeared to have searched for criminal suspects then executed them on the spot. Police, fabricatingevidence, sometimes claimed afterward to have fired in self-defense. In some cases, police seemed to have executed criminal suspects as revenge for prior attacks against officers. In a number of cases, the killings appeared to be the result of mistaken identity. In addition to deliberate killings, innocent civilians were killed or wounded because of indiscriminate or reckless shooting by police, often apparently unprovoked.

The case of sixteen-year-old Arturo Jos Hernndez, a vendor at a vegetable market, illustrated the problem of police violence. Hernndez was hit by gunfire on January 24, when members of the Metropolitan Police entered the Plan de La Silsa neighborhood in Caracas, reportedly firing their weapons wildly. According to neighbors accounts published in the press, Hernndez was surrounded by police after falling with a gunshot wound. Rising to his knees, he showed his identification and begged for his life to be spared. The police took him away on a motorcycle. Hernndezs mother, Luisa Ramrez Mora, after searching in vain in hospitals and police stations, went to the Metropolitan Police headquarters, where she was told that her son was in the Bello Monte morgue. She found him with three bullet wounds in the chest. The forensic report reportedly documented other injuries, including compound fractures in his left leg and right wrist, a collapsed skull, and bruises to his back and disfigurement, suggesting that he had been tortured after entering police custody.

Relatives who denounced unlawful killings by police often faced harassment and threats. On June 8, for instance, municipal police from the Caracas district of Sucre fatally shot eighteen-year-old Freddy Antonio Daz in circumstances that indicated that the police had, at the very least, used their weapons recklessly. At about 10:00 that evening, Yolima Daz Rangel, a resident of the Caracas suburb of Petare, was told that municipal police officers were mistreating her fourteen-year-old nephew, Al Eduardo Sojo Daz. Arriving on the scene, Yolima Daz spoke with the officers but received a slap in the face in response. She managed to rescue her nephew and, with the police in pursuit, took him into her home. According to witnesses present at the scene, one of the officers had drawn his weapon and pointed it at her. Despite Yolima Dazs warning that there were children in the house, the officer opened fire, wounding her in the left arm and hitting her son, Freddy Antonio Daz, who fell to the ground. The municipal police officers initially refused to take the wounded boy to hospital until the arrival of a Metropolitan Police officer, who eventually persuaded them to do so. Freddy Daz was dead on arrival. Several members of his family, including Yolima Daz, his mother, were arrested and taken to the municipal police station, where the police allegedly threatened them not to denounce what had happened.

Venezuelan law made the punishment of police responsible for abuses very difficult. Investigators must carry out pre-trial administrative inquiries, known as nudo hecho, before an official could even be charged. Such inquiries were notorious for protracted delays ranging from months to years. At the same time, the proceedings in criminal investigations were secret, so human rights defenders and victims could not ascertain the status of probes or advocate for greater official interest in the cases.

Venezuelan human rights groups reported frequent cases of prolonged detentions without charge, some exceeding sixty days, in emergency zones along Venezuelas border with Colombia, where constitutional guarantees were suspended throughout the year due to incursions by Colombian guerrillas. Authorities also explained the suspension of guarantees in terms of the risks run by cattlemen and traders of kidnappings both by guerrillas and common criminals. Most of those detained were held in military outposts on suspicion of collaborating with guerrillas. In past years, reports of the torture of detainees held without charge in the border zones received considerable publicity in the press. According to PROVEA, the Theater of Operations No. 1 (Teatro de Operaciones No. 1), a military task force in charge of law-enforcement in the border zone, was responsible for eleven of the thirty-five cases of torture reported in January through July. Detainees also frequently reported being beaten or otherwise mistreated at the time of arrest.

According to the Network in Support of Justice and Peace (Red de Apoyo por la Justicia y la Paz, or Red de Apoyo), military conscripts, forcibly inducted, also suffered brutal treatment. One such case was that of Robert Antonio Cabrera Mrquez, a young Jehovahs Witness who was detained on a bus in Caracas on August 17 by the Metropolitan Police and taken the next day to an air force base in Maracay. After he claimed to be a conscientious objector, Cabrera was allegedly beaten by servicemen. Cabrera alleged that they took him into a room where they locked him in a cupboard and threw in teargas grenades, which made him nearly suffocate and caused serious burns to his body.

Congress took a step toward the improvement of the notoriously slow judicial system when, in January, it adopted a new code of criminal procedure proposed by the Caldera administation. Expected to enter into full force in July 1999, the new code would allow for the oral, rather than exclusively written, presentation of evidence, promising to facilitate legal processes. The new code, if implemented, would also provide other human rights-related benefits. The nudo hecho procedure, identified by human rights groups as one of the most serious obstacles to police accountability, was due to be eliminated when the new code entered force, although it continued to be applied throughout the year. During the transitional period, certain provisions of the new code were implemented. Starting in March, for instance, criminal suspects and their legal counsel were given access to the findings of pre-trial criminal investigations, which were previously kept secret. In contrast, neither victims of police abuse nor the victims legal representatives were allowed access.

With some 25,000 inmates crowded into facilities built for far fewer, conditions in Venezuelas prisons remained grim. Overcrowded, understaffed, physically deteriorated, lacking adequate medical services, conditions in many prisons were cruel, inhuman, or degrading, but their most appalling problem was their high levels of violence. With small numbers of guards exercising little effective control within the prisons, inmatesarmed with knives, homemade firearms, pistols, and even grenadeskilled each other with impunity. Reflecting on the abundance of such arms, a Venezuelan newspaper opined in March that, The capacity for the production of rudimentary weapons in the countrys prisons outstrips, by far, that of any other craft activity in Venezuela. The more than two tons of arms confiscated from several Caracas-area prisons over a three-month period certainly lent credence to this claim.

The first few months of the year witnessed a spectacular barrage of prison violence, even by Venezuelan standards. In theopening days of January, several prisoners at La Planta prison and Yare I prison had already reported been killed. By the end of the month, some thirty-six inmates had died violently. Besides individual killings, violent incidents in which several prisoners died occurred with almost monotonous regularity over the course of the year. On January 16, five inmates were killed at La Planta prison; on March 27, four were killed at the Venezuelan National Penitentiary; in mid-April, five more were killed there; in late May, seven were killed at the Judicial Internment Center of San Juan de los Morros; in mid-June, four were killed at the Tocuyito prison, and on July 23, five were killed at the Tocorn prison.

The rampant corruption of guards facilitated the entry of arms, drugs, and other contraband into the prisons. Even high-level prison officials were not immune to such illicit dealings, as suggested by the dismissal and criminal investigation of the director of Tocuyito prison in August; he was reportedly accused of misappropriating funds meant for the renovation of the prison infrastructure and forin return for a substantial bribefacilitating the escape of an inmate. Such corruption favored a minority of inmates, particularly those with money, to the detriment of larger inmate population.

Women prisoners were generally held in somewhat better conditions than men prisoners, although in Ciudad Bolvar, where a small number of women prisoners were confined within the mens prison, living conditions for both men and women were horrendous, and women prisoners faced a heightened threat of sexual abuse. At the National Institute for Women, the countrys only womens prison, some members of the National Guard allegedly engaged in sexual misconduct with inmates.

The main cause of prison overcrowding remained the confinement of high numbers of unsentenced inmates. Indeed, some two-thirds of the Venezuelan prison population was made up of unsentenced inmates and others whose sentence was not final. In August, the minister of justice announced that 1,500 unsentenced inmates had languished for over three years in the prisons, compelling proof of the slowness of the criminal justice process.

Prison authorities primarily sought to handle overcrowding by building new penal facilities, a program of expansion begun in 1997after nearly a decade without any new prison constructionwith the opening of two new Caracas-area prisons. In late January, the Lagunillas prison opened in the state of Mrida, adding incrementally to the prison systems overall capacity. A much more troubling development was the expansion and renovation of El Dorado prison, formally called the Penal Center of the Eastern Region (Centro Penitenciario de la Regin Oriental), which was located in a remote jungle region near Venezuelas border with Guyana. The prisons relative inaccessibility reduced prisoners ability to maintain contact with their families, rendering it an extremely poor choice for expansion. Despite this obvious problem, the Ministry of Justice announced the reopening of the facility in August, stating that it would henceforth be used for the confinement of convicted prisoners from the countrys entire eastern region. In late September, the 1,300 prisoners held there initiated a hunger strike to call for improvements at the facility.

As this incident suggests, the prisons chronic deficiencies inspired numerous inmate protests, including frequent hunger strikes, some involving large numbers of prisoners. In March, at the Los Llanos prison in Guanare state, inmates family members participated in a protest against physical abuse by members of the National Guard. More than one hundred people, including some ninety women, refused to leave the prison when visiting hours were over, spending several days inside the facility in an attempt to draw attention to the need for improvements.

With El Dorado prison as a notable exception, the prison systems strong suit remained its support of prisoners family relationships. Prisoners were allowed frequent and close contact with family members and friends, including conjugal visits. In late March, the Ministry of Justice announced a plan to install public telephones in all of the prisons, an innovation that would further assist prisoners in maintaining strong ties with relatives and friends.
Asia Overview
Two very different dynamics were at work in East and South Asia during the year. In East (including Southeast) Asia, the deepening economic crisis was by far the most significant factor in terms of human rights developments, and it showed no signs of abating. South Asia remained largely unaffected by the crisis; rights issues there remained depressingly familiar, including communal and caste-related violence and abuses linked to armed conflict and civil strife. Violence against women was a major issue across the region, with particular concern for the treatment of women by the Taliban in Afghanistan. Failure to protect refugees was another regionwide problem. Important elections took place in many key Asian countries during the year, but it would be difficult to argue in India or Cambodia that they presaged any major improvement in human rights. Kim Dae-Jungs election to the presidency of South Korea in December 1997 and Indonesias change in government in May 1998 offered the most hope for better rights protection, but the depth of the economic crisis in both places tempered any optimism.

Human Rights Developments
The Asian economic crisis had both predicted and unforeseen consequences in terms of human rights. Even the predicted consequences, however, were more painful than most had anticipated. Massive layoffs in Indonesia, Thailand, and South Korea, among other places, resulted in much of the new middle class sinking back below the poverty line. In Indonesia, loss of jobs meant a growing inability to pay school feeswhich in turn meant an increase in dropouts to the point that some feared a lost generationof uneducated children. The breakdown of transportation networks meant that widespread food shortages were developing for the first time in recent memory. The ethnic Chinese minority, with a disproportionate control of the retail economy, became more of a target than ever before, in some cases with tacit government endorsement.

As the job market dried up, migrant workers were sent home: Burmese from Thailand, Indonesians from Malaysia, Thais and South Asians from South Korea. Immigration detention centers were reported to be overflowing with new detainees, as not only did police intensify roundups of undocumented workers but the crisis also spurred a new exodus from migrant-sending countries. Thailand and Malaysia both used the cover of deportation of migrants to send back individuals with a clear claim to refugee status.

In a situation of economic collapse, large-scale corruption became a pressing political issue, especially in South Korea, Malaysia, and Indonesia, to the point that dismissal of corrupt officials, investigation of ill-gotten wealth, and the creation of anti-corruption agencies became seen as the essence of political reform.

One widely predicted consequence an anti-Western backlash was not nearly as strong as anticipated, as Asians tended to find more fault with their own governments, past or present, than with Western creditors. Indonesian President Soeharto, after thirty-two years, would not have been forced from office without the economic crisis as a backdrop, and investigation into his assets became a major demand of the Indonesian public. Asians increasingly sought accountability, primarily of public officials and to a lesser extent of international financial institutions, as it was they that had allowed loans to corrupt governments to proceed unhindered.

The crisis changed fundamental assumptions about rights. The Asian miracle had fostered the notion that economic development had to precede political liberalization. The crash forced a reassessment of that position. The World Bank, in its September 1998 report, East Asia: The Road to Recovery , noted, Corruption and poor institutional performance shoulder much of the blame for the crisis. Editorials in the Asian and international press suggested that open and accountable governments could prevent disastrous decision making, better cope with economic crises when they occurred, or at least forestall political unrest by having elections in which voters could throw out those perceived as the culprits. Thailand and South Korea were increasingly held up as examples of how popularly elected governments seemed to be working their way out of the crisis faster than their neighbors.

This cause-and-effect correlation was overly simplistic. Just as a utilitarian approach to authoritarianism that it was good for stability and growthhad blinded many foreign investors to the political pressures building up within repressive states, a new-found support for democratic elections, human rights, and the rule of law on the part of much of the donor community as the crisis deepened was based on exactly the same utilitarian approach to governmentdemocracy was now seen to be better for stability and recovery, if not resumption of growth. In fact, the nature of the political system was only one of many factors affecting the likelihood of a country to be seriously hit by the crisis and its capacity for coping with it. The utilitarian argument implied that a free press, independent courts, and a strong civil society were desirable as means of coping with the economic crisis, rather than as ends in themselves. This meant that if the economic crisis continued to deepen, the utilitarians support for strong democratic institutions could weaken accordingly.

What the utilitarian argument failed to grasp is that the economic crisis coincided with a profound desire for political change across Asia. Indonesias political instability was not caused solely by the collapse of the currency but also by the fact that resentment against Soehartos paternalistic repression and his childrens corruption had been building over the previous ten years. The Thai electorate saw the crisis in 1997 as an opportunity to correct some of the worst ills of a money-driven political system. In Malaysia, the arrest of Anwar Ibrahim was not only Prime Minister Mahathirs response to an alternative set of economic policies but, perhaps more importantly, a defiant response of the old guard to a more outward-looking political generation. It was not necessarily that political change would produce economic answers, but that economic crisis helped bring simmering political tensions , many of them rooted in past human rights abuses, to the surface.

It was telling that the new attachment to democracy on the part of the international community was only visible where a locally generated transition was already in place. The economic-development-leads-to-political-liberalization theory was still very much invogue at the end of the year with respect to countries like China where democratic transitions had not taken place, and where international pressure on human rights issues had all but ceased. Chinese leaders periodically reiterated the development firstpremise during the year, and the steady stream of Western leaders going to Beijing with large trade delegations showed that the lessons learned from Indonesia and Thailand were not going to be applied to China. In India, where democracy had flourished sinceindependence in 1947, human rights issues were simply not high on the international agenda, in part because of the assumption that democracies prevented human rights abuses from happening.

Civil society in Asia knew better. For the tens of thousands of Asian nongovernmental organizations, the economic crisis strengthened the argument that political and economic rights were truly indivisible. Just as political reform became the major demand of nongovernmental groups in the initial phase of the crisis, concerns over food security, access to health care, an adequate standard of living, and provision of a social safety net for the unemployed and impoverished became paramount concerns as the crisis deepened. In policy terms, this meant a move away from advocating the conditioning of IMF or other assistance packages on immediate political reform toward insistence that nongovernmental groups should be actively involved in the planning and implementation of aid or bailout programs.

The nuclear standoff in South Asia did not lead to an increase in communal violence in India and Pakistan, as some had feared. However, the tests did contribute to rising tension between the two countries over Kashmir, and shelling by troops along the cease-fire line increased sharply in July and August, killing more than one hundred civilians.

Afghanistan remained a human rights disaster, with the world either unable or unwilling to exert pressure on warring parties to end abuses that included massacres of those deemed to be the enemy. In the case of the Pakistan-backed Taliban forces who controlled much of the country, abuses included discrimination against and deliberate terrorization of women, as well as summary executions, including the massacre of thousands of Hazaras, a Shia minority, in August. Human rights violations in Sri Lanka were also committed by both parties to the conflict, and the fighting appear to be escalating toward years end. (In early October, local rights monitors and journalists estimated the number of government soldiers killed by the Tamil Tigers in a three-day period to be in the high hundreds.) In Afghanistan, Sri Lanka, and Burma, ongoing conflicts had displaced hundreds of thousands internally, and many more had fled abroad. Refugee and rights organizations paid particular attention during the year to the failure of the international community to provide adequate protection to ethnic minority refugees from Burma in Thailand, but the protection failure was in fact region-wide.

Violence against women was a major issue around the region. The policies of the Taliban perhaps attracted the most attention, but reports of rape against ethnic Chinese women in Indonesia during riots there in May generated outrage around the world and led to the creation of a new network of groups organized over the Internet or in person to combat such violence. Many of the members were based in Malaysia, Singapore, Hong Kong, and Taiwan, as well as among ethnic Chinese communities in Canada, Australia, and the U.S. By October, international and domestic concern had led to the creation of a Commission on Violence Against Women. In India, violence against Dalit, or low-caste, women continued as part of a broader pattern of violence against Dalits. Police paid little attention to crimes by higher-caste groups against Dalit women, including sexual assault and rape, which seemed aimed at intimidating Dalits into ceasing their efforts to demand fundamental rights. Concern over trafficking of Asian women continued, as the economic crisis drove many more families into poverty, making them vulnerable to the offers of recruiters.

Abuse of national security legislation, particularly that which provided for broad powers of search, arrest, and detention without charge, remained a focus of human rights groups concern. Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathirs use of the Internal Security Act (ISA) to arrest his deputy, Anwar Ibrahim, was the most prominent example of such abuse. In India, groups continued their campaign for repeal of the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, but it was only one of several preventive detention statutes used to harass and detain lower castes, minorities, and human rights activists. In Indonesia, President Habibie announced his intention to repeal the hated Anti-Subversion Law (Presidential Decree 11/1963), but by years end it appeared that many of the laws provisions would simply be included in the criminal code. In China, the fate of some 2,000 prisoners convicted of counterrevolution who remained in prison even after the counterrevolution provisions of the criminal code were repealed became a focus of international concern. On a more positive note, the Supreme Court in Pakistan checked efforts of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif to suspend all fundamental rights by declaring a state of emergency; it also struck down controversial sections of a 1997 Anti-Terrorism Act that gave enhanced powers to the police. Nevertheless, by years end, the courage of the court gave little hope to Pakistani human rights defenders, who predicted only further erosion of civil liberties. One reason for their pessimism was Sharifs proposed amendment to the constitution, authorizing the removal of officials for failure to enforce Islamic law.

Important elections or changes of leadership took place during the year across the region, in India, Cambodia, the Philippines, Hong Kong, Indonesia, China, and Vietnam. The Hong Kong election in May was structured to reduce the number of popularly elected seats, but pro-democracy candidates overwhelmingly won those available in a clear rejection of the notion that the people of Hong Kong would see that their best interests lay in supporting Beijing. The Cambodian election may have demonstrated again the desire of Cambodians to vote, but it also demonstrated the cynical use by donor countries of international observers to rubber-stamp a preordained outcome. In this case, ruling party intimidation and pressure in the months before election day made it questionable whether the polling results, free or fraudulent, accurately represented the desire of the electorate. In India, the coming to power of the Hindu nationalist party generated fears of a rise in communal tension; those fears were realized in the states of Gujarat, Maharashtra, Bihar, and Madhya Pradesh, where anti-Christian violence surged in the latter half of the year. In Indonesia, the resignation of President Soeharto and the immediate lifting of controls on political parties offered some hope that the elections scheduled for 1999 would be the freest since 1955, although thirty years of stifled political development meant that coalition-building and compromise were something of a lost art. And despite some signs that pressures for political reform were increasing in China and Vietnam, the closed nature of the political system in both countries made it impossible to tell how much the new leadership would be beholden to conservatives in the Communist Party power structure.
Afghanistan
Afghanistan remained one of the worlds most intractable human rights disasters in 1998. The war between the forces of the Taliban, an ultraconservative Islamist movement that has controlled the capital Kabul since 1996, and the coalition of opposition forces known as the United Front (UF) continued to wreak devastation in the north of the country. A bloody offensive that began in July left the Taliban in control of all but parts of central and northeast Afghanistan; during the battle for the city of Mazar-i Sharif, the Taliban massacred civilians belonging principally to the ethnic Shia Hazara minority. Killings of civilians were also reported from Bamiyan, the main city in a predominantly Hazara region of central Afghanistan that fell to the Taliban in September. Afghans living in other Taliban-controlled areas continued to suffer under repressive policies that were particularly harsh on women and minorities. Those in areas controlled by the opposition were subject to abuses also, including extrajudicial killings, rape and arbitrary detention. Large numbers of civilians on both sides were killed in aerial bombardments. Refugees from the country who had fled the fighting and repression numbered between 1.5 and 2 million; the numbers of internally displaced were estimated in the millions.
Human Rights Developments
On August 8, Taliban forces captured the northern city of Mazar-i Sharif. As they entered the city, the Taliban troops opened fire indiscriminately in streets and market areas as panicked civilians attempted to flee. Over the next week, the Taliban conducted house-to-house searches, detaining Tajik, Uzbek and Hazara men and teenage boys and often shooting the Hazaras in the street or in their houses. Thousands were detained in the city jail and an unknown number transported to jails in Herat and Qandahar. Scores of prisoners transported in large container trucks suffocated. At least several hundred bodies, and perhaps many more, were reportedly buried in the desert outside the city. In addition, eight Iranian officials and a journalist were killed in the city. As they attempted to leave the city, Hazara civilians were stopped and taken away to unknown destinations for interrogation. A large number of civilians died in rocket attacks and aerial bombardments as they fled on the main road south of the city. The massacre was believed to have been carried out in large part in reprisal for the massacre of some 2,000 or more surrendered Taliban soldiers during a failed attempt by the Taliban to take Mazar-i Sharif in May 1997.

By October, the Taliban controlled all of Afghanistans major cities, imposing in these areas its own strict interpretation of Islam. Edicts governing social behavior were enforced by the Ministry for the Enforcement of Virtue and Suppression of Vice, whose vigilance squads exacted summary punishment by beating or detaining transgressors. Such abusive practices were more characteristic of the Talibans administration in Kabul, where the population is ethnically mixed and less sympathetic to the Talibans interpretation of Islam than in Qandahar and other areas in the south. There was no freedom of association or freedom of expression in Taliban-controlled areas. Given the deep suspicion that divides the members of the UF and the warlord nature of governance in much of the northern areas, there was little scope for any such freedoms there.

Women were particularly targeted by the virtue and vice squads. They were not allowed to move outside their homes unless completely covered in a head-to-toe garment called a burqa and accompanied by a male relative. Those caught violating these requirements were beaten. As a consequence of these restrictions, women were sometimes unable to seek medical care. With few exceptions, women were not permitted to work. Entire families were driven into destitution as a result.

Another group specifically targeted by the Taliban was the Hazaras, a Shia minority, and to a lesser extent, other non-Pashtun ethnic groups, including Tajiks. Hazaras returning from Iran, where some two million had fled during the 1980s, were detained upon return, transported to Qandahar and jailed. At least 700 were reported to be jailed there in 1998 pending a prolonged screening process designed to identify supporters and members of Hezb-i Wahdat, the Hazara party that is part of the UF. As a consequenceof these detentions and the deteriorating relationship between Iran and the Taliban, repatriation of refugees from Iran virtually stopped in 1998. Tajiks and Hazaras featured prominently among the internally displaced. Beginning in 1996, large numbers of Tajiks had been forcibly relocated from their homes north of Kabul out of fear they might give support and cover to opposition troops trying to move south toward the capital.

Another striking pattern of abuse institutionalized under the Taliban was the public display of summary, corporal punishment. Every Friday, thousands were pressured to witness public executions and punitive amputations in Kabuls stadium.

As has been the case throughout the war, all parties to the conflict were responsible for violations of international humanitarian law. Over 180 people were killed in a barrage of rocket attacks fired on Kabul by UF commander Ahmad Shah Massoud on September 20-22. Reprisal attacks on civilians, indiscriminate rocketing and shelling of cities, and summary executions of captured prisoners were also reported. It was generally believed that all parties were laying new landmines.
Burma
Ten years after the 1988 pro-democracy uprising was crushed by the army, Burma continued to be one of the worlds pariah states. A standoff between the government and Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, general secretary of the opposition National League for Democracy (NLD), and other expressions of nonviolent dissent resulted in more than 1,000 detentions during the year. Many were relatively brief, others led eventually to prison sentences. Human rights abuses, including extrajudicial executions, rape, forced labor, and forced relocations, sent thousands of Burmese refugees, many of them from ethnic minority groups, into Thailand and Bangladesh. The change in November 1997 from the ruling State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC) to the gentler-sounding State Peace and Development Council (SPDC) had little impact on human rights practices and policies; the SPDCs euphemism for continued authoritarian controldisciplined democracy indicated no change. In addition to pervasive human rights violations, an economy in free fall made life even more difficult for the beleaguered population.
Human Rights Developments
The SPDC s first steps briefly raised hopes for change. In December 1997, the minister for home affairs held an unprecedented, if unproductive, meeting with NLD members. In January, the SPDC continued an unexpected anti-corruption drive that had begun in late 1997, this time extending it to the police force. Five police chiefs were forced to resign, and the Rangoon division police chief was sacked. In a seminar on the economic crisis, held in Rangoon on January 20-21, SPDC Secretary-1, Lt. Gen. Khin Nyunt, urged all participants to freely discuss Burmas economic problems, the first time anyone in the military government had called for opinions.

Optimism that the government was opening up quickly waned, however. Between December and February, a new wave of arrests of political dissidents and student activists took place, and seven members of the NLD, arrested in 1997, were given longprison terms. On March 1, Khin Nyunt gave a press briefing in which he named several men, some of them students, whom he accused of having taken part in plots to assassinate SPDC leaders or otherwise disturb the peace. Of those arrested, sixKo Thein, Khin Hlaing, Naing Aung, Thant Zaw Swe, Myint Han and Let Yar Htunwere sentenced to death for their part in alleged bomb plots. Thirty-three others were given harsh sentences, including Aung Tun, sentenced to fifteen years under the 1962 Printers and Publishers Registration Act and the 1950 Emergency Provisions Act for publishing a book describing the history of the student movement in Burma. In connection with Aung Tuns research, veteran politician and independence hero Thakin Ohn Myint, aged eighty, was sentenced on May 5 to seven years imprisonment with hard labor.

In April NLD parliamentarian Daw San San, who had been arrested during the October 1997 clampdown, was sentenced to serve the remainder of a twenty-five-year jail term she had received for alleged treason in December 1990. She had been released under an amnesty in May 1992, but on condition that she did not take part in political activities. However, a radio interview she gave to the British Broadcasting Corporation in June 1997 was now claimed as evidence that she had broken the conditions of her release.

Tensions rose dramatically in May. On the eve of the May 27 anniversary of the 1990 election, which the NLD had won, the SPDC permitted the NLD to hold a party meeting at Aung San Suu Kyis Rangoon home. Over 200 NLD supporters and parliamentarians, however, were detained for having either attended the meeting or attempting to do so. Even so, those present passed a resolution demanding that a parliament be convened by August 21.

That demand triggered a crackdown which persisted as of this writing. Initially, the SPDC imposed travel restriction orders on NLD officials, using the 1961 Habitual Criminal Offenders Act, which puts repeat offenders on permanent bail, forcing them to sign in with local authorities on a daily basis. Many NLD members refused to sign in, and as a result by mid-July some seventy-nine parliamentarians were reported to have been detained.

As the arrests mounted, Aung San Suu Kyi made attempts to meet with party activists outside Rangoon. Her moves were the result of a decision by NLD leaders to risk personal safety in order to force the government to the discussion table. On June 29, Aung San Suu Kyi was among a group of NLD leaders injured in a scuffle when the military forcibly prevented a student discussion group from meeting outside her home. Subsequently, she tried to leave Rangoon four times. On July 7 and 21, she was stopped en route to visit party members and prevented from reaching her destination. On July 24, her car was stopped as she attempted to visit Bassein. This time, the stand-off lasted for six days and ended only after the military forcibly entered her car and drove her back to Rangoon. On August 12, she made another attempt to reach Bassein, and when her car was stopped at the same point, she remained inside for thirteen days with little food or water. Only a suspected kidney infection and jaundice forced her to return to Rangoon.

This was the prelude to the mass detention of NLD supporters. In mid-August, SPDC leaders held two confidence-building meetings with NLD officials, including the party chairman Aung Shwe. They pointedly refused, however, to meet with Aung San Suu Kyi. Then, as the NLD August 21 deadline approached, a stream of editorials in the state media accused the NLD of treason, claiming no parliament would be allowed to meet until a new constitution was drawn up. Subsequently, over 700 NLD members were detained, bringing the number of elected parliamentarians in detention to 194.

In addition to opposition politicians, students were also the target of arrests. Although the universities had remained closed since December 1996, dozens of students were reportedly arrested in sporadic demonstrations in Rangoon in August and September, including members of two student-backed organizations, the All Burma Federation of Student Unions and the Democratic Party for New Society. In September, a number of junior army officers were also reportedly detained for expressing pro-democracy sentiments, and there were reports of the arrest of Buddhist monks in the northern city of Mandalay.

Prison conditions continued to be a source of concern. In a rare event in February, the International Committee of the Red Cross was allowed to hold a seminar on health matters for Burmas prison doctors in Rangoon. Three well-known detainees were reported to have died in custody during the year, their deaths almost certainly exacerbated by prison conditions or ill-treatment: Aung Kyaw Moe, a student leader, Thein Tin, an NLD Rangoon division organizer, and Saw Win, an NLD parliamentarian.

In ethnic minority areas, the Burmese armed forces used a mixtures of carrots and sticks to deal with ethnic discontent and armed opposition forces. In areas of armed opposition where cease-fires had been reached, local groups reported progress on development and social initiatives, especially in Kachin state. By contrast, in other war-zones there was continued fighting, with attendant grave human rights abuses. Despite repeated international condemnation, the Burmese armys use of forced labour was widespread, confirmed in a major investigation and report by the International Labour Organisation (ILO) published in August ( see below).
The government stepped up its practice of targeting villagers suspected of supporting ethnic insurgents. Forced relocations were especially prevalent in the central southern Shan state, Kayah (Karenni) state, Karen state and Tenasserim division, all of which were areas where peace talks or cease-fires had broken down in the previous three years.

In addition, the Democratic Karen Buddhist Army (DKBA), a breakaway group from the rebel Karen National Union formed in late 1994 with the support of the Burmese army, renewed its terror campaign against Karen refugees in camps in Thailand. In a series of attacks on Huay Kaloke, Mawker, and Mae La refugee camps during March and April, at least four refugees were killed, over

fifty wounded,and thousands made homeless.

As of November, some 21,000 Muslim Rohingya refugees from Rakhine (Arakan) state were still living in the two remaining official camps in Bangladesh, with most of the 260,000 who fled from Burma in 1991-92 having been repatriated by 1997. At the same time, new refugees continued to arrive, citing forced labor and other human rights abuses, but were denied entry to the refugee camps.

The year witnessed increased surveillance and occasional arrests of foreign visitors and journalists. One man of Australian and British citizenship, James Mawdsley, was sentenced to five years for breaking immigration laws when he entered the country, withouta visa, via Thailand in April. He was eventually released as a humanitarian gesture in August. At least five freelance reporters who entered the country with tourist visas were known to have been deported (usually after they tried to make contact with Aung San Suu Kyi or NLD officers), while those who declared their profession in their applications were denied visas from the middle of the year. The SPDC attempted to block all international reporting, and NLD telephone lines were routinely tapped and cut off if foreign journalists managed to get through.
Cambodia
Human Rights Developments
The first national elections in Cambodia since 1993 dominated political developments during the year. Too readily declared free and fair by the international community, they were preceded by widespread intimidation of voters, and followed by protests of fraud. In the heaviest violence in Phnom Penh since the 1997 coup by Second Prime Minister Hun Sen against his former coalition partner, Prince Norodom Ranariddh, fierce clashes erupted in September between riot police and demonstrators protesting the victory by Hun Sens Cambodian Peoples Party (CPP). As of mid-October, a new government had not been formed; the prospect of yet another adversarial coalition government between Ranariddh and Hun Sen offered little hopes for stability or human rights improvements. No progress was made during the year toward ending inpunity for rights violations; officials linked to murders and disappearances remained in office, and Khmer Rouge leaders associated with the 1975-79 massacres of a million or more Cambodians remained at large even after Pol Pots death in April. Ethnic Vietnamese living in Cambodia continued to be a target of political violence.

Hun Sen began to lay the groundwork for the 1998 elections in late 1997 by sending a letter to U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan on October 22, guaranteeing the safe return of opposition politicians who fled after the coup and pledging to organize fair elections. By the end of November, the United Nations Office of the Secretary-Generals Personal Representative in Cambodia had created a new unit of international personnel, mandated to monitor the physical security and safety of returning political leaders, their freedom from arrest and detention, and their ability to engage in political activities. By early 1998, most had returned. These included Ranariddhs party, Front Uni National pour un Cambodge Independent, Neutre, Pacifique, et Cooperatif, or FUNCINPEC; Sam Rainsys Khmer Nation Party (KNP); and the Son Sann faction of the Buddhist Liberal Democratic Party (BLDP). Throughout the first half of the year, the CPP was virtually the only party able to freely and actively conduct political activities throughout the country. It was not until May that opposition parties were legally recognized and not until June that they were fully registered to participate in the election.

Until mid-February, a political impasse over Ranariddhs ability to participate in the elections threatened to block international donor support for the vote. Hun Sen charged that Ranariddh had imported illegal weapons in 1997 and mounted an armed opposition with Khmer Rouge support against government forces. In February, however, a group of donor andneighboring countries known as the Friends of Cambodia endorsed a peace initiative put forward by Japan, and Hun Sen and Ranariddh agreed. Dubbed the Four Pillars plan, it called for an immediate cease-fire and reintegration of resistance forces into the government army, the severing of Ranariddhs ties with the Khmer Rouge, the trial of Prince Ranariddh in absentia followed by his pardon by King Sihanouk, and government guarantees of Ranariddhs safe return to Cambodia.

The latter two provisos were easier to observe than the first two. In a trial held in Phnom Penh Military Court on March 4, Ranariddh was found guilty of the weapons charge and sentenced to five years in prison. In a second trial on March 17, he and two of his generals were convicted of colluding with the Khmer Rouge to overthrow the government. Ranariddh was sentenced to thirty years, and he and his co-defendants were required to pay U.S. $56 million in damages to the government, individuals, and private companies that had incurred losses during the coup. On March 21, King Sihanouk issued a full royal pardon for both of Ranariddhs criminal convictions and released the prince from having to pay any compensation.

A National Election Committee (NEC) was formed in January to organize and monitor the elections and verify the accuracy of the final tally, but it was dominated by the CPP.

Similarly, the Constitutional Council, the nations highest appeals body, which was mandated to resolve electoral disputes and verify the accuracy of the final tally, had a disproportionate number of CPP-affiliated members and was established too late to address most election-related disputes.At party congresses in Phnom Penh in March, two leading opposition parties changed their names because of legal battles with pro-CPP rival factions. The KNP became the Sam Rainsy Party, and one faction of the BLDP became the Son Sann Party. During political party registration, which began on March 28, thirty-nine parties were approved by the Ministry of Interior and the NEC.

A pattern of violence against opposition party workers continued late into the year. Prior to Ranariddhs return on March 3, several high-ranking FUNCINPEC officials were assassinated in Phnom Penh, including Lt. Col. Moung Sameth on March 3, Gen. Thach Kim Sang on March 4, and Lt. Col. Chea Vutha on March 28. Local activists in the countryside were also targeted, as for example in the April 26 grenade attack against Son Sann Party members in Takeo, in which two people were killed.

In April the CPP turned its attention to getting its members appointed to the provincial and commune election commissions and launched a heavy-handed but generally nonviolent party recruitment campaign. Local officials and militia went house to house or conducted mass meetings to solicit thumbprints and pledges from the populace to vote for the CPP, confiscated and recorded identification numbers on voter registration cards, and conducted mock elections before the actual polling, in which people were pressured to vote for the CPP. Although voter registration got off to a rocky start on May 18, the NEC reported that 92 percent of the estimated 5.6 million eligible voters eventually registered to vote.

Top opposition leaders such as Ranariddh and Rainsy began to make high-profile visits to the provinces in May, but the ongoing threat of political violence discouraged activity by local-level opposition members outside Phnom Penh. A May 13, 1998 memorandum from the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Human Rights in Cambodia detailed forty-two killings and six long-term disappearances of people presumed killed since the initial forty-one killings that took place in the immediate aftermath of the July 1997 coup. A U.N. report prepared in April concluded that the government had not launched any serious investigations into coup-related abuses and that no investigations were planned.

On June 8, the co-prime ministers signed a directive establishing a National Human Rights Committee. The fact that the committee was led by two top advisers to Hun Sen, and that this was the fourth time since July 1997 that Hun Sen had pledged to set up such a commission, did not inspire confidence that it was a serious effort. A National Task Force on Security for the Elections was established the same month, responsible for investigating election-related violence. Headed by National Police Chief Hok Lundy, himself linked to political murders, the task force concluded that all of the cases it received stemmed from personal motives such as revenge or robbery.

In the final two months preceding the elections the Cambodia Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (COHCHR) received several hundred allegations of voter intimidation, death threats, acts of violence against individuals, illegal arrests and detention, forced removal or destruction of party signs or shooting at party offices, coercion of voters to join the CPP, temporary confiscation of voter registration cards by local authorities, and barring of party members from access to communities. More than one hundred of the complaints were deemed credible. During the same period, the COHCHR found at least twenty-two murders in which political motivations played a part.

In the elections themselves, 94 percent of the registered voters turned out to vote, observed by the Joint International Observation Group (JIOG), a U.N.-coordinated body of thirty-seven countries. The JIOG dispatched only 250 pairs of observers to cover more than 11,000 polling sites and 1,600 counting centers. Additional observation was handled by Cambodian observers under the auspices of well-respected electoral monitoring NGOs, such as the Committee for Free and Fair Elections (COMFREL) and the Coalition for Free and Fair Elections (COFFEL). Most of the international observer delegations flew in only days before the elections, gave their approval, and left as quickly as they had come. Immediately following the polling, hundreds of opposition activists fled their homes in the provinces after receiving threats of reprisals and death from local officials. Meanwhile, counting continued well into the third week in August.

The JIOG issued its assessment that the voting was free and fair on July 27, before the counting was even completed. The Asian Network for Free Elections (ANFREL) was the only international observer delegation to avoid making a snap judgment, calling on the NEC on July 30 to investigate complaints of polling and counting irregularities as well as reports of widespread intimidation and threats against opposition party members following the elections.

In preliminary results released by the NEC in August, the CPP was declared the winner, but the opposition rejected the results and demanded a recount. However, after cursory examination of only a fraction of the oppositions complaints, both the NEC and the Constitutional Council declared the appeals process closed. On September 1, the NEC announced the final results: the CPP received sixty-four of 122 National Assembly seats, or a slight majority,while FUNCINPEC got forty-three seats and the Sam Rainsy Party fifteen. The opposition refused to join a coalition government proposed by the CPP, which had not won enough seats for the two-thirds majority required to form the new government on its own. In late August the opposition launched three weeks of protest marches and rallies in Phnom Penh and set up a tent city in front of the National Assembly which they called Democracy Square.

Unprecedented numbers of people took to the streets to call for Hun Sen to step down. Government officials declared that the demonstrations were illegal and threatened to arrest Sam Rainsy.

Anti-Vietnamese sentiments flared in some of the demonstrations and rallies, with opposition politicians charging that Hun Sen and Vietnamese puppets were intent on eliminating the Cambodian people. On August 30, demonstrators attempted to destroy a stone memorial in Democracy Square that commemorates Cambodia-Vietnam friendship, smashing it with hammers and setting it on fire. On September 3 and 4, at least four ethnic Vietnamese were killed in mob violence in Phnom Penh as a result of rumors than more than seventy people had died from drinks or food that had been poisoned by Vietnamese people.

Following a grenade attack on September 7 on Hun Sens residence in Phnom Penh, government forces found a pretext to move against the demonstrators, opening fire outside the Cambodiana Hotel, where Sam Rainsy had taken refuge, killing one man and provoking widespread anger. Over the next week daily clashes broke out between riot police, pro-CPP demonstrators and opposition supporters. Bulldozers were brought in to destroy the tent city, and riot police used electric batons, fire hoses, rifle butts and bullets to disperse protesters around the city. At least two people were killed by government security forces or their agents during the unrest, with another twenty-four deaths under investigation by the COHCHR. Dozens more, including monks, women, and students, were beaten or injured by government security forces, and more than twenty people were arrested. The government banned sixty-eight opposition politicians from leaving the country and threatened that some would be arrested. While the travel ban was effectively lifted on September 24 for most opposition leaders, Son Sann Party candidate Kem Sokha, the former chairman of the National Assemblys Human Rights Commission, continued to be barred from leaving the country. In late September he went into hiding after a court summons was issued in connection with his role in the September demonstrations.

Under intense pressure from the international community and King Sihanouk, the opposition called off the demonstrations . On September 22, the king hosted a meeting in Siem Reap between Hun Sen, Ranariddh, and Rainsy. While this facilitated the swearing in of the new National Assembly on September 24, tensions escalated again when a rocket exploded that morning along the road to the ceremony in what Hun Sen charged was an assassination attempt. Ranariddh, Rainsy and many of their members immediately left Cambodia after the swearing-in ceremony, citing concerns about their personal security.

Fundamental freedoms of association, assembly, and expression faced periodic threats during the year, although large numbers of people, sometimes tens of thousands, were able to gather for political rallies, labor demonstrations, and protest marches. For the most part, candidates were able to speak freely during the campaign. In the course of the crackdown on opposition supporters protesting the election results, however, the government issued a statement on September 9 that banned unauthorized gatherings, particularly those that might disrupt public order and security.

Opposition parties had virtually no airtime on broadcast media during the year, except for the thirty-day official campaignperiod, when NEC regulations provided for somewhat more equitable media access. Even during the campaign, however, the privately owned Apsara and Bayon stations continued to give disproportionate coverage in the first half of July to the CPP, which appeared 446 times, with FUNCINPEC appearing six times and the Sam Rainsy Party nine times.

In September, the Ministry of Information ordered the closure of FM 105, a private radio station owned by an unsuccessful opposition candidate, charging that the station had aired inflammatory programs. In October, opposition newspaper Udom Katte Khmer (Khmer Ideal) was suspended for allegedly publishing stories detrimental to national security and political stability. Also in October, the Minister of Information threatened to revoke the visa of an American reporter and suspend two American-owned publications, the Cambodia Daily and Phnom Penh Post , for allegedly biased reporting. After protests from foreign diplomats, the minister backed down.

The court system remained virtually powerless in 1998, with the judiciary subject to political pressure. While no move was made against officials suspected of rights abuses, U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan in August announced the creation of a Commission of Experts to assess evidence of war crimes, genocide, and crimes against humanity committed by the Khmer Rouge under Pol Pot, who died on April 15, only days after the United States announced its intention to capture him and his top deputies and bring them to trial. Questions persisted as to the status of other ranking Khmer Rouge leaders who are still alive, including those who remain in hiding as well as more than a dozen influential Khmer Rouge who have defected to the government since 1996.
China and Tibet
Despite some encouraging developments, Chinas human rights practices remained cause for concern. On the positive side, intellectuals had greater freedom to debate political and economic reform; some notable prisoners were released, including student leader Wang Dan; community-based organizations continued to emerge; and the government signed a major human rights treaty. A sharp increase in the number of lawsuits brought by citizens against officials through administrative courts seemed to indicate a growing consciousness of individual rights. At the same time, strict controls remained on expression, association and assembly, with political and religious dissidents, labor activists, and supporters of nationalist movements often facing arrest and detention.

Western governments seized on tentative signs of tolerance to strengthen calls for engagement, a desirable goal, but one that in policy terms all too often meant silence on Chinas egregious human rights record. Visits of world leaders to China were marked more by symbolism than substance and were often accompanied by preventive detention of known dissidents. In general, China played an obstructionist role in efforts to strengthen international human rights, most notably in discussions on the International Criminal Court. The government in Beijing took a largely hands-off approach to the Special Administrative Region of Hong Kong, but this may have been due to the generally pro-Beijing policies of the SAR government.
Human Rights Developments
President Jiang Zemins apparently successful consolidation of power during the year and the appointment in March of Zhu Rongji as premier led to speculation that the two might work in tandem to promote limited political reform. The appearance of books that would earlier have been banned, such as one linking corruption to the lack of checks in the political structure, and greater tolerance of public demonstrations during the year seemed to point in that direction. But China specialists pointed out that such openings, followed by crackdowns, have happened so often in China at times when they served the interests of those in power that it would be foolhardy to conclude that this represented any lasting liberalization.

Greater scope for scholarly discussion of reform did not mean increased tolerance of political dissent. Those who publicly challenged the Communist Party, organized petitions to senior officials on political issues, maintained links to dissidents abroad, or had contacts with the foreign media were particularly vulnerable to arrest and detention.

Thirteen activists from Hangzhou, Zhejiang province were detained for up to seven weeks after they attempted to register an opposition group, the China Democratic Party, on June 25. On September 10, officials in Shandong and Hubei provinces expressed willingness to register the party if petitioners paid a fee, but the next day, an official in Beijing overruled them. Would-be CDP party members also presented applications to register in the northeastern provinces of Heilongjiang, Jinan, Liaoning, as well as in Beijing and Shanghai. They were questioned by authorities and in some cases, briefly detained.

A few notable prisoners were released at politically opportune moments. Wang Dan, the 1989 student leader, was released into exile on April 19, before President Clintons China trip and after the U.S. abandoned any effort to sponsor a China resolution at the U.N. Human Rights Commission. Bishop Zeng Jingmu was freed after a high-profile vist by a delegation of American religious leaders. But hundreds, perhaps thousands, of prisoners were still serving long sentences for non-violent activities. They including Li Hai, imprisoned since 1995 for gathering information about Tiananmen Square detainees; Jampa Ngodrup, a Tibetan held since 1989 for copying name lists of those arrested or injured in pro-independence demonstrations in Tibet; and Gao Yu, a journalist arrested in 1993 on charges of leaking state secrets for gathering economic data that had not yet been officially released. Liu Nianchun, a labor activist, continued to be held in a labor camp beyond the May 21 expiration of his three-year sentence.

Many dissidents were sentenced during the year to reeducation through labor, an administrative sentence that can lead to detention for up to three years in a labor camp without judicial review. They included Yang Qinheng, a Shanghai activist, who received a three-year term on March 27, a month after he was arrested for reading an open letter on Radio Free Asia citing workers right to unionize. In early April Wu Ruojie, a rock musician, and Li Yi, a businessman, were sentenced for divulging state secrets about the arrest of four poets in Guiyang, Guizhou province.

Overseas connections often meant trouble. Li Qingxi, an unemployed former health worker from Shaanxi, was detained on January 16 and later ordered to serve a one-year reeducation through labor sentence at home for calling on workers to form independent unions, contacting overseas labor and democratic organizations, and listening to the Voice of America. Wang Tingjin, an Anhui mathematics teacher, was accused of assisting in the January 26 illegal entry into China of U.S. resident Wang Bingzhang. In mid-April he was sentenced to two years reeducation through labor. Chen Zengxiang, another dissident with connections to Wang, was reportedly sentenced in October to seven years in prison on charges of leaking state secrets, in connection with his distribution of a list of Shandong political prisoners. In October, Shi Binhai, a journalist at the state-run China Economic Times and co-editor of a book on political reform, was indicted for collusion with overseas dissident organizations.

China made a concerted effort to keep overseas dissidents and their relatives out of China. On April 4, less than an hour after she arrived at her parents apartment in Sichuan province, police took Li Xiaorong, a research scholar at the University of Maryland, into custody. She was traveling on a U.S. passport and had a valid visa, but according to police officers, her work in the U.S. on behalf of human rights in China was unacceptable. She was only one of several activists deported or turned away at the border during the year.

Interviews with the foreign media often triggered harassment. In June, shortly after his political rights were formally restored,former political prisoner Bao Tong, the highest-ranking official to be imprisoned in connection with the June 1989 protests, was given repeated warnings after he gave interviews to the U.S. print and broadcast media during President Clintons visit.

It was routine for public security officers to hold dissidents briefly in connection with the visits of foreign dignitaries. In Xian, for example, President Clintons first stop in China, police detained four people; they were released shortly afterwards. In September, democracy activists in Wuhan had their homes searched before the arrival in China of French Premier Lionel Jospin.

The Chinese government remained concerned about the potential for increased worker unrest, particularly with ongoing reforms of state enterprises that resulted in widespread layoffs, and officials moved quickly to stop activities in support of labor rights. Zhang Shanguang, founder of the Association to Protect Worker Rights, an organization set up to help laid-off state workers, was detained on July 21 and charged a month later with endangering state security. On August 24, Li Bifeng, a former tax official in Mianyang city, Sichuan province, was sentenced to seven years on a politically motivated fraud charge. Human rights organizations believe his real offense was to have informed international human rights groups about the violent dispersal by police of massive worker protests across Sichuan province.

Religious persecution continued, as did concern that unchecked religious practice was a threat to social stability. New regulations were adopted in Guangzhou city and Zhejiang province requiring religious communities to accept government control, restrict contact with overseas organizations, and register with authorities or face fines and other penalties. In May, Hunan provincial officials banned the indiscriminate establishment of temples and outdoor Buddha statues. In April and again in June, officials in Gansu invited underground Catholic clerics in at least two dioceses to week-long meetings to pressure them to join the officially recognized church. Some religious leaders who rejected state control of their activities were detained, usually under reeducation through labor provisions.

China made new efforts to control the flow of information. On December 30, 1997, draconian new regulations titled Administrative Measures for Ensuring the Security of Computer Information Technology, the Internet mandated fines as high as 15,000 renminbi (approximately U.S.$1,800 at the time) and threatened unspecified criminal punishments for use of the Internet agencies. In March 25, Lin Hai, a computer company manager, was detained in Shanghai and later charged with inciting to subvert the government for providing a U.S.-based dissident magazine with the e-mail addresses of 30,000 users in China. He was believed to be still in detention as of September, although the prosecutor had rejected the case for lack of evidence.

Media censorship continued. In August, the Chinese Communist Partys Central Committee announced restrictions on reporting corruption cases involving senior officials, hitherto unreported activities of deceased leaders, and immoral social phenomena. Earlier, officials limited independent reporting on natural disasters such as an earthquake in Hebei on January 11 and the disastrous floods along the Yangtze river. Chinese authorities also routinely interfered with reporting by foreign journalists.

As of October, China was reportedly planning to amend its adoption law, facilitating domestic adoptions. Such an amendment could significantly reduce the number of children in state orphanages, many of whom suffer from inadequate care.

On October 20 and 21, China hosted a two-day international symposium on human rights to commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The government used the meeting to argue against universal standards.

Tibet
The human rights situation in Tibet remained a major source of concern. At the end of 1997 Chinese government officials made clear that a campaign against the Dalai Lama and pro-independence forces would continue.

At least ten and possibly twelve prisoners reportedly died following two protests in Drapchi prison in Lhasa, the Tibetan capital, in May. The first protest took place on May 1, the second on May 4, on the day of a visit to the prison by ministers from the E.U. troika countries. During both, prisoners shouted slogans in support of independence and the Dalai Lama. In the weeks following the E.U. visit, scores of prisoners were interrogated, beaten, and placed in solitary confinement. Some of the prisoners were reported to have died in early June. Two reportedly were killed by gunfire during one of the protests, while others were said to have died from beatings. Authorities in Tibet maintained that many of the deaths were suicides. No independent investigation had taken place by the end of the year.

Details of retaliation against prisoners involved in a earlier protest during the visit of the U.N. Working Group on Arbitrary Detention in October 1997 became known in 1998. Three prisoners who shouted political slogans reportedly were beaten and held in solitary confinement for a lengthy period before having their prison terms extended between three and ten years.

Prison conditions in Tibet, as in China, were said to be poor, frequently resulting in prisoners ill-health. Some prisoners were also believed to have died as a result of punishment. Yeshe Samten, a monk, died on May 6, six days after he was released from Trisam prison, reportedly as a result of torture he had suffered during his two-year sentence. The E.U. ministers reported that they were told there were some 1,800 prisoners in Tibet, of whom some 200 were held for state security crimes. Unofficial figures are much higher.

A patriotic education campaign continued during the year designed to force Tibetans, especially monks and nuns, to denounce the Dalai Lama, accept the child recognized by Chinese authorities as the Panchen Lama, and admit that Tibet has always been a part of China. As a result of the campaign, authorities reported that 76 percent of Tibetan monasteries and nunneries had been rectified. Monks and nuns who refused to be educated faced expulsion.

It remained unclear as of October whether Gendun Choekyi Nyima, the nine-year-old boy recognized by the Dalai Lama in 1995 as the reincarnation of the Panchen Lama, was under house arrest or some other form of custody, and there was conflicting information concerning his whereabouts and living conditions. Chinese authorities repeatedly denied requests, including by U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson, for access to the boy.

Xinjiang
Separatist activity continued in the Muslim region of Xinjiang, but strict censorship of the media and restrictions on access made it almost impossible to obtain accurate information. Dissident organizations claimed that many ethnic Uighurs suspected of supporting the separatist movement were detained and sometimes executed, not only for taking part in violent acts designed, in the words of Chinese officials, to split the motherland but also for peaceful advocacy of independence. Scattered incidents, such as a gun battle in April in Ili during which at least two Uighurs and one policeman were killed and a bombing in Khotan in August, indicate continuing violence on the part of both parties.

Hong Kong
At first glance, residents of the Special Administrative Region (SAR) of Hong Kong seemed to have more to fear during the year from a deteriorating economy than from mainland political interference. In the first elections under Chinese sovereignty on May 24, pro-democracy candidates won more than 60 percent of the directly elected seats in the Legislative Council (Legco). But the elections themselves were structured so that the democrats could always be outvoted by pro-government elites.

There were other worrying signs as well. In April, the provisional legislature hand-picked by China rushed through the Adaptation of Laws (Interpretive) Bill, a law that effectively transferred immunity from prosecution under local laws from the British Crown to the Chinese government. It followed on a controversial decisions by the SAR Department of Justice not to prosecute the Xinhua News Agency, Chinas front for the Communist Party in Hong Kong, for refusingd to turn over files on pro-democracy activist and former legislator Emily Lau as it was required to do under Hong Kongs Privacy Law. Local courts also ruled that Chinas National Peoples Congress had the right to override the Basic Law, the document worked out by Britain and China that functions as the SARs constitution. Two activists were convicted on public order grounds for defacing the national and SAR flags in May.

While the annual commemoration of the June 4 massacre passed without incident in Hong Kong, and demonstrations in general were permitted to go forward, many pointed out that no incident had occurred in 1998 that had really tested the one country, two systems principle. As the economy continued to worsen and the prospect of social unrest increased, the test might not be long in coming.
India
Elections in February brought to power Indias Hindu nationalist Indian Peoples Party (Bharatiya Janata Party or BJP). Barely two months in office, the new government flaunted its defiance of international opinion by testing five nuclear devices on May 11 and 13. The tests ignited a firestorm of criticism around the world and triggered sanctions by a number of Indias donors and trading partners. The tests, together with the governments more hawkish posturing on Kashmir, increased tensions with nuclear rival Pakistan and sharpened international concern about the prospects of a regional war.

The election of the BJP also raised fears of renewed communal hostility in India. Several senior officials of the BJP, including Home Minister Lal Kishan Advani, have been implicated in instigating anti-Muslim violence in riots that took place after groups aligned with the BJP destroyed the Babri Masjid, a sixteenth-century mosque, in 1992. In 1998, these groups threatened to go aheadwith plans to build a temple on the site of the destroyed mosque despite the prospect of further violence. In Gujarat, where the state government was also BJP, Hindu activists targeted Christian churches as part of a campaign to drive missionaries from India. In Maharashtra, the state government led by the BJP and Shiv Sena, another Hindu nationalist group, launched a campaign to deport Bengali-speaking Muslims, claiming that they were illegal Bangladeshi immigrants. The new government did little to address other longstanding human rights concerns, including child labor and caste violence.
Human Rights Developments
In the aftermath of Indias nuclear tests, an upsurge in shelling and shooting by Indian and Pakistani troops stationed along the cease-fire line in Kashmir left over 100 civilians dead. Although India maintained that the exchanges represented a seasonal phenomenon, observers in Kashmir reported that the shelling was the heaviest in several years.

In a deadly new development in Kashmir, Pakistan-backed militant groups massacred Hindu civilians in at least six separate incidents in the first nine months of the year. Most of the killings took place in Doda district and in border villages and appeared to represent a tactical shift for militant groups that had been largely driven out of major towns in the Kashmir valley. On January 25, unidentified gunmen shot dead twenty-three members of two Hindu families in the village of Wandhama, the home district of Chief Minister Farooq Abdullah. On April 18, militants hacked to death twenty-six people in two villages in Udhampur district. Responding to the massacre, Home Minister Lal Kishan Advani threatened hot pursuit of the militants into Pakistan-controlled Kashmir. An April 26 attack on a village in Pakistan-controlled Kashmir appeared to have been carried out in retaliation for the Udhampur massacre ( see Pakistan chapter). On June 19, guerrillas shot dead at least twenty-five male members of two Hindu wedding parties, including both bridegrooms, in Chapnari village in Doda district. On July 25, four people were killed in Hadi Dhoke; on July 28, sixteen people were killed in Doda, and on August 3, thirty-five laborers were shot dead in Chamba, in the neighboring state of Himachal Pradesh. On August 31, militants shot dead five people in a village near the capital, Srinagar. Two of the victims were former rebels who had defected to the Indian authorities.

A new government offensive in Doda and the border districts revived patterns of abuse by Indian forces that had abated in the Kashmir valley, where the conflict has been centered since it began in earnest in 1990. In one of the deadliest incidents of its kind in years, army soldiers fatally shot at least nine villagers during a search operation in the town of Qadrana on January 30, after some of the villagers began throwing stones at the troops. Summary executions of detainees also continued. On April 20, security forces detained S. Hamid, chairman of one of the factions of the Jammu and Kashmir Peoples League. The next day the authorities claimed he had been killed in a shootout with the Special Operations Group, a counterinsurgency unit of the security forces. However, relatives who witnessed the detention stated that he had been killed in custody.

Caste-related violence continued to represent a serious problem in 1998. Despite campaign promises to address longstanding concerns about violence and discrimination against low-caste untouchable Dalit groups, the government made no progress in either investigating incidents of caste-related abuse or implementing laws designed to curb such abuse. Many of the incidents represented an effort by middle- and higher-caste groups to suppress Dalit movements demanding land reform or payment of minimum wages. Women were singled out in attacks and were frequently raped. In Bihar, the Ranvir Sena, a private militia controlled by high-caste landlords, was responsible for murdering at least fifty-eight people on December 1, 1997. During the attack, five teenage girls were raped and mutilated before being shot in the chest. Local police established a camp in the village after the massacre, but situated it in the higher-caste landlord neighborhood, strengthening suspicions about police tolerance of the Ranvir Senas activities. No one responsible for the rapes or murders was arrested.

Caste clashes in the southern districts of Tamil Nadu involved local police. On February 26, in Gundupatti, 130 police personnel, together with four truckloads of unidentified strongmen thought to be affiliated with the ruling Dravidian Movement Party (Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, DMK), attacked Dalits and bonded laborers residing in two villages in Kookal Panchayat, a remote area of the Kodaikanal hills. According to a local human rights organization, women were kicked and beaten, their clothing was torn, and police forced sticks and iron pipes into their mouths. The attackers reportedly looted and destroyed property and assaulted children and elderly persons. Kerosene was poured into stored food grains and grocery items, and the attackers, including police personnel, reportedly urinated in cooking vessels. The police raid was apparently in retaliation for a decision made by residents of the Kookal Panchayat to boycott national elections.

In Andhra Pradeshs Kurnool district as many as thirty low-caste villagers were killed in the early morning hours of July 16. The victims were hacked to death, and their bodies were thrown into a house which was then set on fire. At least one hundred other houses were burned to the ground. High-caste villagers were believed responsible for carrying out the massacre in apparent retaliation for the murder of a high-caste community leader by members of the Peoples War Group (PWG), a Marxist-Leninist organization that has advocated the use of violence to achieve land reform. Many Dalits in the area supported the PWG, and most of those killed belonged to Dalit communities. Local police did not appear on the scene for more than ten hours after the massacre. Dalit villagers told local human rights investigators that many of their attackers remained in the village after the massacre and appeared to have police protection.

On February 16, Bombay High Court Justice B.N. Srikrishna, who conducted the one-man commission of inquiry into the 1992-93 Bombay riots, presented his findings to the Shiv Sena-BJP government of Maharashtra. The report, released to the state legislature on August 6, determined that the riots were the result of a deliberate and systematic effort to incite violence against Muslims, some of whom had carried out spontaneous and sometimes violent protests following the destruction of the Babri Masjid. More than 700 people died in the riots, the vast majority of them Muslims. The report singled out Shiv Sena leader Bal Thackeray and Chief Minister Manohar Joshi as responsible for inciting violence and recommended that they be prosecuted. The report stated:[T]here is no doubt that the Shiv Sena ... took the lead in organizing attacks on Muslims and their properties.... Despite widespread calls by the political opposition, human rights groups, womens rights groups, and other community groups, for the prosecution of the perpetrators, the Shiv Sena-BJP government refused to adopt the commissions recommendations and instead labeled the report anti-Hindu. The political opposition planned to petition the state Supreme Court to order the prosecution of Thackeray and Joshi.

Civilians continued to be victims of military operations against armed opposition groups seeking autonomy in Indias northeastern states. In September, Home Ministry Additional Secretary P.D. Shenoy announced that India planned to recruit former members of the separatist United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) into its security forces, including the army, to provide them with employment. As in past years, surrendered ULFA members (called SULFA) who aided regular security forces in counterinsurgency operations were implicated in extrajudicial executions. After the August 10 killing of SULFA businessman Tapan Datta and a friend, SULFA agents reportedly retaliated by killing the elder brother of ULFA chairman Arabinda Rajkhowa, four members of the family of ULFAs publicity secretary, Mithinga Daimary (Deepak Das), and the elder brother of Krishna Gogoi, leader of ULFAs Dihing regional unit.

Armed opposition groups in northeastern states carried out attacks on security personnel and government officials and engaged in arbitrary killings of noncombatants, hostage-taking and extortion. In April an armed group in Tripura abducted thirty bus passengers and held six for ransom after releasing the rest. In June suspected members of the All Tripura Tiger Force kidnapped a tea estate owner and killed his son. Bodo separatists and members of ULFA carried out bombings that killed civilians at various points in 1998. Ethnically based separatist groups in Assam, Tripura Manipur and Mizoram were all accused of attacks on villagers of rival ethnic groups. Between December 1997 and May 1998, ethnic clashes in Mizoram reportedly caused more than 3,500 families to flee to Tripura and Assam. On July 29, five women and six children, all Bodos, were killed by Santhal gunmen in Assams Kokrajhar district. In September, at least 700 houses were burned in ethnic clashes between members of the Bodo and Santhal tribes in Assam. By mid-September, some forty people had been killed and thousands had fled their homes.

In Singrauli, Madhya Pradesh, activists protesting environmental degradation and resettlement of local villagers at the site of the World Bank-financed National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC) power plant and ash dikes continued to suffer physical attacks, arbitrary arrests and the destruction of property. In May, the Independent Monitoring Panel (IMP), established in response to a review of the project conducted by the World Banks Inspection Panel, set up an office in the Singrauli region to resolve disputes related to compensation and violations of civil and political rights. At the same time, construction of ash dikes in the highly disputed Mithini village area was halted pending resolution of compensation-related grievances.
Indonesia and East Timor
Indonesia had one of the most tumultuous years in its modern history: economic collapse spurred student-led demands for political reform, bringing President Soehartos three-decade rule to an end in May. His successor and proteg, Vice-President B.J. Habibie, tried to distance himself from his patron by releasing political prisoners, lifting political controls, and setting a timetable for free elections, but these measures won him little legitimacy from a skeptical populace. The army, traditionally the countrys most powerful institution next to the president, appeared weaker than any time in recent memory as more and more evidence of past abuses came to light. Rising prices, food shortages, and massive unemployment led to outbreaks of violence throughout the year, much of it directed against the small ethnic Chinese minority, widely resented for their disproportionate control of the retail economy. Poor but resource-rich provinces used the newly open political atmosphere to demand more economic autonomy. These demands, together with major progress in negotiations between Portugal and Indonesia over political autonomy for East Timor and renewed pro-independence activity in Irian Jaya, led to the renewal of a long dormant debate about federalism as well as widely expressed fears for the countrys disintegration. By years end, there was no sign of economic recovery, and it was impossible to know whether Indonesia was on its way to pluralist democracy, prolonged upheaval, or both.
Human Rights Developments
The year began with the free fall of the Indonesian currency, an outbreak of anti-Chinese riots, and the beginning of student protests with a view to influencing the outcome of the planned session in March of the unopposed re-selection of President Soeharto by Indonesias version of an electoral college. The economic decline and political unrest were both exacerbated by Soehartos announcement on January 21 that B.J. Habibie, an unpopular Cabinet minister with a penchant for expensive showcase projects such as a national airline industry, was his choice for vice-president. Soehartos son-in-law, Gen. Prabowo Subiyanto, helped fuel anti-Chinese sentiment by making veiled references to traitors who took their money abroad.

As campus protests escalated and security tightened in February, well-known political activists began to disappear, abducted from their homes or workplaces in what was clearly an organized operation. On March 10, Soeharto was duly reappointed to a seventh five-year term, and the consensus among political observers at home and abroad was that only violence in the streets followed by army intervention, or Soehartos death, could prevent him serving out the full term. Discontent escalated with the announcement on March 14 of a new Cabinet that included Soehartos daughter and several cronies; it was seen as a clear sign that Soeharto had no interest in reform of any kind.

Student protest became a lightning rod for demands for change, gaining widespread support from the middle class and among the political elite, including parts of the military. International outrage over the disappearance of activists and pressure for clarification of their whereabouts led to the led to the creation of a new organization, Kontras, to work on behalf of the families of the disappeared, and to the eventual resurfacing of several young men in April and early May. Pius Lustrilanang, the first to give a public account of his abduction, torture, and detention, set an example for others; the evidence they produced pointed directly to the involvement of the army special forces, Kopassus, and to General Prabowo, former Kopassus commander.

On May 4, the government announced a gasoline price hike, fulfilling strictures set by the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Riots erupted immedately, with the worst violence in Medan, North Sumatra, much of it anti-Chinese. On May 9, Soeharto left the country for a meeting in Egypt. On May 12, four students were shot dead, apparently by army or police snipers, following a demonstration at Trisakti University in Jakarta. The next day, the worst violence Jakarta had seen in decades broke out and continued for three days, with security forces standing by as mobs torched Chinese shops and homes. Over 1,000 died, many of them non-Chinese shoppers or would-be looters trapped in burning shopping malls. Foreign embassies and companies evacuated staff and dependents, and thousands of Chinese-Indonesians fled the country.

President Soeharto cut short his visit to Cairo and returned home, but it was too late. Political support among those closest to him had evaporated, and by May 19, student protestors had occupied the national parliament building, with tacit military endorsement. Promising at first to step down after new laws were drafted and an election held at some indeterminate time in the future, Soeharto then bowed to public pressure (and the resignation of half his Cabinet); on May 21, he turned over power to Vice-President Habibie. In a development of almost equal import, General Wiranto, commander of the armed forces and defense minister, emerged the victor in a power struggle with General Prabowo, whose allies were suspected not only of the disappearances but also of shooting the Trisakti students and organizing the Jakarta riots. (In August, Prabowo admitted his role in the disappearances to a military investigating board and was dismissed from the army; in September, it was announced that he would be court-martialled, even though he was now a civilian.)

President Habibie formed a new Cabinet that dropped the most notorious cronies and political hardliners, but his efforts to include opposition figures failed; such was his association with Soeharto that none agreed to serve. Within days, he announced a series of steps designed to demonstrate his reformist credentials, including the release of two of the countrys best-known political prisoners, labor leader Muchtar Pakpahan and former opposition parliamentarian Sri Bintang Pamungkas. By late August, more than one hundred other prisoners had been freed, with the notable exception of East Timorese leader Xanana Gusmao; Budiman Soejatmiko, Dita Sari, and other political organizers associated with the leftist Peoples Democratic Party (Partai Rakyat Demokratik or PRD); and several men linked to a coup attempt in 1965.

In June, Habibie announced an action plan for human rights that included ratification of key human rights treaties. By the end of the year, the government had ratified the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the International Labour Organizations Convention 87 Concerning Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organize.

Ordering the Justice Ministry to draft new laws on political parties and elections to be presented to the Peoples Consultative Assembly in late 1998, Habibie also lifted controls on political party formation, including a Soeharto-era ban on the PRD. By September, more than seventy parties had registered with the Home Ministry, most of which were likely to lack the mass base necessary under a new draft law to compete in parliamentary elections.

The print and broadcast media enjoyed virtually full freedom after Soehartos fall for the first time in thirty years, and well over one hundred licenses for new publications were issued by the Ministry of Information between June and August. The news magazine Tempo , banned in 1994, reopened in October.
A controversial draft law on demonstrations was tabled in July, designed to place curbs on any demonstrations of more than one hundred persons. The National Human Rights Commission and rights activists denounced the bill as a curb on internationally recognized rights, and by October, it had become the first piece of legislation in years defeated by popular protest. (A less restrictive version was passed in its place.)

July saw a number of issues come to the fore that remained unresolved by the end of the year. Violence against the ethnic Chinese, and ethnic Chinese women in particular, was one. Soon after the May riots in the cities of Jakarta, Solo, and Surabaya, reports began to emerge of mass rapes and other forms of sexual assault against ethnic Chinese women in a systematic, organizedfashion. The reports were followed by graphic descriptions and photographs that appeared on the Internet and that became the basis for public protests from Beijing to Los Angeles. General Wiranto announced in June that an army investigation had uncovered no evidence of rape; rights organizations said victims were too frightened or traumatized to come forward or had fled the country. The government appointed a fact-finding team to look into the May violence, including rape, on July 24. (As of late October, the team had not issued its final report.) In August, the Internet photos were conclusively proven false, and questions had arisen about some of the rape data initially collected. Advocacy groups reporting the rapes meanwhile were subjected to harassment and theats from unidentified callers, while racist groups emerging in the new climate of free speech played on the fear of ethnic Chinese by warning of new assaults on the community. The murder in October of Ita Martadinata, a Jakarta woman whose mother was deeply involved in the rapes investigation, only increased that fear.

Also in July, a series of pro-independence demonstrations broke out in towns across Irian Jaya on the anniversary of a 1961 proclamation of independence by an armed nationalist group, the Free Papua Movement (Organisasi Papua Merdeka or OPM). In Jayapura and Biak, the army opened fire after attacks on local security personnel. One student and one policeman died in Jayapura; the death toll in Biak was at least one demonstrators and perhaps more, as the military tried to suppress information on casualties. Rights groups said the demonstrations had been inspired in part by a letter sent on May 22 by members of the U.S. Congress, urging, among other things, a political dialogue on Irian Jaya. The deaths fueled separatist sentiment, coming as they did after revelations in May of grave human rights abuses in the area around Mapnduma, Jayawijaya district, during military operations there in 1996-97 following the armys rescue of hostages taken by the OPM.

These revelations, as well as new evidence on the widespread atrocities in Aceh, a region on the northern tip of Sumatra, during counterinsurgency operations there in 1990-91, generated pressure on the government to look more systematically into past abuses. (The deportation of hundreds of Acehnese migrants from Malaysia in late March caused an international outcry, as some of those sent back were clearly refugees who had fled Aceh in the early 1990s and had good reason to fear persecution in Indonesia. (See entry on Malaysia.)

In August, as the National Commission on Human Rights was looking into the possiblity of setting up a truth commission for Indonesia, a respected Muslim leader, Abdurrahman Wahid, announced the establishment of a non-governmental Commission on Truth and National Reconciliation to look into past abuses in Aceh, Irian Jaya, and East Timor. Not to be outdone, the government in early September announced the formation of a National Reconciliation Commission, a body whose mandate did not appear to include exposing the truth or seeking justice.

Attention to past military abuses also led to demands for troop withdrawals in special security zones called military operation areas ( daerah operasi militer or DOM). Most of Aceh was considered such an area, as were parts of Jayawijaya district in Irian Jaya. In August, General Wiranto apologized to the people of Aceh for the abuses they had suffered and declared the DOM status revoked. But on September 2, as troops began to leave from the city of Lhokseumawe, popular anger boiled over. Violence directed against the departing soldiers soon turned into a more general riot, amid accusations that the rioting had been sparked by the military elements themselves to ensure their continued presence in Aceh (where some had lucrative commercial operations).

On East Timor, the U.N. brokered an agreement between the Habibie government and Portugal on August 5 in which both sides committed themselves work toward an agreement on wide-ranging autonomy for the former Portuguese colony considered by Indonesia to be its twenty-seventh province and by the U.N. to be under Portuguese administration. Indonesia agreed to drop its insistence that a precondition of negotiations must be acceptance of Indonesian sovereignty, although it continued to reject the idea, widely supported inside East Timor, of a referendum on independence. Pro-independence demonstrations took place before and after the agreement, without interference from the army. Shortly before the agreement was signed, Indonesia announced it was pulling combat troops out of the territory, but days after the first 398 were pulled out, another 263 army health personnel and police were sent in. By August, some 1,000 soldiers had been sent home, but East Timorese leaders did not consider the withdrawals significant, as thousands of troops, not considered combat forces, remained in place.

In September, fresh violence broke out across the country as the impact of the economic collapse became increasingly felt. Riots in Medan and Bagan siapi-api in North Sumatra and in Kebumen and Cilacap, Central Java were particularly violent, with Chinese shops and homes again targeted. The governments response included allegations that the unrest was due to communist forces.

Beginning in July, murders began of suspected practitioners of black magic in East Java by mysterious groups of men called ninjas . By October, over 140 people had been killed, and over ninety of those belonged to one Muslim organization, the Nahdatul Ulama (NU). The NU had aligned itself with popular opposition leaders Megawati Soekarnoputri against President Habibie, and its leaders and the East Java police were among many suggesting the ninjas were linked to the army. By late October, revenge killings against suspected ninjas had begun.
The reform process continued to lurch forward, with a major debate shaping up on the role of the armed forces and the announcement in September of the repeal of the hated Anti-Subversion Law that had been used repeatedly by Soeharto to detain political opponents.
Japan
The use of the death penalty, government policy on comfort women, childrens rights, and asylum for refugees were key human rights concerns in Japan this year. Japan played a generally constructive role on the creation of the International Criminal Court (ICC). Implementation of guidelines on the use of Official Development Assistance (ODA) to promote human rights and democracy was inconsistent, and policies toward human rights abusers tended to follow the U.S. lead, sometimes with different strategies and tactics.

Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto resigned in July, but the Liberal Democratic Party maintained control of the government, and his successor, Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi, (former foreign minister), continued the same basic foreign and domestic policies related to human rights.
Human Rights Developments
On April 27, in a landmark ruling, a Yamaguchi district court ordered the Japanese government to pay U.S. $2,300 each to three South Korean comfort women forced into sexual slavery by Japanese soldiers during World War II. The ruling was a rejection of existing policy denying government compensation to individuals.

During South Korean President Kim Dae-jungs visit to Tokyo in October, the Japanese emperor, Akihito, and Prime Minister Obuchi made the strongest official apology thus far for the abuses of the past, expressing Japans remorseful repentance for the unbearable damage and pain inflicted on the Korean people during colonial rule. But the government announced no changes in its policy on comfort women.

Japan continued to use the death penalty, with some twenty-eight executions carried out in secret since 1993. In June, three convicted murderers were hanged, but the Justice Ministry refused to give notice of the executions, claiming that announcing them in advance would cause relatives too much distress. Japan routinely keeps death row prisoners in solitary confinement for years and prevents access by lawyers and physicians during the week before their execution.

Japan continued to refuse to grant asylum to refugees, though refugees from Burma were still allowed to stay legally in Japan on a temporary basis. According to the Ministry of Justice, in 1997 (the latest figures available) a total of 242 people applied for refugee status from countries worldwide; only one person was given asylum.

The government played a high-profile role at the ICC conference in Rome, backing the creation of the ICC. Following the appointment of a U.N. Special Representative on Children and Armed Conflict, Japan announced a grant of U.S. $100,000 to assist with his work and offered to sponsor a symposium in Asia on child soldiers. At the annual session of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights in Geneva, the Japanese delegation usefully highlighted the refusal of Burma to grant access to the U.N.s special rapporteur. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs marked the fiftieth anniversary of the U.N. Universal Declaration of Human Rights by holding its third symposium on human rights in the Asia-Pacific Region (January 27-28), with Mary Robinson, the U.N. high commissioner for human rights, as the keynote speaker.

Japans ODA program remained the largest in the world for the seventh year in a row, with U.S. $9.3 billion in loans disbursed in FY 1997, despite a 10 percent cutback. Japan continued to voice its commitment to use ODA to promote democratization and human rights but also stressed positive linkage, the use of aid as an incentive, for example the effort to encourage free market reforms in Vietnam, over negative linkage such as aid suspension in the case of Nigeria.

The application of the ODA charters guidelines on democratization and human rights remained both highly inconsistent and erratic, but the Japanese government was far more consistent in applying the charters principles dealing with military spending and development of nuclear weapons. For example, almost immediately following Indias nuclear tests in May, Japan cancelled $30 million in grants to the Indian government and said it would consider suspending larger aid programs. It imposed similar sanctions on Pakistan when it conducted nuclear tests later that month.

The economic crisis in Southeast Asia had serious implications for Tokyos investment and trade relations. In May, then-Foreign Minister Obuchi toured the region, noting that Japan had committed $37 billion in aid for the region while also calling for greater transparency and accountability.
Malaysia
The September arrest of Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim and some of his close associates under the Internal Security Act (ISA) marked a sharp turn toward repression in Malaysia as the once booming economy went into decline. Tens of thousands of foreign migrant workers, most of them Indonesian and Bangladeshi, were arrested and sent home during the year, amid allegations of severe overcrowding in immigration camps and police brutality during deportation. In some cases, individuals with a valid claim to refugee status were deported with the migrants. Restrictions on freedom of expression continued, with the trial of migrant rights activist Irene Fernandez on charges of malicious reporting entering its third year. The government was quick to punish any signs of what it saw as communal incitement.
Human Rights Developments
The arrest of Anwar Ibrahim, once heir-apparent to Prime Minister Mahathir, dwarfed all other news. A power struggle between the two that had been building for several years intensified as the economic crisis worsened, with Anwar increasingly taking a pro-free market approach sympathetic to foreign investors and the International Monetary Fund, and Mahathir blaming the West and Western currency speculators in particular for his countrys economic plight. By mid-year, borrowing the reform slogans from neighboring Indonesia, Anwars supporters within the ruling United Malays National Organisation (UMNO) party were making corruption and nepotism major political issues, with Mahathir the unstated target.

In May, 50 Dalil Kenapa Anwar Tidak Boleh Jadi PM (50 Reasons Why Anwar Cannot Become Prime Minister), a book containing graphic sexual allegations as well as accusations of corruption against Anwar, was published in Kuala Lumpur. In early June, the book was circulated at the annual meeting of UMNO. It was during that meeting that Mahathir apparently began strengthening his control over the party and making moves against Anwar. Days later, Anwar obtained a court injunction to prevent further distribution of the book and filed a defamation complaint against the author.

In July, a visit by the Indonesian opposition leader Amien Rais led to more pointed comparisons of Malaysia and Indonesia. Domestic critics accused Mahathir of tolerating cronyism, and the international financial press and the IMF demanded greater transparency in government and UMNO-managed enterprises. The editors of Utusan Malaysia , a Malay-language newspaper and magazine group, and Berita Harian , another prominent Malay newspaper, were forced to resign in July, allegedly because of the prominence their papers had given to the transparency issue. Both were supporters of Anwar.

In August, police charged the author of the 50 Reasons book with malicious publishing of false news. But in September, the judge who had banned the books distributiona pro-Anwar decisionwas transferred, raising concerns among Malaysian lawyers about a judiciary whose independence was already problematic.

Mahathir formally dismissed Anwar on September 2, accusing him of precisely the inappropriate behavior detailed in the 50 Reasons book. Anwar claimed he had been fired because of his efforts to warn Mahathir of public anger over corruption and cronyism and growing popular demands for reform. Anwars dismissal extended to all his positions: deputy prime minister, finance minister, and deputy chair of the National Economic Action Council (NEAC). On September 4 he was expelled from UMNO.

Between September 6 and 15, several close associates of Anwar, including his adopted brother, were arrested under the ISA, some of them charged with sodomy or other forms of sexual misconduct banned by Malaysian law. The allegations had all been outlined in the 50 Reasons book. Earlier, in August, police had arrested an Anwar business associate, S. Nallakaruppan, under the ISA for unlawful possession of ammunition. Affidavits later filed at the High Court also accused Nallakaruppan of arranging some of Anwars sexual liaisons and suggested that because they traveled together abroad, Nallakruppan may have had access to official secrets.

On the evening of September 20 Anwar was arrested at his home by police, after some 35,000 of his supporters marched todemand the prime ministers resignation. Also arrested following the demonstration were six others including UMNO youth leader Zahid Hamidi and several officers of the Malaysia Islamic Youth Organization (Angkatan Belia Islam Malaysia or ABIM). All were detained under the ISA, but they were freed unconditionally on September 30.

When Anwar appeared for the first time in public on September 29 to be formally charged on ten counts of corruption and unnatural sex, he had a black eye and a bruised right hand and accused his captors of torturing him. Anwars injuries caused international outrage. Prime Minister Mahathir accused Anwar of beating himself, while the public prosecutor announced on September 30 that Anwars claims of ill-treatment would be investigated. On October 14, Anwar was released from ISA detention but remanded to prison to await trial. He was expected to be tried on four of the corruption charges from November 2 to 14.

Hundreds of Anwar supporters were arrested in the weeks following his arrest as demonstrations against the government increased. The government banned all meetings to discuss reformasi or reform, the word used as a slogan both by Anwar and by Indonesian students in their effort to bring down Soeharto.

Anwars arrest drew worldwide attention to the continued use of the ISA, long used by the Mahathir government and its predecessors against political opponents. In recent years, it had been used less to punish free expression than publication of false passports and travel documents for undocumented migrant workers. Of 198 people known to be in detention under the ISA during the year, the overwhelming majority were detained for facilitating the illegal entry of foreign workers into Malaysia.

The Malaysian government continued to use other broadly worded laws to punish its critics. On August 25, outspoken opposition parliamentarian Lim Guan Eng was jailed after the federal court upheld his conviction for sedition and malicious publishing of false news in connection with statements he had made in 1995. He had accused the attorney general of mishandling a case involving the chief minister of Malaccas alleged statutory rape of a schoolgirl.

Irene Fernandez, head of the Kuala Lumpur-based advocacy organization called Tenaganita (Womens Force), continued to face the possibility of three years imprisonment as her trial on charges of malicious publishing entered its third year. Fernandez had published a short memorandum in July 1995 on abuses in immigration detention centers. The government maintained that the report was inaccurate.

In August, a case involving Param Cumaraswamy, a Malaysian attorney serving as U.N. special rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers, was referred to the International Court of Justice. He had been sued in 1997 for sixty million ringit in the Malaysian courts after he had alleged corporate interference in the Malaysian judiciary. He made the allegations in connection with his work as special rapporteur, and the Malaysian government refused to recognize the immunity granted him by the United Nations secretary-general.

The government put a high priority on preventing communal violence and punishing any activities seen as a possible incitement to violence. In February, the conversion of a Muslim woman named Nuraishah to Catholicism in order to marry a Catholic man caused a furor and demands from conservative Muslims that the ISA be used against apostates. Most newspapers voluntarily refrained from printing any stories about it, but the police inspector-general also warned that publicity given such incidents could be inflammatory. Nuraishah alleged that Malaysian police helped her family, who were opposed to the marriage, abduct her from her lawyers office; they also arrested the lawyer but later released him. The couple was forced to flee Malaysia.

On September 24, four people were charged with incitement under Section 505 (b) of the penal code for spreading rumors on the Internet about communal riots. They were to be tried separately later in the year or in 1999. On August 7, news appeared on the Internet, which is widely used in Malaysia, about riots in the Chow Kit area of Kuala Lumpur. The riots were said to have involved attacks by Indonesian migrant workers armed with machetes against ethnic Chinese or Malays. (There were different versions of the reports.) Given the attention in the Malaysian press to anti-Chinese violence in Indonesia, the news set off a wave of panic-buying in Kuala Lumpur and traffic jams as people tried to get out. In fact, there were no riots, and police later detained four people suspected of circulating the stories. On August 17, after the four, all ethnic Chinese, had been arrested, the attorney general warned that anyone who disseminated false information over the Internet could be charged under a number of laws, including the Sedition Act, Defamation Act, Broadcasting Act as well as the new Communications and Multimedia Act. He added that the police also had the right to detain offenders under the Internal Security Act without consulting the attorney general. According to the Internet service provider, Mimos Bhd, the four had pretended to be members of different ethnic groups depending on the ethnicity of the recipients of their messages. The government had asked Mimos to help police with their investigation into the source of the rumors, and Mimos obliged by providing confidential identification details of the four. It told the press that it would not invade the privacy of its users without specific reasons, such as a request by authorities. The four faced a maximum two years jail or fine or both if convicted.

The Malaysian government remained extremely sensitive toward anything that might cause an outbreak of ethnic violence. In mid-March the government intervened to settle a conflict between Muslims and Hindus in Penang, where Hindus had tried to build a temple within twenty meters of a mosque. Over 180 people were arrested when the conflict was at its height, but most were questioned and released; some forty remained in detention in the weeks immediately following.

On September 21 the British Broadcasting Corporation and Independent Television News (U.K.) protested Malaysias jamming of broadcast signals to prevent them from relaying coverage of demonstrations over the arrest of sacked Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim. Other international broadcast companies, including New Zealand Broadcasting, were also reportedly stopped from broadcasting riot pictures.

The economic downturn became an official rationale for the ongoing campaign to arrest and deport undocumented migrants. Between January 1 and April 30, the Home Ministry reported 30,000 deportations. On March 26, eight migrants and a policemanwere killed in a riot sparked by migrants from the Indonesian special region of Aceh, on the northern tip of Sumatra, who were protesting their imminent deportation. Riots also occurred in three other camps where Acehnese inmates were detained. Some 545 Acehnese were deported shortly thereafter, some of whom had been acknowledged by UNHCR as refugees with a valid fear of persecution in Indonesia; some suffered serious injuries, including gunshot wounds, when police tried to break up the protest. Malaysian NGOs and international press were threatened with lawsuits for reporting allegations of police abuse during deportation operations. On March 28, UNHCR officially (and unsuccessfully) requested the Malaysian government to stop deporting Acehnese and to grant access to the immigration centers. On March 30, twelve Acehnese were among fourteen migrants who forced their way into the UNHCR compound in Kuala Lumpur demanding protection; all had escaped from the Lenggeng immigration detention center in Malacca during the March 26 riots. On April 10, a group of thirty-five Acehnese, many of whom were escapees from Lenggeng, entered the U.S., Swiss, French, and Royal Brunei diplomatic compounds in Kuala Lumpur to demand protection. The latter three embassies called the police, and twenty-seven Acehnese were arrested. The governments in question ignored international protests and demands that, at the least, all be permitted interviews with UNHCR. The U.S. allowed the eight who had entered its embassy compound to stay until third-country resettlement was found. By September, these eight, together with the fourteen who had entered the UNHCR compound, had all departed for Sweden, Denmark, and Norway.
Pakistan
Pakistan continued its slide into economic chaos in 1998. The decision in May to answer Indias five nuclear tests with six of Pakistans own was widely condemned and triggered sanctions from the U.S., Japan and a number of European countries that helped push the economy into a near-collapse. The announcement in September that Pakistan would sign the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty was expected to lead to a lifting of those sanctions. In the aftermath of the tests, the government of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif declared a state of emergency and attempted to suspend all fundamental rights but was checked by the Supreme Court. Human rights were otherwise completely absent from the governments agenda; instead, as sectarian clashes worsened in the course of the year and renewed violence threatened to break out between the ethnically based opposition parties and the government in Karachi, Prime Minister Sharif proposed legislation to further strengthen the powers of the executive in the name of bringing Pakistans constitution into conformity with Islamic law. The bill passed the National Assembly on October 9 but was expected to face major opposition in the Senate.

Despite the economic crisis, Pakistan continued to intervene in two conflicts on its borders, in Afghanistan and Kashmir. In Afghanistan, Pakistan provided substantial financial and military support for the Taliban movement, backing an August offensive that consolidated the militias hold on much of northern Afghanistan. In Kashmir, an escalation in cross-border exchanges between Indian and Pakistani troops along the territorys cease-fire line led to more than one hundred civilian deaths on both sides in July and August.
Human Rights Developments
As the Pakistan government focused on security concerns from outside, little effort was expended to prevent the human rights violations stemming from threats within its borders. In May the Supreme Court struck down a number of provisions of the Anti-Terrorism Act (ATA), a controversial law granting police expanded powers of arrest that was introduced in 1997. However, little action was taken to stem custodial violence by the police, while threats against judges and members of the press further eroded the independence of Pakistans few democratic institutions. The countrys blasphemy laws, which have strengthened criminal penalties for offenses against Islam, continued to serve as tools of religious persecution. In May, a prominent human rights activist committed suicide as an act of protest against the laws.

The Indian and Pakistani prime ministers met for talks at the annual meeting of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) but failed to lay the groundwork for progress on issues of bilateral concern. In September, a government spokesman acknowledged for the first time that Kashmiri militants frequently crossed the cease-fire line seeking refuge in Pakistan. Pakistani authorities claimed that an April 26 attack on a village in Pakistan-controlled Kashmir was carried out by Indian commandos in retaliation for massacres of Hindu civilians on the Indian side. There was no independent confirmation of the charge.

In Karachi, an upsurge in fighting between the Immigrants National Movement (Mohajir Qaumi Movement, or MQM), a group representing Urdu-speaking migrants who left India in 1947, and the United National Movement (Muttahida Qaumi Movement), a group that split from the MQM, left more than 700 dead, 300 in the months of June and July alone. It was the highest number of killings since 1995. On August 12, unidentified gunmen shot four Mohajir men, including one sixteen-year-old, who was the only one to survive. Later that evening nine Muttahida activists, ranging in age from fifteen to twenty-two, were killed and five were injured by unknown gunmen. In apparent retaliation, the next day two Mohajir activists were forced off a public bus before being shot, and two vehicles were burned on the streets. Despite the fact that until September the Muttahida formed part of the governing national coalition headed by Prime Minister Nawaz Sharifs Pakistan Muslim League (PML), some of the attacks were believed to have been perpetrated either with official participation or at least the acquiescence of various government agencies. In September, the Muttahida Qaumi Movement quit Sharifs coalition. After four of its activists were killed on October 5, the group called a strike that sparked widespread rioting in Karachi.

On July 17, unidentified gunmen in Karachi shot dead Salim Reza, vice-president of the militant Sunni Tehrik Pakistan (STP). Two days later, Abdul Wahid Qadri, leader of a breakaway faction of the STP, was assassinated. On September 26 a prominent Shialeader, Safar Ali Bangash, and his son were assassinated. But sectarian violence was by no means restricted to Karachi during the year, as the conflict between extremist Sunni and Shia groups continued in Punjab. The killing of twenty-two Sunnis in Mominpura graveyard in Lahore in January set the stage for the continuing hostilities between the two factions and began a chain of attacks and counterattacks that left 300 dead by the end of May. No one was arrested for any of the killings. On August 11, Shii militant Mehram Ali, convicted under the ATA of a January 1997 Lahore court bombing, was executed. In the face of other government inaction, the execution served to confirm fears among the Shia minority that it would be singled out for punishment.

In May the Supreme Court ordered the government to amend the ATA to bring it into conformity with constitutionally guaranteed protections by granting higher courts the power to hear appeals from the anti-terrorism courts and by eliminating provisions granting police special powers to search private residences, obtain confessions by duress, and shoot without first being fired upon. At this writing, the government was preparing to introduce a revised version of the ATA. While acknowledging the constitutional infirmities of the ATA as originally drafted, however, the courts ruling did not apply retroactively to cases already decided under the ATA, including many that have resulted in death sentences.

Hours after Mays nuclear tests, the Sharif government imposed a state of emergency and sweepingly suspended fundamental rights. However, in response to petitions challenging the legality of the move, the Supreme Court ruled in June that the constitution did not permit the government to suspend all fundamental rights and noted that certain rights, such as freedom of religion and freedom from slavery, could never be suspended. The government then responded with a modified order that permitted the government to make preventive arrests without providing cause and suspended the rights to property and equal protection.

Police torture continued and, with rare exceptions, few official steps were taken to curb it.Violent protests following the custodial killing of a fourteen-year-old boy in Mansehra, in the North-West Frontier Province (NWFP), and the police crackdown that followed drew attention to the pervasive problem of torture in police custody. The boy, Ghulam Jilani, was pronounced dead on May 12 in a Mansehra hospital, where police had taken him hours after arresting him on theft charges. In a first information report filed immediately after Jilanis hospitalization, the police alleged that Jilani had tried to hang himself. According to the autopsy report, however, he died of head injuries. In the riots that followed, mobs attacked the local office of the PML, other government offices, and private businesses. On May 13, police and paramilitary rangers exchanged fire with armed demonstrators, resulting in two official casualties (five by unofficial accounts), as well as over one hundred injuries. A heavy deployment of police, rangers, and the Frontier Constabulary quelled the protests by May 15. In the riots immediate aftermath, Muhammad Nawaz, the head constable of the Mansehra police station, was arrested on murder charges. At the same time, the NWFP government established a tribunal of inquiry into Jilanis death, headed by District and Sessions Judge Syed Yahya Zahid Gilani. As of August, the tribunals findings had not been made public.

In Punjab, the summary execution of a suspect in an alleged encounter with police came to light after a local doctor refused to take the victims bodies into the morgue, in part because the doctor doubted the officersstory. Shortly after the facts became known, the fourteen officers were promoted by the Punjab chief minister.

Ahmadis and Christians continued to be persecuted under Pakistans blasphemy laws. In April a Christian man, Ayub Masih, was sentenced to death for speaking favorably of author Salman Rushdie during a dispute with a Muslim villager. During Masihs hearing, one of the complainants, Mohammad Akram, shot and wounded Masih in the courtroom; despite eyewitness testimony by family members, the police refused to register their complaint against Akram. Based solely on the statements of the complainants, the court handed down a death sentence against Masih on April 27. Protesting the sentence, Bishop John Joseph of Faisalabad, a longtime activist for religious minorities, shot himself on May 6. It was widely believed that Masihs accusers hoped to drive the Christian family from their village and gain control over the familys land. Although Pakistans Minister for Law and Justice Khalid Anwar acknowledged the possibility, noting that there is no doubt that people, for personal reasons, file false cases [...] and judges are under great pressure not to acquit the accused, no progress was made toward reforming the laws.

The abusive nature of Pakistans Hudood Ordinances, which prescribe punishments for certain offenses, was highlighted in the context of conflicts over intertribal marriages. In February, Riffat Afridi, a Pashtun woman in Karachi, eloped with Kanwar Ahsan, a member of the Mohajir community. In response, the Pashtun community called a strike in Karachi; two people were killed and dozens injured in the violent clashes that followed. Afridis family and other Pashtuns filed charges that Afridi had been kidnapped by Ahsan and claimed that she was already married to one of her cousins. The police detained Ahsan, but when they attempted to bring him to court for a hearing, a group of Pashtuns, allegedly including some of Afridis male relatives, opened fire in the courthouse. Ahsan survived, and the court acquitted him of the charges. Fearing further retaliation by the Pashtun community, the couple sought asylum abroad.

The Pakistan Commissionerate for Afghan Refugees (CAR), the body responsible for security in Afghan refugee camps, has also been responsible for abuses. On April 6, two Afghan women were reportedly raped after being abducted from a bus traveling from Nasir Bagh refugee camp to Peshawar. The driver was arrested but was released after he apparently paid a bribe to the police. Complaints from the refugees prompted CAR to investigate the case, and the driver was reportedly rearrested. Refugees also reported routine harassment by the Pakistan police, who demanded to see the refugees papers and threatened to arrest them or demanded bribes.
Sri Lanka
Human Rights Developments
Little progress was made in 1998 towards a political settlement of the governments fifteen-year conflict with the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), and as abuses by all parties to the conflict continued, so did political battles over government proposals for constitutional reform. Efforts to identify, redress and prosecute war-related rights violations moved slowly. In January, the government made good its promise to release reports of inquiries into more than 16,000 disappearances dating back as far as 1988, but thousands more remain to be investigated. The year also saw the first severe punishment of government personnel for human rights violations in the course of the conflict (a gang rape, disappearance and multiple murder that resulted in the death penalty). But the vast majority of outstanding casesmany involving extrajudicial killings by security forcesremained unresolved, and new violations continued.

Rancorous disputes over approaches to ending the ongoing conflict with the LTTE dominated political news in Sri Lanka. Debate focused on acceptable terms for negotiating with the LTTE and administrative arrangements for ethnic power sharing. A ruling Peoples Alliance (PA) proposal to devolve greater political power to regional councils, including a Tamil-administered one, was opposed by the main opposition United National Party (UNP), Sinhala nationalists and influential Buddhist clergy who favored a unitary state with strong central authority. The government made clear its position that a political consensus among the entire Sinhala polity was a prerequisite for negotiations with the LTTE. President Kumaratunga also declared negotiations to be conditional on the LTTE giving up its key demand for a separate state and rejected its calls for third-party mediation. In September Kumaratunge accused the UNP of conspiring to overthrow the government after the party called for unconditional talks with the LTTE and she learned that a UNP member of parliament had met with LTTE leaders.

Amid these political battles, the army continued its campaign in the northern Vanni region for control of a key highway that would give it land access to the former LTTE stronghold of Jaffna. The operation, code named Jaya Sikuru or Sure Victory, was launched in mid-May 1997 and has been the longest in the history of the conflict. Censorship of war reporting and restricted access to conflict areas made independent monitoring of abuses difficult, but reports continued of civilians killed and wounded in aerial bombardment, shelling and gunfire. After attacks in June when at least twenty were reported killed and fifty injured, hundreds of demonstrators petitioned government authorities in the Vanni to protect civilian lives. Shortages of food and essential supplies were reported in conflict areas. Hundreds of thousands remained internally displaced mid-year; hundreds sought safety in India, others died in the attempt.

Hundreds of deaths and injuries of civilians were also reported during army operations in the east, which received much less international attention. As in the north, both security personnel stationed there and ex-militant paramilitary forces working alongside them were accused of extrajudicial killings, torture, and illegal and arbitrary detentions of persons suspected of LTTE links. In one of the few cases where official action was taken, on February 1 in Thambalagamam, Trincomalee district, officers from the Bharathipuram police post and local home guards reportedly arrested and killed eight young men in retaliation for an attack by the LTTE on police in the area the night before. Police arrested forty-two, thirty-nine of whom had been released on bail by mid-June.

Tamil politicians and human rights organizations protested the security forces continued use of homeguards and armed ex-militant Tamil groups to aid in security operations, as spotters to identify suspected LTTE members, and to detain and interrogate suspects. They have been accused of murder, abduction, extortion, assault, illegal detention, torture, and forced conscription.

Large-scale arbitrary arrests of Tamils based almost solely on their ethnicity continued in many parts of the country, particularly after major attacks attributed to the LTTE. In the north and east, residents complained of beatings, torture, and public humiliation of persons detained during searches, and of arrested youths being used for forced labor. In Colombo, where thousands of mostly short-term arrests occurred, protests by Tamil politicians in April after a midnight roundup of more than 1,200 people led the government to propose improved procedures for registration of Tamil arrivals in the city and the establishment of government-run guest housessuggestions that concerned human rights defenders, who feared their potential abuse. In July, complaints over a number of roundups conducted prior to the SAARC (South Asian Area Regional Cooperation) summit convinced President Kumaratunge to appoint a special presidential committee to deal with complaints of harassment of Tamil civilians.

The LTTE was blamed for many deaths of noncombatants in 1998, in bombings, assassinations, and at least one public execution. On January 26, the Sri Lankan government banned the LTTE after blaming it for the truck bombing the Temple of the Tooth in Kandy, an important Buddhist shrine. The attack damaged the entrance to the temple and killed seventeen people. In three separate incidents in February, March, and August bombings attributed to the LTTE killed nearly fifty people and wounded more than 270.

A number of political assassinations in Jaffna in 1998 were also attributed to the LTTE. Army Brig. Larry Wijeratne was killed by a suicide bomber on May 14, 1998. On May 17, Sarojini Yogeswaran, mayor of Jaffna city, was killed by an unidentified gunman. On September 11, her successor, Pon Sivapalan, died from wounds sustained in the explosion of a powerful mine hidden in the Jaffna municipal council. Also killed was Jaffnas top army officer, Brig. Susantha Mendis, along with six army and police officers and several civilians.

The LTTE continued to detain Tamils with dissenting viewpoints as political prisoners. In August LTTE forces in Kilinnochchi arrested four Tamil members of the Trotskyist Socialist Equality Party of Sri Lanka. Three were freed September 13 after almost a month and a half in captivity; a fourth was was released September 16 after being held for more than two weeks.

Independent press coverage of the war has been difficult since 1995, when the Defense Ministry introduced regulations barring journalists from the north except during infrequent visits organized under military escort. In June, the situation deteriorated further when, for the third time under the Peoples Alliance (PA) government, strict censorship rules were imposed on war reporting,punishable under emergency regulations. This time the government also banned reporting on the conduct and transfer of security personnel. News services noted that background on the ethnic dynamics of the war was frequently censored.

On August 4, the Sri Lankan government reimposed a state of emergency throughout the country for the preservation of public order. The move permitted President Kumaratunga to cancel five provincial council elections, scheduled for August 28, in which critics expected the party to do poorly. The military claimed it would be difficult to provide security for candidates and polling booths. Members of the Free Media Movement (FMM) filed a case in the Supreme Court accusing the government of denying Sri Lankans the right to exercise their franchise.

Human rights and media organizations also protested a rash of politically motivated attacks on journalists in 1998. Two air force officers, a squadron leader and a flight lieutenant, were arrested for their February attempt to abduct senior military correspondent Iqbal Athas from his home and threaten his family. The men were directed to appear in court on October 14. Also in February, Pradeep Dhamaratne, a correspondent for the Sinhala language Dinamina , was hospitalized for injuries suffered when he was arrested and tortured after publishing a report linking local police to the illicit liquor trade. An inquiry led to the censure of an officer implicated in the incident, but Dhamaratne continued to receive death threats, and on March 4 his house was burned down. On July 17, unidentified attackers fired anti-tank bullets at the home of Sunday Leader editor Lasantha Wickrematunge after his paper published allegations of government corruption.

On August 26, Thadshanamurthy Mathusoothanan, a columnist for Saranihar , the Tamil newspaper published by the human rights organization MIRJE (Movement for Inter-Racial Justice and Equality) and editor of another Tamil bulletin, was abducted off a street in Colombo and held incommunicado for seventeen hours until journalist friends traced him to police custody, where he was detained under emergency regulations pending investigation. His father, who attempted to visit him in detention, was denied access; on August 28 his two younger brothers were also arrested.

Official efforts to account for tens of thousands of persons disappeared at the hands of the security forces continued. As it promised in 1997, the Sri Lankan government made public the reports of three regional commissions of inquiry into some 16,742 reported disappearances dating back to 1988. In July, a new commission with islandwide jurisdiction was appointed to investigate and report on about 11,000 complaints left uninvestigated by these earlier commissions. In July, the Civil Rights Movement of Sri Lanka criticized the governments failure to appoint a similar commission to investigate the 600 or more reported disappearances in the Jaffna area after government forces took control of the former LTTE stronghold in mid-1996 or to address the many disappearances of Tamils in eastern Sri Lanka from 1984-1988.

Prosecution of the crimes uncovered in these and other inquiries has been a halting process, although charges have been filed against a number of government personnel. In the first criminal prosecution of its type, on July 3 the Colombo High Court sentenced to death six soldiers and a reserve policeman found guilty of the September 1996 murders of Jaffna schoolgirl Krishanthy Kumarasamy and her mother, teenage brother and neighbor. Five of the accused were also convicted of the rape of Krishanty, and three were found guilty of abduction. Like many Tamil civilians disappeared in security force operations, Krishanthy was abducted from a military checkpoint; her family members and neighbor who attempted to find her were taken from the same checkpoint later that day.

In a related matter, in July after Rajapakse Jayasinghe, a soldier convicted in the Kumarasamy case, claimed that he knew the location of a mass grave containing up to 400 bodies killed and buried by the security forces, the Sri Lankan government ordered police investigations. Three months later, there had been little progress into this or other investigations into reported mass graves. Human rights defenders, concerned about impartiality, called on the Human Rights Commission (HRC) to undertake an independent investigation with the help of international forensic experts, but although an HRC official had planned to travel to Jaffna in October to begin recording testimony from families of the disappeared, his trip was postponed, and there were no exhumations. In several prominent human rights cases before the courts, security personnel accused of gross violations remained on active duty, including eight army officers charged in relation to the disappearancesof at least twenty-five teenagers in Embilipitiya between August 1, 1989 and January 30, 1990.

No progress was made in reopening the notorious Bolgoda Lake case despite government vows in 1997 to expedite it. The case implicated twenty-two Special Task Force (STF) commandos in the 1995 murders of twenty-three Tamil youths whose bodies were found floating in bodies of water near Colombo. The suspects were released on bail in 1996 and resumed their duties.

In August, five senior police officers including a Deputy Inspector General were sent on compulsory leave after the report of a presidential commission established to investigate allegations of torture and extrajudicial executions at a government-run detention center at the Batalanda Housing Estate near Colombo implicated them in the torture and disappearances of a large number of youths in the late 1980s.
Thailand
The most serious human rights issue in Thailand continued to be the Thai governments treatment of refugees, including more than 100,000 Burmese. For Thai citizens, but not for refugees or migrants, the scope for human rights protection increased with the adoption of a new constitution in October 1997. Legal experts and human rights activists pushed during the year for comprehensive legal reforms that would guarantee popular participation and administrative power sharing, protect the independence of the judiciary, and provide for necessary checks on abuse of power by state forces such as the police. As the economic crisis worsened, the new opportunities to make demands on the political system seemed to offer an important outlet for expressing grievances that spared Thailand any major episodes of social unrest during the year. Nevertheless, there were fears that the growing number of unemployed and the governments inability to ease the hardship could still create social and political troubles ahead.
Human Rights Developments
Treatment of refugees continued to be a major cause for concern. Thailand is still not a party to the 1951 U.N. Convention on the Status of Refugees and has no procedures whereby a person can be determined to be a refugee with a well-founded fear of persecution. The government allowed Burmese and Cambodians fleeing armed conflict to stay in camps along Thailands borders but refused to acknowledge that human rights violations in the country of origin other than those associated with armed conflict were a valid reason for needing asylum.

In February, the Thai government began negotiations with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) that would allow UNHCR a formal role for the first time on the Thai-Burmese border. By September, they appeared to have produced an agreement that would result in a limited protection role for UNHCR but one restricted to those refugees in camps on the border and with the primary aim of facilitating eventual repatriation to Burma.

Burmese from ethnic minority groups who were allowed to stay for the most part had access only to camps along the Thai border that were vulnerable to attack by military groups backed by the Burmese army. One such group, the Democratic Karen Buddhist Army (DKBA), renewed its terror campaign against ethnic Karen refugees in Thailand. In a series of attacks on Huay Kaloke, Mawker and Mae La refugee camps during March and April, at least four refugees were killed , over fifty wounded and 10,000 made homeless. The DKBA attempted to defend these attacks by claiming that a number of villagers in its control areas had been killed by guerrillas of the Karen Liberation Army, an insurgent force fighting the Burmese government. The DKBA claimed that attacks had been launched from the refugee camps. The Thai government responded by accelerating its plans to consolidate the more than twenty Karen camps at the beginning of the year into just five or six major sites.

In April the new Thai deputy foreign minister, Sukhumbhand Paribatra, visited Rangoon and was reported in the Thai press as saying that Burmas military rulers had agreed to the UNHCR being involved in assisting displaced Karens in order to secure their voluntary repatriation.

In addition, over 500,000 other displaced persons or illegal migrants from Burma also remained in Thailand but were vulnerable to arrest and deportation even though many were believed to have a valid fear of persecution. By July, the Thai Labor Department reported that foreign workers had vacated 120,000 jobs to make way for Thai workers. Not all of those workers would have been deported, but deportations were clearly on the rise, and serious overcrowding in immigration detention centers had become a major issue by the end of the year. New immigration checkpoints were opened during the year on roads near the Thai border, and anyone detained without proper documentation was subject to instant deportation (and sometimes to abuse, extortion, or theft) without right of appeal.

In February, Thailands Interior Minister Sanan Kachornprasart announced that the government was considering abolishing a1952 law banning communism because it contradicted the new constitution and could be used to restrict citizens rights. The law gives security officials wide powers of arrest, search, and detention. The move was supported by human rights and pro-democracy activists, but army officials, who had long used the law against suspected drug traffickers, said they would only agree to its repeal if a new law was passed enabling them to have the same powers against suspected traffickers.

Reports continued of abuse and extrajudicial killings by Thai police. In January, a violent police assault on protesting workers outside an auto parts factory led to promises that the police department would improve its systems for riot control and take disciplinary action against police found to have employed excessive force. In March, an inmate who escaped from Kabin Buri Prison along with five others and was recaptured on the same day was found hanged in his prison cell. According to witnesses, his body showed signs of fresh injuries and he appeared to have been beaten, leading to speculation that he had been killed by police. The Ministry of the Interior announced in July that it was investigating the killing of a second inmate in the same institution who was shot to death by a prison janitor, reportedly while his ankles were chained. Prison officials alleged he was armed with a knife and attempting to escape.

In July, relatives of three men slain in Hua Hin district called on Thailands director general of police to investigate charges that local police had killed the men and attempted to burn their bodies, apparently to destroy the evidence. They also sought to bar local police from investigating the case. Witnesses charged that the victims were carried to a deserted area in a car with a flashing light on top and were subsequently shot. Gasoline was poured on their bodies, which were thrown onto tires and burned.

On September 16, Salang Bunnag, a suspended deputy police director general, and another high-level police officer failed to appear for the first hearing of the 1996 Suphan Buri murder case in which seventeen police under Salangs command were accused of the extrajudical killings of six drug suspects. Public prosecutors said Salang would be arrested if he failed to show at the next hearing. Since the case was reopened in March, senior investigating officer Anothai Bamrungphong said he had received threatening phone calls; there was also a shooting incident near his house on June 5. The officer said he believed both had been carried out by officers involved in the Suphan Buri incident.

On November 17, 1997, Thailand enacted the Measures in Prevention and Suppression of Trafficking in Women and Children Act, allowing authorities to detain suspected trafficking victims caught in searches of public places, airports, railway and bus stations, seaports, entertainment establishments and factories for as long as ten days for authentication of their travel documents. The law does not permit authorities to detain suspected traffickers who are accompanying victims.

In an effort to bring its laws into accordance with International Labour Organisation (ILO) standards, Thailand enacted a new labor law that came into force on August 19, which included prohibitions of child labor and sex discrimination, outlawed sexual harassment, and regulated working hours, overtime, and benefits.

In July, Thai Foreign Minister Surin Pitsuan made an unsuccessful effort to change the policy of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) of not criticizing fellow members. He proposed a new approach of flexible engagement so that Thailand, for example, would be able to raise concerns about Burma through the ASEAN framework. Supported only by the Philippines foreign minister, the idea was dropped.
Vietnam
Human Rights Developments
The unexpected release of some of the countrys best-known political prisoners was a highlight of the year. Arbitrary detention in substandard prison camps continued, however; press freedoms remained strictly curtailed; independent associations and trade unions were not allowed to operate; and little progress was made in legal reform. Rural unrest that had erupted in 1997 continued, with peasant protests against high prices, corruption, land confiscation, and excessive taxation. Differences between reformers and conservatives at top levels of the political power structure appeared to deepen during the year, but it was difficult to tell from human rights developments who was in the ascendant. Veteran revolutionaries and influential intellectuals tried to test the newly-installed Communist Party leadership during the year by openly criticizing the government and advocating for increased democracy, economic reforms, and press freedom.

Arbitrary detention of individuals for their political beliefs remained a major concern, but in September, the government freed at least eleven prominent dissidents and religious leaders as part of a broader amnesty involving more than 5,000 prisoners, with more releases announced in October. Those released in September included Dr. Doan Viet Hoat, arrested in 1990 for publishing the pro-democracy bulletin, Freedom Forum; Dr. Nguyen Dan Que, arrested in June 1990 for issuing a public appeal for political pluralism; prominent monks Thich Quang Do, Thich Tri Sieu, and Thich Tue Sy, who are all members of the banned Unified Buddhist Church, as well as Paul Nguyen Chau Dat and Tadeo Dinh Viet Hieu, members of the Catholic Congregation of the Mother Co-Redemptrix. It was not clear what prompted the releases, but the planned visit in October by the U.N. Special Rapporteur on Religious Intolerance may have been a factor in the release of the religious activists. Despite the prisoner amnesties, dozens of other dissidents remained under surveillance or in administrative detainment under Directive 31/CP, which authorizes detention without trial for up to two years by the Ministry of Interior. Critics who remained under house arrest included biologist and writer Ha Si Phu, poet Bui Minh Quoc, writer Tieu Dao Bao Cu, and war veteran Nguyen Ho. Vietnams leadership, with newly appointed Communist Party Secretary Le Kha Phieu at the helm, was deeply divided over political and economic reform. In January, in the first of several open letters to the party leadership, Gen.Tran Do, a respected retired military officer, criticized the partys concentration of power and proposed reforms, including free elections.

Other well-connected intellectuals and military veterans issued letters and statements during the year criticizing high-level corruption and calling for reform. Most did not suffer reprisals; respected geophysicist Nguyen Thanh Giang was detained for three days in March before being released after going on a hunger strike.

The countrys farmers continued to show their anger over rampant corruption, punitive taxation, unfair rice prices, land disputes, and compulsory labor contributions to national infrastructure projects. Sporadic incidents of rural unrest surfaced in Thai Binh province, the site of the most severe unrest in 1997; Long Binh in southern Dong Nai province, where farmers protested evictions by the military in January; Ha Tay Province near Hanoi, the site of ongoing dissatisfaction over land rights and corruption; as well as Ha Nam, Nam Dinh, Thanh Hoa, Quang Ngai, and Bac Ninh provinces. In March, at least nine local people were convicted for disturbing public order during the January clashes in Dong Nai. In July, the Peoples Court in Thai Binh sentenced more than thirty local people, whom the government termed extremists, to prison terms for inciting people to disrupt public order during uprisings in the province in November 1997.

Unusually candid reporting in the domestic press on farmers unrest in various provinces demonstrated the degree to which the leadership wanted the public to believe that it was resolving the farmers grievances. For example, a lengthy front-page article in the official Nhan Dan (Peoples Daily) newspaper on February 5 carried the results of the governments investigation into the Thai Binh unrest, which it blamed on local officials failure to respond to administrative corruption and excessive taxation. The government dispatched high-level officials, including Politboro member Pham The Duyet (ironically the object of corruption charges himself during the year) to sites of unrest, notably Dong Nai and Thai Binh, where they launched inquiries and suspended, fired, or levied fines against dozens of corrupt local cadres. In a February 23 press conference, President Tran Duc Luong made one of the strongest public acknowledgments of the problem to date, blaming local corruption for spurring peasant discontent. In March an anti-corruption ordinance was passed that contained provisions requiring officials to declare their assets. The National Assembly heatedly debated a draft law to facilitate the filing of complaints by citizens against local officials but failed topass the legislation by the close of its session in May.

The government continued to require that all religious activity be approved by the state and to apply restrictions on travel by religious leaders and on the contents of their sermons and speeches. In July, the Politburo issued its first directive on religion, saying the partys policy was to respect religious freedom but banning superstitious practices without defining what those were. The directive also prohibited the printing and distribution of Bibles, banned excessive mobilization of the population, and threatened legal repercussions against those who abused religion to cause social unrest or oppose the government. In July, the government turned down a request for a papal visit in August during the two-hundredth anniversary of the sanctuary of the Notre Dame of La Vang in Quang Tri province. It also attempted to discourage citizens from other provinces from traveling to La Vang for this event. (Nevertheless, more than 60,000 Catholic pilgrims were able to attend, making it the largest religious gathering in Vietnam in decades.) On the other hand, in March, the government approved the Vaticans appointment of a new archbishop of Ho Chi Minh City, a position that had been left vacant for five years because of official rejection of an earlier nominee. In July, three years after a request was originally submitted, the government approved the October visit of Abdelfattah Amor, the U.N. special rapporteur on religious intolerance.

The press remained under tight government control during the year. None of the criticism of the government by senior party leaders or retired officers was published in the media. In a stern reminder to journalists not to exceed state-imposed limits, Nguyen Hoang Linh, editor of Doanh Nghiep (Enterprise) newspaper and a Communist Party member, was brought to trial on October 21 after his arrest a year earlier. He was found guilty for taking advantage of democracy to damage the state and sentenced to time served (one year and thirteen days). In 1997 Nguyen had reported on high-level corruption. Troubled areas such as Thai Binh and Dong Nai remained off-limits to foreign journalists, aside from a one-day, officially sponsored tour in mid-February. In an effort to control information about the regional economic crisis and its impact on Vietnam, the Ministry of Culture continued to implement a 1997 press edict that prohibited media coverage of the banking system and instructed editors to tone down critical economic coverage.
Europe and Central Asia
Human Rights Developments

The long-anticipated outbreak of violence in the province of Kosovowith war crimes committed primarily by Yugoslav government forces against the civilian ethnic Albanian populationand the dramatic deterioration of Russias economy that pushed the country to the verge of chaos were the most notable developments in the region in 1998. Both cases underscored the threat posed when human rights and the rule of law are downplayed in order to promote interests such as territorial integrity, regional security, or economic gain.

While the international community touted the need for regional stability and a regional approach to security concerns, governments such as the United States and the member states of the E.U. often ignored the regional security threat posed by human rights violations and indicated no recognition that the failure to insist on accountability for atrocities in one country or region often fueled abuses in another.

There was a distinct deterioration of the human rights situation in Belarus, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY), Kazakstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. And while President Saparmurat Niyazov was being unconditionally welcomed at the White House by President Clinton, the government of Turkmenistan continued to deny its citizens virtually all civil liberties. Other areas of concern in the region included a growing problem of religious persecution, attempts to intimidate or shut down the independent press, widespread ethnic discrimination, and a continuing problem of police brutality that often reached the level of torture. Sporadic fighting occurred in the Abkhazia region of Georgia and in Tajikistan, although cease-fire agreements remained in force in both countries, and numerous abuses continued to be perpetrated by both sides in the conflict in southeastern Turkey, although at a lesser intensity than during the mid-1990s. On a positive note, a peace agreement was reached and overwhelmingly approved by public referendum in Northern Ireland, bringing an official end to the conflict.

Almost ten years of repression, systematic discrimination, and widespread police brutality against ethnic Albanians finally erupted into armed conflict in Kosovo in 1998. Less than three years after the Dayton Peace Agreement ended the war against civilians in Bosnia and Hercegovina, the Yugoslav Army and special police units carried out a military offensive in Kosovo in which civilians were the primary victims. Yugoslav government troops committed extrajudicial executions, systematically destroyed civilian property, and forced thousands of people to flee their homes.

For much of 1998, the international community wrung its hands but remained inactive as the death toll in Kosovo rose and the number of displaced persons and refugees from the conflict grew exponentially. As the Kosova Liberation Army (KLA) grew in strength, the international community, especially the United States and the European Union (E.U.), were reluctant to take any step that might be construed, in the words of Secretary of Defense Cohen, as lending support, either moral or military, to those seeking independence. Pointing to the need for protecting international borders and the destabilizing effect an independent Kosovo would have on the region, it closed its eyes to the instability created by unchecked human rights violations.

It was only after the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY) government had carried out a highly abusive offensive in Kosovo during the months of July, August, and September that seriously weakened the KLA, that the international community intensified pressure and negotiated the framework of an agreement intended to end the conflict and create a large monitoring mission to verify compliance with the terms of the agreement. As of this writing, it remained unclear whether the October agreement would truly end the fighting in Kosovo and ensure the safety and security of those living there.

The conflict in Kosovo exacerbated ethnic tensions in Macedonia between the majority population and the ethnic Albanian minority, yet the international community, which has invested great political and financial resources to maintain Macedonias stability, rarely criticized the Macedonian governments human rights record, including the mistreatment of the ethnic Albanian minority, apparently viewing human rights protection and regional stability as an either-or proposition. By failing to insist on minority rights and the rule of law, it missed an important opportunity to help dispel the frustrations caused by ethnic discrimination that sometimes foster secessionist movements. The conflict in Kosovo also contributed to an increase in ethnic tensions in neighboring Bosnia and may have played a role in the electoral success of hardline nationalists in the September elections. Provocative statements by hard-line nationalists in Serbia regarding the conflict in Kosovo fueled a series of hostile statements by nationalists during the electoral campaign in Bosnia. The arrival of several thousand ethnic Albanian refugees from Kosovo further strained Bosnias already limited resources.

As the world negotiated a treaty for an International Criminal Court during the year, the promise of and the obstacles to an effective system of international criminal justice were nowhere more evident than in the Former Yugoslavia. Although significant progress was made during 1998 in transferring indicted personswhether by arrest or by surrenderto the International CriminalTribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in the Hague, the highest ranking persons indicted for atrocities in the region were not arrested and others believed responsible for war crimes remained unindicted. The failure to arrest Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic undermined efforts to secure a lasting peace in Bosnia, damaged the credibility of the tribunal, and compromised the deterrent effect the tribunal might have had in Kosovo.

Serious violations of the laws of war were also committed in Georgia and Tajikistan, where efforts to transform fragile cease-fires into a lasting peace remained unsuccessful. More than 200 people were reportedly killed when violence erupted in the Abkhaz region of Georgia in May, and scores of civilians were killed in Tajikistan when fighting broke out on several occasions during the year. In both countries, the fighting resulted in a campaign against civilians, including summary executions, rape, torture, and the looting and destruction of civilian homes and property. Armed insurgency groups in Kosovo, Northern Ireland, and Turkey were also linked to serious violations of the laws of war and other abuses during the year.

The most hopeful note in 1998 came in April when the political leaders and citizens of Northern Ireland, with the active engagement of the governments of Ireland, the United Kingdom, and the United States, reached an historic agreement to end the conflict. Human rights concerns featured prominently in the peace agreement, which acknowledged the need to address, among other things, the abusive conduct of the police. However, the government of Tony Blair moved slowly to address key human rights concerns during the year, and, in the wake of the August 15 Omagh bombing that killed twenty-nine people, strengthened the already draconian emergency legislation that has often been condemned by human rights organizations.

Armed conflict continued to produce forced displacement in the region. The fighting in Kosovo caused at least 300,000 persons to flee their homes, and in Georgia more than 30,000 people were displaced by the May fighting. The reluctance of many refugees and internally displaced persons to return to their homes was often a consequence of an incomplete transition from war to peace that did not include accountability for past and on-going abuses.

The year of return in Bosnia and Hercegovina produced few so-called minority returnsreturns to areas where the post-war majority is of a different ethnicity than the returnee. In many cases, the return of refugees and displaced persons was impeded by the ongoing presence and influence of police and government authorities with a history of abuse, the atmosphere of impunity that surrounded police misconduct and ethnically motivated violence, as well as by the governments failure to grant equal access to the law in relation to property return and other administrative issues. The absence of a final peace agreement in the Nagorno Karabakh conflict caused at least 750,000 Azeri refugees to remain homeless and destitute in Azerbaijan. An internationally praised Croatian government plan for the return of displaced persons and refugees did little to alter the pattern of official discrimination against and harrassment of ethnic Serbs in the country. As a result, the exodus of ethnic Serbs from Eastern Slavonia continued, while few of the more than 300,000 Serb refugees who had earlier fled Croatia were willing to return.

A number of states adopted policies that undermined the refugee protection that is required by international law. The European Union was particularly eager to ensure that displaced persons stayed as close to their homes (and as far away from the E.U.) as possible, even if regions and countries bordering the conflict zone were ill-equipped to provide refuge and were themselves still reeling from the aftermath of war. In August, the republican government of Montenegro (an autonomous province of FRY)which had already received an estimated 30,000 internally displaced persons and complained of little international aidclosed its internal border with Kosovo and deported 3,200 ethnic Albaniansthemselves citizens of FRYto neighboring Albania.

Concerns regarding the impact of corruption on the rule of law and access to human rights protection intensified throughout the region. Nowhere was this concern more prominent than in Russia, where the collapse of the ruble and the ensuing economic crisis threatened to send the country into anarchy. The Russian governments failure to address the severe problem of corruption has created a vicious cycle: unfettered corruption has laid waste to the public institutions crucial to long-term economic development and the rule of law, has eroded public trust in the state, and has weakened the states ability to enforce its laws. The weight of neglect and corruption has produced weak institutions that were not able to prevent the current crisis and are particularly ill-suited to resolve it.

Human rights are inevitably compromised when corrupt officials are not held accountable for their conduct. Corruption is rampant in Russian law enforcement agencies, in which Russian police often conducted lax investigations, preferring instead to rely on torture to solve crimes. But Russia is not the only country in the region suffering a human rights crisis that is fueled, at least in part, by corruption. Corruption riddled the police force, prisons, and the judiciary in many other countries in the region, including Albania, Armenia, Georgia, Macedonia, Romania, as well as the five Central Asian countries, undermining any hope that these institutions would respect and protect citizens rights and interfering with efforts at reform.

A disturbing number of journalists were killed this year in Bulgaria and Russia, many under circumstances believed to be associated with their writing about corruption and organized crime. Journalists were arrested, beaten, and otherwise harassed and newspapers and other media subjected to various degrees of restrictions in Belarus, FRY, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, and Turkey. There was no independent media whatsoever in Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan.

Predictably, independent media were perceived as a threat by the most repressive governments in the region. However, almost every country specifically covered by this report used criminal libel statutes and/or vaguely worded laws on national security to prosecute and imprison journalists who were critical of government officials or policies.

Religious persecution and discrimination have become disturbingly widespread in the region, in part a backlash against new religions and religious groups allowed to flourish in the immediate aftermath of the collapse of communism. Churches such as the Orthodox church in Armenia, Bulgaria, Greece, Romania, and Russia, which often enjoy a privileged status, have sought to limit the influence of evangelical groups that might threaten their influence. In some cases, the hostility toward religious groups was also rooted in xenophobia, a perception that these groups are a foreign threat to national traditions and beliefs. Religious groups were often denied the opportunity to register, making them all the more vulnerable to police harassment and extortion. Proselytizing was prohibited or severely limited to a privileged few in Armenia, Greece, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and, to a certain degree, Russia. The governments of some West European countries also took steps to limit the activities of certain, non-traditional religious groups, for example, by placing these groups under surveillance, refusing to grant them tax-exempt status, and discriminating against their members.

Government-sponsored campaigns against orthodox or so-called fundamentalist Muslims intensified dramatically throughout much of the CIS, and continued unabated in Turkey, during 1998. Russia, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan announced in May that they had formed a troika to combat fundamentalism and engaged in a campaign of arrests, brutality, and harassment against many viewed as pious. On September 17, authorities in Kyrgyzstan expelled Pakistani missionaries for distributing religious literature. The campaign against fundamentalism took on dramatic proportions in Uzbekistan, where the government carried out a brutal campaign culminating in the detention of an estimated 1,000 Muslim men in the cities of Namangan and Andijan alone. In Turkey, 128 persons from the Aczmendi sect were imprisoned for periods ranging from twenty months to six years for wearing religious dress that violated the modern dress reform of Ataturk. Similarly, in Uzbekistan female students who wore traditional Muslim dress were not allowed to pursue an education and feared they would face further punishment under a new law prohibiting ritual dress in public.

Other basic freedoms such as the right to assembly and association, as well as academic freedom, came under attack during 1998. In Azerbaijan, Belarus, Croatia, Kazakstan, Kyrgyzstan, Turkey, and Uzbekistan, governments limited the opportunities for legally-sanctioned ralliesoften arbitrarily denying applications for demonstrations without any legitimate justification or approving demonstrations only in remote locationsand then frequently used excessive force to disperse demonstrators. Restrictions on academic freedom in Belarus, FRY, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan were intended to silence any remaining vestiges of critical thought in the society.

Creating adequate mechanisms for ending torture and police brutality remained an unanswered challenge for the regions governments. Severe ill-treatment and torture were common practice, most notably in Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Russia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan. Police misconduct went largely unpunished, and a biased and often corrupt court system functioned to deny adequate recourse to victims of torture and other ill-treatment. Although in Turkey some police were prosecuted for ill-treatment and torture of detainees, their lenient sentences or acquittals did not serve to alter the atmosphere of impunity.

In many states of the former Soviet Union, state institutions such as prisons and the army continued to reflect the highly abusive legacy of the Soviet past in their treatment of persons in their charge. There continued to be allegations of severe mistreatment of conscripts and horrendous working and living conditions in the Russian and Armenian armies, with numerous deaths reported in 1998. Abusive officers were not held accountable for the ill-treatment of those in their charge.

Abhorrent prison conditions continued to plague much of the region, and few governments undertook the comprehensive reforms that would provide anything other than a stop-gap solution for the problems. The death penalty remained in force in Albania, Belarus, Bulgaria, Kazakstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan, but only Kazakstan and Turkmenistan continued to carry out executions during the year. On a positive note, Azerbaijan abolished the death penalty in 1998.

The marginalization of and severe prejudice against ethnic groups such as Roma continued unabated and was often exacerbated by open government hostility that, in some cases, verged on incitement. Ethnically motivated violence by skinhead groups or the police typically went unpunished in Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Greece, Macedonia, Romania, and Slovakia. In the Czech Republic, Greece, and Slovakia, local government officials tried to expel Roma from their towns and/or to contain them in ghettos outside the city limits during the year. Discrimination against gay men and lesbians was not only tolerated by some governments, but sometimes openly condoned. In Romania, homosexuality remained a criminal act under the penal code. Skinhead violence against ethnic minorities in Russia rose alarmingly during the year, but was rarely vigorously investigated and prosecuted.

As noted above, women remained vulnerable to gender-specific abuse during armed conflict. Some incidents of rape were reported during the conflict in Kosovo, as well as during renewed fighting in Georgia and Tajikistan. The suffering produced by theforcible trafficking of women for work in the sex industry and/or the forcing of women into debt-bondage once in the host country was a concern of growing proportions. Governments absolute neglect of the victims of domestic violence was one of the least addressed human rights abuses in the region.
Albania
Human Rights Developments

Albania experienced further turmoil in 1998. The assassination of a leading opposition figure and a violent anti-government demonstration led to the prime ministers resignation. High levels of crime, violence, and corruption, as well as the influx of refugees from Kosovo, destabilized the country and adversely affected the protection of human rights.

On September 12, unknown individuals killed a leading member of the opposition Democratic Party (DP), Azem Hajdari. DP leader and former president Sali Berisha blamed the government, but there was no conclusive evidence to support this claim. On September 14, Hajdaris funeral procession turned into an violent attack on the prime ministers office by armed DP supporters. For a brief period, the prime ministry and the Albanian state television and radio building came under their control.

On September 28, Prime Minister Fatos Nano resigned; he was replaced by thirty-one-year-old Pandjeli Majko, also from the Socialist Party. Parliament lifted Berishas parliamentary immunity due to his role in what the government called a coup detat, but, as of October 19, he had not been arrested.

1998 saw a number of violent incidents involving armed gangs and the police. In contrast to the aggressiveness of the police forces during Berishas rule, the police under the new government sometimes suffered from an inability or unwillingness to establish control, especially in the more remote areas. There were also times, however, when the police exceeded their authority by using excessive force.

On January 5, police in the town of Fier forcibly removed an injured citizen, Agron Pasha, from his hospital bed and reportedly beat him to death; as of October, no one had been held responsible for the crime. In February, the former chief of criminal police in Shkoder, Gjergj Deda, was severely beaten while in a Tirana prison. In January, the police also reportedly beat an activist of the opposition Democratic Party, Petrit Jatchoe, in Kutchova. Also in January, the chairman of the municipal council in Fier and member of the Democratic Party, Durim Lekdushi, was beaten by the police in Vlora.

A number of policemen were killed by criminals during the year. On February 25, parliament passed a new anti-crime law that allowed the police to shoot without warning on armed groups who resist the police.

In late August, the police arrested six former senior officials from the Berisha government, including the former ministers of defense, the interior, and state control. All six were charged with ordering the use of chemical weapons, helicopters, and airplanes against the civilian population during the uprising in 1997. The charge of crimes against humanity leveled against them carries a sentence ranging from fifteen years in prison to the death penalty, which is in force in Albania.

Sali Berisha and the DP organized protest rallies, despite a police ban on demonstrations because of what the Interior Ministry called, "terrorist threats." In one demonstration on August 27, six Berisha supporters and six policemen were injured in scuffles.

Despite some improvements, the judicial system continued to suffer from the low number of trained professionals, corruption, and a disrespect for legal norms. Due process violations were commonplace, such as the unlawful extension of detention periods, restricted access to lawyers, and irregularities during trials.

By October, a constitutional drafting commission made up of representatives from the main political forces, and Albanian and foreign legal expertswas nearing completion of its work. Throughout the year, the commission was hampered in its work by political fighting between the government and the opposition, mostly due to an ongoing boycott by the DP.

On February 14, Chairman of the Constitutional Court Rrustem Gjata was removed from his post by parliament because he had been a member of the communist-era secret police. Gjata was removed on the basis of the so-called Genocide Law from 1995, which bars from public office any person who held power in a pre-1991 government or was a collaborator with the former secret police. The law does not provide adequate due process guarantees or establish clear criteria to determine who should be banned from public office. Ironically, Gjata defended the law when it was before the Constitutional Court in 1995.

The head of the Court of Cassation, Avni Shehu, came under fierce verbal attack from the government in March. The pro-government media labeled the court a nest of criminals and accused Shehu of corruption, but he was not removed.

Freedom of the media improved, especially with a proliferation of private radio and television stations which were never allowed under the previous government. However, there were some disturbing incidents of violence against journalists, and media sympathetic to the political opposition complained of restrictions.

In February, the police in Librazhd reportedly beat two journalists, Rexhep Polisi and Ylli Dosku, because of their writings. Shortly thereafter, the police in Elbasan beat Irena Vreto, a correspondent for Republika newspaper. On May 10, a bomb planted by unknown individuals exploded at the Vlora home of Koha Jone journalist Zenepe Luka, injuring his two children and two neighbors. The attack took place one day after top DP officials had gone to Vlora for the first time since last years uprising, and Luka had written about the tense situation in the city.

In March, the news agency Enter, considered close to the opposition, complained that its electricity and telephone lines had been cut. On February 24, the government pressed charges against Vjollca Vokshi, an announcer at the pro-DP Radio Kontakt, fordisseminating misinformation with the intent to incite panic. During an attack by armed gangs on the police station in Shkoder two days before, Vokshi had changed a government statement from the government will eliminate the criminals by all means to the government will suppress the revolt in Shkoder with violence and blood. The charges were dropped in May. On September 8, the director of Radio Kontakt, Agron Bala, was attacked by unknown assailants while leaving the stations studio.

Womens rights remained an issue, especially the problem of domestic violence. The participation of Albanian women in foreign prostitution rings was reported. In some cases, women were clearly deceived into leaving Albania by criminal gangs or even abducted.

In July and August, Albanian authorities, together with the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, arrested at least five non-Albanians suspected of being members of militant Islamic groups. One of them faced the death sentence in his home country, Egypt, and was extradited. On August 16, the U.S. Embassy in Tirana evacuated all non-essential staff because, according to the U.S. government, there was a terrorist threat to the embassy.

An estimated 15,000 ethnic Albanians from Kosovo sought refuge in Albania from attacks by the Serbian police and Yugoslav Army (see chapter of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia). Most refugees were accommodated in the north, a region largely out of the governments control, but by September many had relocated to areas in the center and south of Albania, with help from international aid agencies; some of these people subsequently fled to Italy. In August, the Albanian government announced that there had been forty-one incidents along the Albania-Yugoslav border involving the Yugoslav armed forces.
Armenia	
Human Rights Developments

President Levon Ter-Petrossians resignation in February radically changed Armenias political landscape, but the governments human rights practices remained poor. The Armenian governments human rights record in 1998 was marred by its failure to prosecute election-related violence, physical abuse of conscripts in the Armenian army and in pretrial detention, and by its willingness to condone religious intolerance.

President Ter-Petrossian left office after Armenian defense minister Vasgen Sarkisyan called for his resignation and forty members of parliament quit the bloc that supported the president to join the Yerkrapah faction. The Yerkrapah faction is associated with the Yerkrapah Battalion, a conservative veterans organization led by Sarkisyan, which was linked to violent attacks in April 1995 on twelve non-apostolic religious groups, mostly Christian sects other than the Armenian Orthodox Church. Throughout the past three years, the Armenian government failed to bring to justice any of the perpetrators of these violent attacks. The Yerkrapah Battalion also reportedly ransacked a human rights library in July 1997.

Ter-Petrossians forced resignation was related to his willingness to compromise in negotiations on the Nagorno Karabakh conflict to allow the enclave to retain effective independence, but technically remain part of Azerbaijan. Snap presidential elections were called on March 16 in accordance with Armenias constitution, with a second round of voting on March 30. Former Prime Minister Robert Kocharian was declared the winner. The OSCE election observers final report found both rounds to have been marred by extensive fraud, and flatly stated that the final round did not meet OSCE standards. The report noted that monitors witnessed ballot stuffing, discrepancies in the vote count, a large presence of unauthorized persons in polling stations, and intimidation of voters, election workers, and even the international observers themselves.

After the elections, the government claimed to have prosecuted some violent incidents during the elections. But Human Rights Watch learned that many organized groups that participated in ballot stuffing and violence were not prosecuted. For example, on March 16, a group of approximately thirty men entered a Yerevan polling station and in front of numerous witnesses beat two candidate proxies who protested the groups tampering with the ballot box.

A September 1997 amendment to the law on the freedom of conscience and religious organizations further tightened restrictions by prohibiting financing for religions with spiritual centers outside the country. The law, originally adopted in 1991, precludes proselytizing by religions other than the official Armenian Orthodox Church and is clearly intended to hinder the activities of religions other than the official Armenian Orthodox Church.

The law provides for a Committee for Religious Affairs, under the Council of Ministers, with broad and vague powers to register religious organizations. The Jehovahs Witness organization, whose adherents were among those attacked in April 1995, continued to be refused registration due to the authorities view that the organization opposes compulsory military service. Members of the government human rights committee and some nongovernmental organizations supported the ban on the groups registration. Amnesty International has declared several adherents of the Jehovahs Witnesses, convicted for failure to perform military service, as prisoners of conscience.

Physical abuse and poor conditions plagued the Armenian army, resulting in the deaths of several conscripts. They include the death on April 7 of Vahagan Alaverdyan, an eighteen-year-old resident of Yerevan drafted into the Armenian army in November 1997. Alaverdyans family stated that they identified him at the Khojaly Military Hospital in Nagorno Karabakh, covered with extensive bruises on the chest, stomach, and back. They further accused officers and other members of the military unit in which he served in Nagorno Karabakh of beating him to death. The Armenian government routinely denies that it conscripts troops and requires them to serve in Nagorno Karabakh.

Officers remained largely unaccountable for abuse in the army. In one case, a nongovernmental organization brought the beating of two soldiers to the attention of authorities. On August 8, the Ministry of Defense responded that the officers had been reprimanded and threatened with expulsion from the Armenian army. However, such a sanction is highly unlikely to be effective in preventing abuse. Nongovernmental organizations reported that Ministry of Defense personnel continued to take family members hostage in order to secure the return of draft-evaders.

The procuracy and the Ministry of Internal Affairs and National Security showed an insufficient commitment to impartial investigation and prosecution of credible allegations of physical abuse in police lock-ups and pretrial detention. For example, police in the Massis district police station and in Yerevan Isolator Number 1 allegedly beat Hamlet Heloyan, an ethnic Yezid suspected of thefts, after he was arrested in March 1998.

In June, a court sentenced four policemen from the third and fourth precincts in Gumri to eight years of imprisonment in relation with the August 1997 death in custody of a suspect. The police were convicted on charges of abuse of office and assisting in a suicide, even though photographic evidence showed extensive evidence of severe beatings on the victims body.
Azerbaijan
Human Rights Developments

Increased international attention to Azerbaijans abysmal human rights record failed to yield concrete reforms in 1998. President Heydar Aliyev issued a number of decrees ordering improvements in human rights conditions during the year. However, these were merely window-dressing. The measures could not substitute for the governments dismal record and its lags in adopting urgently needed structural reform of the courts, police, and procuracy, nor did they succeed in obscuring the governments dismal human rights record.

Legislation governing the October 11 presidential elections and the future conduct of local elections provoked sharp criticism from opposition parties and a series of public demonstrations in Baku and other major cities. Senior government officials claimed that the electoral legislation adopted in July met international standards, but in fact the government had failed to adopt reforms recommended by international organizations specializing in electoral reform, such as the National Democratic Institute. The governments unwillingness to allow more equitable representation of opposition parties on the Central Electoral Commission was one of several issues that caused major opposition parties to boycott the presidential elections. OSCE and Council of Europe election monitors said after the vote that they had found numerous irregularities, and concluded that the elections did not meet internationalstandards.

Although the parliament adopted legislation in February abolishing the death penalty, developments during the year pointed to the hollowness of the Azerbaijani governments commitment to improved practices in other areas. There was, for example, continued physical abuse by the Ministry of Internal Affairs staff. A November 1997 Human Rights Watch investigation found that physical abuse and torture by the police was rampant, and systematized in facilities such as the Baku City Police station, where many under suspicion of politically motivated crimes have been detained. Throughout the year, Human Rights Watch received numerous credible allegations that police continued to abuse detainees physically and to intimidate, harass, and even kidnap the family members of suspects. Family members charged that police and officials of other security forces conducted arbitrary searches without warrants, threatened and intimidated them, and in some cases arrested and then physically abused them in custody. Especially alarming was the climate of impunity in which the police acted; statistics provided by the Ministry of Internal Affairs showed that only two police officers had been prosecuted for physical abuse in Baku in 1997.

Restrictions on public demonstrations also continued. On May 8, Baku authorities arbitrarily detained and held for periods of five to ten days approximately one third of the roughly 150 people who were peacefully protesting the highly controversial draft law on presidential elections, which was then under consideration in parliament. On August 15, opposition activists reported that approximately 300 people had been detained during election rallies in Baku and other cities, while Minister of Internal Affairs Ramil Usubov acknowledged that 106 had been detained for resisting the police or disorderly conduct.

On August 6, the president signed a decree lifting pre-publication censorship and instructing the parliament to adopt laws to ensure freedom of the print media. Yet nine days later police detained seven journalists who were trying to cover the August 15 rallies; some of them were reportedly beaten in custody. In February, police seized issues of the Baku-based Monitor magazine. Journalists from the Monitor received a letter in April from the minister of internal affairs demanding that they refute an article published in that issue regarding torture in Azerbaijan. In July, a court found the magazine guilty of highly dubious libel charges that resulted in a fine, forcing its closure. And an April decree adopted by the Cabinet of Ministers further tightened restrictions on the broadcast media by creating new onerous registration requirements for all independent television stations in Azerbaijan.

In February, President Aliyev issued a decree instructing his government to cooperate with international and local human rights organizations. Yet throughout the spring, smear campaigns and harassment by senior Azerbaijani officials, including Minister of Justice Sudaba Gasanova and Deputy Procurator General Isa Najafov continued, as in past years, against local activists.
Republic of Belarus
Human Rights Developments

Belarus continued its slide toward Soviet-style repression of fundamental human rights in a year that witnessed two political show trials and, as of this writing, promised yet more. Additionally, the government closed the last remaining daily independent newspaper and stepped up an at times violent campaign against opposition activists, including minors, especially at demonstrations. The Ministry of Justice stripped prominent defense lawyers of their licenses to practice law for defending political cases.

Characteristic of this general contempt for international law, on June 10 the Lukashenka government evicted more than twenty foreign ambassadors from the European Union, the United States, Japan and other countries from their residences outside of Minsk on the pretext of needing to carry out urgent repairs. When the ambassadors refused to leave, their telephone lines, electricity, and gas supplies were cut and ditches were dug across the main entrance road to prevent vehicular access.

Government complicity was evident in at least one politically motivated assault. On December 23, 1997, two unidentified men broke into the film studio of Yuri Khashchevatsky and beat him unconscious, breaking his nose and his foot in three places, and leaving him with a concussion, multiple bruises, and abrasions. Khashchevatsky directed An Ordinary President , an openly satirical documentary about President Lukashenka that authorities subsequently banned; the assault occurred two days after the film was broadcast on German television. No valuables or equipment were stolen or damaged. Police closed the investigation in June without result.

In an evident attempt to intimidate and deter young political activists from opposition political activity, the Belarusian government turned a court hearing on graffiti into a political show-trial: on February 24, following a five-day hearing, a Minsk court handed down an eighteen-month sentence in a strict regime labor camp to nineteen-year-old Alexei Shidlovsky and a suspended eighteen-month jail term to sixteen-year-old Vadim Labkovich for writing anti-presidential graffiti in the provincial town of Stolbtsy. The two teenagers had spent nearly six months in pre-trial detention, during which prison guards reportedly beat Shidlovsky. The government ignored appeals from the international community to release the pair or grant clemency.

Peaceful public protest remained a dangerous exercise in 1998. The government codified into law a 1997 presidential decree that had severely curtailed freedom of assembly rights, and police continued arbitrarily to arrest and assault demonstrators. Minsk authorities moved several demonstrations from the city center or simply denied permission to hold them, citing the new law. During the Labkovich-Shidlovsky trial, police arrested a total of nine persons for disobeying the orders of a police officer or for holding an unsanctioned demonstration. Authorities arrested and jailed for fifteen days Yury Maroz, who had stood alone outside the courtroom, holding a placard calling for the teenagers release. A peaceful opposition rally on March 22 resulted in the mass arrest of demonstrators.

On April 2, the authorities staged a rally in central Minsk to commemorate the signing of the Russia-Belarus Union treaty a year earlier. Members of the Belarusian Peoples Front (BPF) and its affiliated Youth Front organized a small counter-demonstration, sang pro-independence songs and later peacefully dispersed. Men in plainclothes subsequently emerged from parked cars and beat and detained about forty BPF and Youth Front members, including its leader, Pavel Syverinets and fifteen-year-old Dmitri Vaskovich. The pair were charged with malicious hooliganism (which carries a maximum five-year prison term) for allegedly forcing performers off the stage, singing songs, shouting slogans, and breaking a microphone. Vaskovich was released after three days, during which police beat and threatened him; they gave him food and water only once in three days in an attempt to coerce him into incriminating Syverinets. In May, Vaskovich received a warning, while Syverinets was held until June 3 and released pending trial, which had yet to begin at the time of this writing.

In 1998 the Belarusian government intensified its campaign against the independent print media. On November 24, 1997, the Higher Economic Court closed the last remaining independent daily newspaper, Svaboda [Freedom], following the accumulation of more than ten warnings resulting from political articles. On November 19, the State Press Committee issued warnings that two articles published in Svaboda that month violated article five of the Law on the Press and other Mass Media, because they supposedly incited social intolerance and hostility between society and the authorities. One of the articles drew parallels between Belarus today and 1937; the other accused the president of incompetence and criminal activity.

Warnings to other independent outlets raised fears that they too would be closed. In November 1997, the independent weekly newspaper, Imya [The Name] received an official warning for publishing satirical collages of the president and other government officials which expressed the obvious aim of politically and personally discrediting the state leaders. The collages featured the heads of the president and other high-ranking Belarusian political figures, along with top Russian oligarch bankers and politicians, including President Boris Yeltsin, transposed onto the bodies of women, card players, or prisoners.

On May 29, the State Press Committee issued a warning to the weekly independent Belarusian-language newspaper, Nasha Niva [Our Cornfield] , for violating article six of the press law, which forbids the mass media from deviating from the generally accepted norm of language use. The warning relates to the traditional spelling used by Nasha Niva that predates a 1933 ruling altering the Belarusian spelling system; the ruling was intended to bring the language closer to Russian. On August 12, Nasha Niva appealed the warning to the Higher Economic Court. The court subsequently convened a commission of language experts from the Institute of Linguistics which, on September 22, rejected the State Press Committees allegations. As of this writing, a formal ruling in Nasha Nivas favor had yet to be issued.

A confidential government memorandum leaked to the press in April confirmed suspicions that the government sought to stifle non-state media by withholding official information. The memorandum, entitled On Strengthening Countermeasures [Against] Articles in the Opposition Press, outlined three ways to counter anti-government media coverage: banning government officials from passing official documents to non-state media; banning officials from commenting on official documents to the opposition mass-media; and forbidding state enterprises from placing advertisements in opposition newspapers, from which important revenue for these papers is generated. The memorandum also referred to a March 17 letter from President Lukashenka and a specialpresidential order. President Lukashenka confirmed the memorandums authenticity on May 5 in a speech, stating that the memorandums author should have given the directives orally and not in written form.

January saw the culmination of the trial of Russian ORT television journalists, Pavel Sheremet and Dmitri Zavadsky. In August 1997 authorities arrested Sheremet and Zavadsky while filming a news story on the Belarus-Lithuanian border. Although initially released with a fine, the journalists were arrested a few days later following the broadcast of the material that they had filmed, then later released. On January 28, a court in the border town of Oshmyany sentenced Sheremet and Zavadsky to one and a half years of imprisonment, suspended for one year. Human Rights Watch believes the state chose to prosecute the pair because of the role they played in exposing the lack of border demarcation, a subject of official sensitivity.

On December 20, 1997, the Council of the Republic (upper house of parliament) adopted amendments to the press law. One amendment punishes publications for articles that insult the honor and dignity of government officials, and could affect those who put forward legitimate criticism of state officials. Another amendment codified a prior presidential decree restricting the import and export of information deemed to threaten the national security, rights, and freedoms of individuals; health and morals of the population; and environmental protection. The law now sanctions the administrative prosecution of all distributors of a newspaper found to have violated these vague standards, the banning of such publications, and suspension of an individuals right to engage in media activities should he violate the law.

The government actively invoked the law as amended, enforcing the ban on importing harmful information. For example, on May 2, Belarusian authorities confiscated 900 copies of Belaruskiye Vedemosti [Belarusian News] and several hundred copies of other political articles at the Belarus-Ukraine border, presumably for their political content. Belaruskiye Vedemosti is published in Poland.

Whereas the amended 1997 law set out only administrative sanctions, in June, the Chamber of Representatives (lower house of parliament) adopted a draft law to criminalize insulting, libeling, and slandering the president. According to the June draft, such slander would be punishable by a maximum four years of imprisonment. The bill also provides for penalties for the use of placards in public places or spreading information in the media that infringes on presidential honor or dignity. As of this writing, the law had yet to be formally adopted.

In 1998, the Ministry of Justice continued to disbar politically active attorneys or attorneys who defend politically sensitive cases, taking advantage of a 1997 presidential decree that placed bar associations under much tighter Ministry of Justice control and forced all lawyers to become bar members.

On February 25, the Ministry of Justice revoked Nadezhda Dudarevas license to practice law. Dudareva had been noted for representing clients connected with the opposition movement and for her outspoken criticism of the government. She purposefully did not join a bar association in order to evade censure for her work defending political cases and to continue to work free of charge, which bar association members are forbidden to do. The official reason given for her disbarment, a thinly veiled pretext, was that she allegedly put pressure on a judge during a trial in 1997. She lost her license the day after the sentencing of Labkovich and Shidlovsky, in whose defense she had worked.

On March 24, the Ministry of Justice removed Garry Pogonyailo from the Minsk city bar association, immediately following his client Pavel Sheremets unsuccessful appeal. Pogonyailo defended some of the highest-profile political cases in Belarus, including former National Bank chair, Tamara Vinnikova. He had received two reprimands from the Minsk city bar association for protesting Vinnikovas degrading treatment in custody and for protesting procedural violations in Sheremets case.

On October 12, Deputy Minister of Justice Viktor Golovanov informed Vera Stremkovskaya, whose clients include Viktor Klimov (see below), that she would be stripped of her license to practice law for comments she made on human rights violations in Belarus at a meeting of human rights activists in New York three weeks earlier. As of this writing, Stremkovskayas disbarment had yet to be enforced.

In February, Belarus added another political prisoner to its jails when police arrested Andrei Klimov. Klimov was an active and vocal member of a special committee of the Thirteenth Supreme Soviet (the parliament President Lukashenka disbanded in 1996), formed to investigate constitutional violations by the president. On February 10, Klimov distributed a letter summarizing the commissions findings to the procurator, the police department, the tax inspectorate, and all local government heads. On February 11, police arrested him on charges of embezzlement and of carrying out entrepreneurial activities without a license; the timing of the arrest points to a political motive, as does the authorities refusal to permit bail. As of this writing, Klimov remained in pre-trial detention.
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Human Rights Developments

1998, the third year of implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement (DPA), brought significant progress on several key human rights issues. Freedom of movement improved, eleven indictees were transferred to the Hague (the location of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, ICTY) during 1998, and the restructuring of the police forces was well under way. These positive developments, however, were often imposed by or the result of intense pressure from the international community. Several serious human rights concerns persisted, including the inability of refugees and internally displaced persons to return to their homes and the ongoing influence of those indicted, but not apprehended, for war crimes. Other lingering concerns included ethnically motivated violence and the absence of redress for the victims of abuse. Despite the hard-won reform of the property law and the criminal justice codes in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, ordinary citizens had experienced little concrete benefit to date.

Political developments
In December 1997, the Peace Implementation Council (PIC) strengthened High Representative Carlos Westendorps authority to dismiss public officials who obstruct implementation of the DPA and to impose decisions when authorities failed to come to agreement on key issues. While not without controversy (relating to the degree of international control being exerted in Bosnia), several decisions by Westendorp resulted in immediate and dramatic improvements, for example, the law on citizenship and the extension of the deadline to reclaim socially owned property. Moreover, Westendorp finally addressed ongoing and active obstruction of the DPA by local officials.

The process of change in the Republika Srpska (RS) began with the election of Milorad Dodik as RS prime minister in January 1998, but despite changes in the RS parliament after the November 1997 elections, and significant international political and financial support, Dodik was unable to deliver on his promise to ensure the return of 70,000 refugees and displaced persons to the Republika Srpksa in 1998 and to reform RS property laws by September 1998. Dodiks ability to effect change was hampered by the weakness of his coalition, making it necessary for him to make compromises with hardliners. Eastern RS remained under the control of hardline nationalists, creating serious problems with police reform and cooperation with the federation.

War Criminals
In January 1998, American SFOR troops arrested Goran Jelisic, nicknamed Serb Adolf, in Bijeljina. Further arrests were made by German, American, and British troops in Prijedor, Banja Luka, Bosanski Samac, and Foca. Moreover, five indictees surrendered themselves to the ICTY. No indictees, however, were arrested and turned over to the ICTY by the Bosnian authorities. As of this writing, more than twenty indictees continued to live freely in the RS and Bosnian Croat territory. Major figures indicted for war crimes, such as Radovan Karadzic, Ratko Mladic, Milan Martic and Ivica Rajic, remained at large, and there seemed little international pressure to arrest them or obtain their arrest.

Return of Refugees and Displaced Persons
1998, dubbed the year of return by the international community, fell fall short of expectations. While 475,000 refugees and displaced persons (out of more than two million) had returned since the signing of the DPA, only about 15,000 were so-called minority returns (returns to an entity where the post-war majority is of a different ethnicity). Between the signing of the DPA and July 1998, only 1,920 non-Serbs had returned to the RS, and the RS had failed to revoke discriminatory housing legislation as requested by the PIC. Federation authorities also continued to obstruct return, despite new property legislation. Despite a 1998 target of 20,000 so-called minority returns,only around 2,500 minorities had returned to Sarajevo by the end of September 1998. During the three years since the signing of the DPA, many more minorities have fled Sarajevo than have returned.

Ethnically Motivated Violence and Evictions
Ethnically motivated violence, often related to minority returns, continued to occur throughout Bosnia. In Drvar, a Bosnian Croat area, a protracted series of violent incidents (including arson, assault, and murder) ultimately forced hundreds of Bosnian Serbreturnees to flee again in April. Local authorities repeatedly failed to take adequate measures to protect Bosnian Serbs from violence and were sometimes themselves complicit in the violent incidents. Ultimately, several public officials were dismissed by the U.N. International Police Task Force (IPTF) and the Office of the High Representative (OHR), but to date, only minor criminal charges had been brought.

In Travnik, at least five Bosnian Croats were slain since the beginning of 1998, but no perpetrators arrested. In Stolac and Capljina, approximately one hundred Bosniak houses were damaged in 1998, a pattern of violence similar to that in 1996 and 1997, and Bosniak returnees were often victims of physical assaults and intimidation. After refusing to address these crimes for more than two years, the Stolac chief of police was removed in February at the request of IPTF, and the mayor of Stolac was dismissed by the High Representative in March. Similarly, the chief of police in Capljina was decertified by IPTF following violence against returnees there in the fall. The situation improved somewhat thereafter, but local police continued to fail to protect citizens and property, or to hold the perpetrators accountable.

Freedom of Movement
Despite the recalcitrance of some authorities, freedom of movement significantly increased in 1998 due to an agreement on uniform license plates. Previously, the ethnicity of drivers could be discerned by the license plate, thereby blocking many displaced persons from visiting their prewar residences to assess the possibilities for return. Freedom of movement was at times obstructed by citizens who organized physically to prevent return or visits by ethnic minorities.

Media
The main political parties continued to control primary media outlets. During elections, for example, the Croatian Television station (HRT) clearly favored the Croatian Democratic Union (Hrvatska Demokratska Zajednica, HDZ). In the RS, Dodik replaced sixteen directors of state-owned radio stations due to their allegiance to his opponents, raising concern about his commitment to freedom of expression. In January, the editor-in-chief of the independent Sarajevo-based Dani (Days) magazine was convicted of libel in flawed proceedings. The case was brought by a newspaper closely connected to the leading Bosniak Party of Democratic Action (Stranka Demokratske Akcije, SDA) and was believed to be politically motivated. In May, Danis offices were attacked by armed criminals, allegedly for publishing an article on the Bosnian mafia in which the son of the Bosnian president was implicated. Although a journalist was kidnapped, and weapons used, the court fined the defendants only DM60 (U.S.$37.00) each. On July 29, a grenade exploded only meters from Danis office. As of September, no suspects had been arrested.

Elections
Implementation of the 1997 municipal election results proved difficult. Only ten municipalities met the December 31 deadline for final certification. In many municipalities, nationalists blocked implementation by refusing to accept duly elected representatives from other ethnic groups. Ultimately, agreements were reached in most municipalities, but many councils barely functioned, and minority councilors were repeatedly obstructed in their work, harassed, and on several occasions, physically attacked. No agreement could be reached in Srebrenica, resulting in the installation by OHR/OSCE of an interim executive board led by an OSCE representative. In Gornji Vakuf, a village highly contested by Bosniaks and Bosnian Croats, final certification was revoked on July 20 and all aid suspended until the implementation of election results.

In September, elections were held for the presidency, parliament, entity parliaments, and the RS presidency. While conditions for free and fair elections, such as freedom of movement and freedom of the press, had improved since the 1997 election, the elections were marred by technical difficulties and political interference. Bosnian Croats who switched allegience from the HDZ to the newly formed New Croatian Initiative (Novi Hrvatska Inicijativa, NHI) were threatened and in some cases physically attacked. The Election Appeals Sub-Commission reacted by striking several HDZ candidates from the ballot, and removed several other HDZ candidates when the state-controlled television station from Croatia, despite several warnings, continued to favor HDZ in its reporting.

The elections generally continued the strong hold on power of the ruling ethnic, nationalist parties. Moreover, Nikola Poplasen, a close comrade-in-arms of Serbian fascist leader (and paramilitary) Vojislav Seselj during the war, and a known advocate of ethnic cleansing and the partition of Bosnia, was surprisingly elected as the new president of RS, replacing president Plavsic, who was considered more moderate.

Law enforcement
Law enforcement authorities continued to serve the interests of the main nationalist parties. Cases of ethnically motivated crimes were rarely properly investigated or prosecuted. Court proceedings were often flawed. In January, Bosnian Serb Veselin Cancar was convicted for war crimes and sentenced to eleven years in prison (later reduced to nine), despite the fact that the arrest and courtproceedings were not in accordance with the Rules of the Road agreed in Rome in 1996. After repeated demands from the international community, the Bijeljina District court agreed to retry the Zvornik 7. These Bosniak former residents of Srebrenica were detained and tried without due process in 1996. Flawed criminal proceedings resulted in convictions for murder and illegal possession of weapons, drawing severe criticism from the international human rights community. The new trial was postponed several times, however, due to the failure of some defendants to appear in court, and is still ongoing.

Detainees were frequently mistreated by local police throughout the country. In January, federation authorities arrested a Bosnian Serb suspected of the 1993 assassination of Bosnian Deputy Prime Minister Turajlic. An IPTF investigation concluded that illegal weapons and unnecessary force were involved during the arrest. In September, the IPTF dismissed Ljubisa Mauser Savic, chief of the RS uniformed police, for involvement in torturing suspects in the murder of a high-ranking police official. Human Rights Watch previously reported allegations of war crimes involving Ljubisa Savic. Savics post-war behavior illustrates the danger of overlooking allegations of wartime abuses by current officials. Allegations relating to Savic were overlooked by the international community in its zeal to support the government of Milorad Dodik. On the positive side, RS authorities finally investigated the pattern of abuse by local police of non-Serbs in Teslic and initiated criminal and/or disciplinary proceedings against thirty-two police officers.
Bulgaria
Human Rights Developments

The human rights situation in Bulgaria remained static during 1998. Though the non-communist Union of Democratic Forces government, elected in 1997, gave rhetorical support to improving its protection of human rights, its actions revealed unwillingness and inability significantly to change legislation or provide adequate remedies for victims of abuse. State authorities routinely infringed on freedoms of expression and religion; often state institutions and the press appeared to collaborate to increase hysteria and prejudice against minorities. Ethnic minorities continued to suffer disproportionately from widespread police brutality.

The Bulgarian penal code, which criminalizes defamation, was used to prosecute independent journalists in 1998, resulting in the imposition of fines and/or suspended sentences. The government also used other means to exert pressure on critical media. On February 9, the day after Hushove aired a program satirizing Prime Minister Ivan Kostov and Foreign Minister Nadezhda Mihailova, the National Media Council and the State Television and Radio Administration canceled the popular television series. Officials alleged financial impropriety, but had earlier threatened to end the show for its denigration of public authority. Themanaging board of the National Radio removed journalist Diana Yankulova from the air for three months beginning in March for conveying information given anonymously regarding the minister of the interior. Svetoslava Tadarakova was dismissed from the National Television by the general director for statements in the media [which] ruin the good reputation of Bulgarian National Television.

There were reports of at least eleven violent attacks against media representatives in 1998, including physical assaults and bombings of newspaper offices. The attacks were believed to be motivated by the desire to intimidate journalists investigating corruption. Police have made no arrests in connection with these crimes, nor have they completed investigations into the attacks. Roma also were frequent targets of violence. On January 12, police shot and killed a fleeing Roma suspected in the murder of a taxi driver. A minor female witness was detained by police, who reportedly threatened to shoot her and threw a hammer at her when she could not respond to inquiries about the whereabouts of a pistol. She was released unhurt approximately one hour later. Skinheads attacked a group of Roma children living in an abandoned building on May 15, 1998. One boy, Metodi Rainov, fifteen years old, was killed when he was thrown from a window; others were beaten and chased out of the building and down the street. Authorities had made no arrests as of this writing although the victims claimed they could identify their attackers. Police and prosecutorial officials have routinely failed to investigate and prosecute police officers accused of brutality, contributing to an atmosphere of impunity for police misconduct. Only two policemen were convicted and sentenced for having murdered suspects during 1998. Prosecutors suspended other investigations involving police brutality or did not file formal charges. On at least four occasions in 1998, police conducted large scale raids of Roma neighborhoods; the police claimed they were searching for stolen goods, but local human rights groups and witnesses suspected the raids were intended to intimidate Roma and collectively to punish the Roma community for its perceived criminality. Residents of the neighborhoods were beaten, and homes and goods were destroyed. Witnesses and victims told the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee that they were too afraid to file official complaints, and that they were convinced that the complaints would have no effect.

Local authorities and media continued to harass the members of non-Orthodox religions. False and inflammatory reports that members of Jehovahs Witnesses had committed various crimes were disseminated by both private and state-owned television and print media. In violation of constitutional guarantees of freedom of religion, police arrested children and adults for distributing religious tracts. On February 19, four apartments belonging to Jehovahs Witnesses were searched by police . Religious material and other personal items were confiscated. On March 12, Varna customs officials confiscated religious materials from Jehovahs Witnesses because they were of a religious-sectarian nature. Krassimir Savovs two-year prison sentence for his conscientious refusal to perform compulsory military service was confirmed by the Plovdiv Regional Court on July 2, 1998. Mr. Savov, a Jehovahs Witness, remained at liberty pending his appeal.

In Barges, the municipal council refused to register dubious religions, including Jehovahs Witnesses, the Church of the Moon, and Seventh Day Adventists. These religions already had been officially registered by national authorities in Sofia. The decision of the city authorities had no legal effect, but demonstrated the level of intolerance and hostility toward non-Orthodox religious groups.

The death penalty remained legal under Bulgarian law. The Bulgarian parliament placed a moratorium on executions in 1996; however, at least two death sentences were imposed in 1998. Bulgarias death row prisoners have complained to the European Court of Human Rights about the length of their stay on death row. Conditions for other prisoners also remained deplorable. The rights to representation and prompt challenge of the lawfulness of detention are not guaranteed by the code of penal procedure and were routinely violated.
Croatia
Human Rights Developments

Concrete actions to improve human rights in Croatia fell short of the governments stated commitments and treaty obligations in 1998, despite intense pressure from the international community. The transfer of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja, and Western Sirmuim (hereafter Eastern Slavonia) from United Nations to Croatian control on January 15 occurred peacefully, but displaced and domiciled Serbs continued to leave the region, frustrated by government obstructionism and harassment from ethnic Croats. Serb returnees elsewhere in Croatia and Serb refugees still abroad fared no better, although new laws adopted during the year offered some hope that housing and documentation problems could be resolved. The independent media continued to face state-sanctioned harassment, and temporary security measures undermined freedom of assembly. Government cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) remained limited, while domestic war crimes trials fell below international standards and confusion continued to surround the amnesty law.

While the overall security situation in Eastern Slavonia remained acceptable, incidents involving attacks and intimidation of Serbs increased following the formal transfer of authority from the U.N. Transitional Authority for Eastern Slavonia (UNTAES) to Croatian control on January 15. Most incidents involved Croat returnees attempting to force out displaced Serbs occupying their homes. Others, such as the February murder of an elderly Serb woman and the July murder of a mixed marriage couple, appeared to have more explicit ethnic overtones. Under the supervision of the U.N. Civilian Police Support Group (UNCPSG), the mixed ethnicity Transitional Police Force (TPF) followed correct procedures, although Serbs complained of frequent identity checks andfailure to investigate or follow up complaints.

While some municipalities had Serb council members and several had Serb mayors, the political autonomy granted to Serbs in Eastern Slavonia during the UNTAES mandate remained conditional: as of this writing, the status of the Joint Council of Municipalities, a consultative body of elected Serb representatives created under UNTAES, remained limited to that of a cultural organization, and no progress had been made in obtaining regular government funding. In April, despite earlier guarantees, the government decided to abolish the municipality status of Tenja and Mirkovci, two Serb-majority villages, allegedly for budgetary reasons, prompting many long-term Serb residents to sell their homes and leave.

Serbs throughout Croatia faced extensive legal and administrative discrimination when trying to obtain documents and pensions. Despite government decrees issued in April on the implementation of the 1997 law on convalidation, local authorities continued to refuse to recognize marriage and divorce certificates, certification stamps in working books, and property deeds issued by the authorities of the Republika Srpska Krajina between 1991 and 1995. Many Serbs of retirement age were unable to obtain pension credit for the time they worked between 1991 and 1995. Serbs frequently complained of long delays in obtaining identification cards, citizenship certificates and passports, and of discriminatory naturalization fees.

Housing discrimination against Serbs remained a major concern. While the government abolished several discriminatory war-time housing laws, courts refused to hear cases of Serb plaintiffs trying to reoccupy their property, while courts in Eastern Slavonia issued eviction notices to displaced Serbs occupying Croat houses, who also faced soft evictions in the form of harassment and threats from Croat returnee owners. Few of those forced out were able to reoccupy their own property and some were moved to collective centers. New mixed-ethnicity housing commissions established by the June Program on Return a government plan to restore property to the pre-war ownerswere formed in most municipalities, but as of this writing, the government had not issued effective instructions on their operation and few were functioning properly. Despite widespread destruction of Serb-owned property in war-affected areas, a discriminatory reconstruction act prevented all but a handful of Serbs from receiving government reconstruction assistance.

Although new laws were passed to facilitate return, the more than 300,000 Serb refugees living outside Croatia faced ongoing hurdles to voluntary repatriation, including the requirement that Croatian citizens without documents must apply for citizenship. In May, under the threat of European Union (E.U.) sanctions, the Croatian government amended the Procedures for Return, an April law enumerating the procedures for obtaining the documents necessary to enter Croatia, with Mandatory Instructions simplifying the application process. The Croatian embassy in Bosnia also began consular days in Banja Luka in July, allowing Serb refugees in Republika Srpska to apply for travel documents for the first time.

Despite these developments, consulates in Bosnia and Yugoslavia offered limited numbers of appointments per day which, combined with cumbersome and complex procedures requiring multiple visits to consulates, sharply limited the rate at which documents were issued. With much of the property owned by Serbs occupied or destroyed, and discriminatory procedures for reoccupying or reconstructing property, return remained an abstraction for many, even among those refugees with Croatian documents.

Croatias process of accounting for war crimes remained a matter of serious concern. Confusion about the law on general amnesty and politicized war crimes trials remained a source of uncertainty among Serbs inside Croatia and an impediment to return for refugees. While the government issued a list in March granting amnesty to 13,575 persons from Eastern Slavonia, it made no effort to inform the persons directly, and the information given for each name frequently lacked the biographical detail necessary conclusively to determine identity. The number of further potential cases under the amnesty law remained unclear. Irregularities in the conduct of war crimes trials led to suspicions that prosecutions were politically motivated; evidence produced and questioning pursued by the judge often bore little or no relation to the charges, and persons were sometimes subject to prosecution twice for the same crimes. An order from the president of the Supreme Court forbidding direct contact between court officials and OSCE and U.N. representatives severely restricted their ability to perform trial monitoring. Croatian authorities continued to refuse to refer war crimes evidence or cases to the ICTY for review, while Croatias overall cooperation with ICTY remained poor except in cases involving Croat victims.

Media freedom remained elusive during 1998. While renewal of Radio 101s broadcast license and the launch of Forum 21, a media reform association, in November 1997 augured well, electronic media remained largely under the control of the ruling Croatian Democratic Union (Hrvatska Demokratska Zajednica, HDZ ). Croatia continued to lack a private national television station and, Catholic Radio aside, no private national radio station. The granting of broadcast licenses remained inconsistent and prone to HDZ interference. A draft bill in April to remove the Croatian Radio-Television (Hrvatska Radiotelevizija) from government control hinted at the licensing of an independent national television channel, but legislation remained pending at the time of this writing. While the court dropped criminal libel charges brought by twenty-two government ministers against the editor of the newsweekly Globus (Zagreb) in April, ongoing state-initiated persecution of independent print media through the courts continued. An unresolvedlibel case against Feral Tribune (Split) served as an egregious example of the hundreds of mostly state initiated cases pending against independent publications.

The response of the authorities to a mass demonstration in February organized by twelve trade unions and six opposition parties and its handling of inflammatory rallies by extreme nationalists the same month revealed the fragility of freedom of assembly in Croatia. After the municipal authorities and police rejected a request to hold a public rally in the center of Zagreb to protest rising prices and tax increases, ostensibly on safety grounds, organizers decided to proceed anyway. Demonstrators were met by 4,700 police officers, including 1,500 special (paramilitary) police, who erected barricades around the main square to prevent the protest from taking place. Although organizers relocated the demonstration to a nearby square, thirty protesters and six police were injured as police used force against demonstrators attempting to enter the cordoned-off area. In March, Croatian authorities responded to a February anti-Serb rally by the ultra-nationalist Croatian Party of Rights (Hrvatska Stranka Prava, HSP) in Borovo Selo by banning all public demonstrations in Eastern Slavonia until August, a measure in contravention of the Croatian constitution, and banned a further HSP rally scheduled to take place in Knin.
Czech Republic
Human Rights Developments

Although the human rights situation in the Czech Republic remained generally acceptable in 1998, there were a number of notable exceptions including state-sponsored discrimination and racially-motivated violence against Roma. Though the government took steps to dismantle a communist-era statute that forbid nomadic lifestyles, a discriminatory citizenship law remained on the books, and law enforcement authorities failed vigorously to investigate and prosecute violence against Roma. A new government was elected in the spring, led by Prime Minister Milos Zemans Czech Social Democratic Party (CSSD), marking the first transition of power since the division of Czechoslovakia in 1993.

In a case that drew international attention, the town of Usti Nad Labem, in northern Bohemia, passed plans to erect a four-meter-high fence separating thirty-nine Roma families from the rest of the town. The plan also called for round-the-clock police surveillance in the fenced-off area. Similar plans in the town of Plzen would have moved Roma residents of the city to portable cabins on the outskirts of the city. The cabins were to have been surrounded by a fence and put under twenty-four- hour police supervision. Under pressure from Roma rights groups and the international community the towns delayed implementation, but the plans had not been abandoned as of this writing.

Skinhead attacks against Roma and visiting African students occurred at an alarming rate during the year. The European Roma Rights Center reported that racially motivated crime increased sixfold between 1994 and 1996. Though statistics do not exist for1998, local rights groups believe that this trend continued. For example, on May 15, in the town of Orlova, four skinheads reportedly beat a forty-year-old Roma man before throwing him in the road where he was run over and killed by a truck. Law enforcement authorities charged the four men with causing grievous bodily harm with racial motivation.

Law enforcement authorities often failed to investigate or prosecute racially motivated violence and discrimination with the necessary vigor. Compounding this problem, law enforcement officials were reluctant to enforce the hate crimes statute, which provides for higher sentences than the standard criminal code provisions, although the evidence often warranted the more serious charge. In March, a district court judge in southern Moravia handed down more lenient sentences than the law proscribed to skinheads convicted of assaulting a Congolese doctor and shouting racial epithets. The judge defended his ruling on the basis of the skinheads later repentance for the crime.

The atmosphere of intolerance toward Roma was further exacerbated by open expressions of hate and prejudice by political leaders, as well as private groups. The chairman of the far right Republican party, Miroslav Sladek, proposed on the floor of the parliament that gypsies should be criminally responsible from their birth on. Several organizations openly promoted racial hatred and xenophobia, and members of minority groups were often refused service in restaurants and shops. On May 7, an appeals court overturned the conviction of a bar owner who had been charged with refusing to serve Roma, finding no evidence of a pattern of discrimination.

The government made positive moves toward protecting the rights of Roma on March 4, when the Senate repealed the Traveling Proscription Act of 1958, a law that forbade nomadic lifestyles. However, a discriminatory citizenship law that mainly affected Roma was not amended as had been recommended by rights groups, international organizations, and members of the Czech government. The law, which was established after the breakup of Czechoslovakia, demanded that Roma, whose families had lived in the Czech Republic for generations, prove permanent residency and have a clean criminal record for five years. Under the law, many Roma were denied citizenship and were classified as aliens. As such, they were deprived of voting rights and social benefits and, if convicted of even petty crimes, could be expelled from the Czech Republic. In May, the district court of Teplice ordered that Milan Sivaka Roma man born in the Czech city of Pardubice and who was convicted of numerous crimesbe expelled to Slovakia even though he had been granted Czech citizenship in February. Though the law was amended in 1996, several discriminatory clauses remained. Poor notification of individual rights under the law and uneven enforcement of its provisions on a local level compounded its effect on the Roma community. The government failed to amend the law  as urged by a special federal commission in its October 1997 report  to grant citizenship to those who resided in the Czech Republic when it split from Slovakia on January 1, 1993. The ruling Social Democratic party (CSSD) campaigned in the 1998 general election on a platform to amend the law but it has made no proposals to do so as of this writing.
Georgia
Human Rights Developments

Despite President Eduard Shevardnadzes repeated public statements indicating a commitment to reform and improved human rights practices, he failed in 1998 to curb and bring to justice members of abusive security forces. Physical abuse of detainees in the custody of the Ministry of Internal Affairs continued to be widespread and routine throughout Georgia.

Cases that came to Human Rights Watchs attention included that of Gulchora Dursunova, detained on suspicion of drug trafficking. Dursunova was reported to have fallen to her death on June 23 at approximately 5:00 a.m. from the eighth floor of the Ministry of Internal Affairs headquarters building in Tbilisi while being questioned by police. On May 6, four police officers from the Galdani Massif police station in Tbilisi detained Jemal Teloyan, and severely and repeatedly beat him, while later detaining his mother and demanding a bribe for his release. In another incident, an angry mob dragged Sergo Kvaratskheli, a resident of Tsalendjika, from his hospital bed and beat him to death on the night of March 7, while local and regional police reportedly looked on. Neighbors had accused Kvaratskheli of stealing items from a grave.

On May 20, the worst fighting since the 1993 cease-fire broke out in the Gali region of Abkhazia. More than 200 people were reported killed and approximately 30,000 fled after Abkhaz militia swept through villages in the Gali region in a deliberate campaign to terrorize inhabitants and destroy their homes by setting them afire. Abkhaz militia reportedly shot, raped and tortured ethnic Georgians during the campaign, and then systematically looted and burned the property of those who fled. Refugees alleged that some units of a predominately Russian CIS peacekeeping force fired on them as they fled, while other CIS peacekeeping force units reportedly acted to protect those seeking refuge. Throughout the year Abkhaz militia reportedly detained and routinely extorted money from ethnic Georgians who had returned to their homes in the Gali region.

The Georgian government denied that its security forces trained, supplied, and directed the activities of some partisan groups despite persistent and highly credible reports that partisan groups had links to the Ministries of Internal Affairs and Defense and, to the State Security Service and to some members of the government. The fighting in Gali erupted after steady reports of violence by Georgian partisans over the past eighteen months.

The Ministry of Internal Affairs continued to ignore calls from international monitors and the Ministry of Justice to transfer both pre-trial and post-conviction facilities to the latters authority. Draft legislation on penitentiary reform proposed earlier by the parliament would have transferred post-conviction facilities to the Ministry of Justice, but the government delayed in giving it final approval.

Visiting international monitors reported to Human Rights Watch that although conditions in the notorious Fifth Investigative Isolator had improved, overcrowding in other pre-trail detention facilities and prisons continued to be a serious concern. Local monitors reported that there was little attempt to reform the rampant corruption and poor conditions in prisons and labor colonies. In August a prisoner in the maximum security Detention Facility No. 14, Petr Gelbakhiani, was stabbed by another inmate, Loti Kobalia, while prison guards failed to react to the attack. Gelbakhiani claimed that after the attack, prison authorities attempted to coerce him into stating that he had attempted suicide.

Senior law-enforcement officials repeatedly claimed that police officials had been prosecuted for a range of offenses, including physical abuse and corruption, in order to alter the climate of impunity. However, the Ministry of Internal Affairs failed to respond to requests from Human Rights Watch to substantiate these claims by releasing information on the number of police officers convicted, the articles of the criminal code under which they were charged, or length of sentence received.

Legal and court reform also suffered a setback. Not enough candidates passed judicial examinations held in May to fill newly created judicial vacancies, thus delaying court reform and the full implementation of the criminal procedure code adopted in November 1997. The government maintained that the examinations were intended to combat widespread corruption in the judiciary and ensure that judges were conversant in recently passed legal reform. Despite concerns raised by some sitting judges, no candidates who sat for the exam, which was carried out in cooperation with international organizations, complained of bias or unfairness.

Local human rights monitors complained of procedural violations in the trial of Jaba Ioseliani, a former member of parliament and leader of the Mkhedrioni paramilitary group, and fourteen other defendants, charged with attempting to assassinate President Shevardnadze in August 1995. Procedural violations included the failure to rule inadmissible testimony allegedly gained from some of the defendants under severe and systematic torture.

The Tbilisi-based print media remained lively and critical, but several incidents suggested that the government is not sufficiently committed to stopping infringements on media freedoms. Under a presidential decree signed in April, all printing presses must register and obtain licenses from a special entity within the presidents office. An alleged harassment campaign and the subsequent conscription into the army, in violation of Georgian law, in May of Amiran Meskheli, a journalist for Orioni [Orion] newspaper, followed an article he wrote detailing sexual abuse in the Georgian army. An official of the State Security Service brought a libel suit in July against Sozar Sobeliani, the editor of Caucasioni [The Caucasus] newspaper, after he published an article regarding the activities of the defense, interior and security ministries in support of Georgian partisans in the Dali Khoeba region of Abkhazia.
Greece
Human Rights Developments

A number of human rights abuses continued to plague Greece during 1998, especially regarding the treatment of the Turkish and Macedonian minorities, as well as of migrants. There continued to be government-imposed restrictions on freedom of expression and freedom of worship. The government of Prime Minister Costas Simitis took some positive steps, including legalizing the presence of more than 400,000 mostly-Albanian migrants and abolishing article 19 of the citizenship law.

As in previous years, the government recognized only one minority, the Muslim minority living in Thrace and protected under the 1923 Treaty of Lausanne. The government continued to deny the existence of a Turkish minority, although most Muslims identify themselves as Turks, regardless of their ethnic origin. In August, the speaker of the parliament stated that the Muslim and Christian population of Thrace should be homogenized. Ethnic minorities that are not officially recognized often suffered restrictions on their freedom of expression and association. Among these ethnic minorities legally denied recognition are Macedonians.

Article 19 of the citizenship law, which had sometimes been used arbitrarily to deprive non-ethnic Greeks of their citizenship, was abolished in June. According to government statistics, 60,000 Greek citizens, mostly ethnic Turks, had been deprived of their citizenship and had become essentially stateless since the introduction of article 19 in 1955. While the apparent intent of the law was to force those deprived of citizenship to migrate to Turkey or Germany, as many as 1,000 former Greek citizens remained in the country after their citizenship had been revoked. As a result, they faced difficulty receiving social services such as health care and education and were denied the rights guaranteed in the 1954 U.N. Convention Relating to the Status of Stateless Persons ratified by Greece in 1975. Moreover, the abolition of article 19 was not retroactive: those who had their citizenship revoked prior to the laws adoption have not been able to have their citizenship reinstated. In January 1998, the state finally gave 150 stateless persons identity documents, which allowed them to travel abroad, as well as to receive social benefits and education. However, in August, the government refused to issue identity cards to another group in direct breach of the law.

The government continued to ban use of the word Turkish to identify the minority or any of its associations. Rasim Hint, formerly a primary school teacher at the school in Xanthi, was suspended for one year in July for having referred to the school as Turkish rather than minority in 1996. For the same reason, Hint had also received punitive transfers from the city of Xanthi to distant mountain villages between 1996-1998.

In Florina (northern Greece) where most ethnic Macedonians live, four ethnic Macedonians were put on trial in September 1998 for inciting citizens to commit acts of violence. The charges stem from an incident in September 1995 when a mob led by the mayor attacked and ransacked the offices of the ethnic Macedonian Rainbow party after the four defendants hung a sign in Greek and in Macedonian stating Rainbow-Florina Committee. Those who attacked the offices were never indicted, although a complaint was filed by the Rainbow party. By contrast, the party was prosecuted for using the Macedonian language on the sign in a clear violation of the right to free expression. However, the party was acquitted on September 15 due to intense international pressure. As of this writing, another Rainbow leader is awaiting trial on similar charges of incitement for having brought calendars from Macedonia bearing the names of Greek towns in Macedonian and praising the inter-war pro-Macedonian policy of the Communist party.

Many ethnic Macedonians who fled Greece as a result of the 1946-49 civil war were not allowed to enter Greece in 1998, even for brief visits, or to attend events related to the fiftieth anniversary of their exodus in July, despite written commitments to the contrary by the Greek government. In July 1998, the European Court of Human Rights found that Greece had violated article 11 (freedom of association) of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) because the Greek courts had not allowed the establishment of the association Home of Macedonian Civilization in 1990.

The countrys estimated 350,000 Roma continued to face widespread societal and governmental discrimination in employment and housing and were frequent targets of police brutality. As in 1997, many municipal authorities tried to expel Roma from their jurisdictions or threatened to do so during the year. Such initiativesalthough in clear violation of Greeces domestic and international obligationswere sometimes upheld by local courts. Most dramatic was the expulsion from Evosmos, near Salonica, in mid-1998, of a large, destitute Roma community, made up of 3,500 people: four mayors threatened to prevent the group from settling in a former military camp allocated by the state and to prevent the public contractor from carrying out the necessary infrastructure work therein; as a result, the group wandered from place to place until it finally settled near a river, after having been expelled from three additional sites. Although local officials sometimes promised to provide alternative housing for the displaced Roma, such housing was rarely if ever allocated. No alternative living quarters were ever provided for Roma who had been forcibly moved from Ano Liosia to a settlement surrounded by a wire fence in 1997.

There were frequent allegations of excessive police violence against Roma throughout the year, and an environment of impunity surrounded police brutality. In two cases the murder of a twenty-nine-year-old Roma in the Partheni region on April 1 and the torture of two Roma teenagers in Mesolongi on May 8forensic evidence supported allegations of police responsibility. Despite such evidence and calls by NGOs for the police to be held accountable, no disciplinary action had been taken against the police officers as of this writing.

Although Greece generally enjoys broad press freedom, independent journalists are often prosecuted for libel for having expressed opinions critical of public officials. On September 3, for example, Yannis Tzoumas, a journalist and publisher of the daily Alithia (Chios), was sentenced to four months in prison for having written an article that was critical of Stavros Soumakis, Minister of the Merchant Marines, in August 1997. Similarly, on September 17, journalist Makis Triantafyllopoulos was given a suspended sentence of eight months for an article in the daily Kalimera (Athens) criticizing the minister of justice. Kalimera was shut down a few months later. This phenomenon was aggravated in 1998 by the announcement on August 18 of a proposed amendment to introduce prison sentences of at least two years for cases of insult and defamation through the electronic media.

Abdulhalim Dede, a journalist who won a 1998 Hellman/Hammett grant from Human Rights Watch for past persecution, was again sentenced in September to eight months imprisonment for installing an antenna without a permit. Although more than 3,000 radio stations in Greece function without licenses and many build their antennas without permits, few are prosecuted. Human rights groups believed that Mr. Dede was singled out primarily because he is an ethnic Turk.

In 1998, migrant workers had the opportunity to register and seek residence permits in Greece for the first time: more than 400,000 took advantage of the measure. Nevertheless, many continued to face discrimination, especially in employment, housing, and in government services. Migrants continued to experience bias before the courts and in dealings with police and prosecutors and, in many cases, no adequate translation was provided during judicial proceedings. There were numerous reports during the year of police brutality against migrants, who were rarely able to obtain adequate remedy for such abuses. Few police were convicted or held accountable on allegations of brutality.

The Eastern Orthodox church maintained its privileged status as the only official religion in Greece, creating a number of disadvantages for other religions. In December 1997, the European Court found that Greece had violated article 14 (prohibition against discrimination) and article 6(1) (right to fair and public hearing) of the ECHR by denying the legal personality of a Catholic church. Similarly, in February, the court found that Greece had violated article 9 (freedom of religion) of the ECHR by unjustly convicting Protestants for proselytism. On December 19, 1997, an association of the Church of Scientology was dissolved for having carried out business practices outside the scope of its statutes. Independent NGOs in Greece, however, pointed to a lack of evidence to support the decision and criticized the courts focus on the churchs proselytizing activities.
Hungary
Human Rights Developments

A new government, formed on July 8, 1998, and led by Prime Minister Viktor Orban of the Federation of Young Democrats/Hungarian Civic Forum, took responsibility for the continuing legacy of discrimination against Roma and routine police abuse that threatened to undermine Hungarys progress in guaranteeing human rights in the post-communist period. The persistence of these abuses in 1998 led domestic human rights groups to criticize both the European Union (EU) and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) for concluding accession agreements with Hungary in the face of strong evidence of Hungarys failure to protect minorities and to hold police accountable for human rights violations.

Official statements enforcing stereotypes about gypsies fueled anti-Roma sentiment in 1998. On January 30, 1998, seven Hungarian human rights groups addressed a public letter to parliament and then-Prime Minister Gyula Horn protesting a public appearance in which Horn accused Roma communities of embracing criminal elements. Addressing the congress of the Lungo DromNational Gypsy Interest Association in Szolnok on January 16, 1998, Horn had noted that Roma communities display strong internal solidarity but added, It is undesirable...that this solidarity extends even to law-breakers. The gypsy community should also dissociate itself from crime. The protest letter criticized Horn for fostering prejudice against Roma and possibly even encouraging discrimination against them. The groups, including the Hungarian Helsinki Committee, claimed that In democratic countries, this is called inciting racist sentiments.

On April 2, 1998, the daily Blikk (Budapest) reported that Vera Pacs, mayor of Isaszeg, had ordered an eighteen-member Roma family to leave the town stating that there were two types of Roma: the good-for-nothing type and the completely wretched type. The refusal to permit the family to remain came after the December 1997 stabbing of an ethnic Hungarian by a Roma man and amidst growing anti-Roma sentiment in the town. The family later moved.

Official tolerance for discrimination against Roma gave some authorities license to take increasingly tough measures to keep Roma out of their communities. The forced relocation of thirteen Roma families who had been illegally occupying the Radio Street 11" building in Szekesfehervar resulted in widespread anti-Roma rhetoric and action beginning in December 1997. The mayor of Patka, Karoly Hedlicska, reportedly gathered close to 1,000 signatures in support of keeping Roma families from Szekesfehervarwho had purchased or were interested in purchasing homes in Patkaout of the town. The mayors of forty-three Fejer County towns and villages in Hungary reportedly met and drafted a resolution that Szekesfehervar should keep its own gypsies and not export them to surrounding communities. On January 8, 1998, the Szekesfehervar government announced that the Roma families would be able to remain in the temporary accommodations they occupied after being removed from the Radio Street 11 building, and the mayor told Reuters that he hoped to find flats for the families.

On April 9, 1998, the Roma Press Center reported that the practice of barring entrance of Roma to popular discos continued in many nightclubs in Bekescaba. In December 1997, the Local Gypsy Self-Government in Bekescaba complained to local authorities about the lack of access to public establishments. Officials responded that they could not restrict the operation of private enterprises without a valid court decision. Local police stated that while discrimination against Roma is against the law, they had no right to force the owners to serve Roma. In April 1998, Imre Furmann, the director of the Legal Defense Bureau for National and Ethnic Minorities, announced that the police do have the legal means to act against club owners. Citing the Law on the Police, which states that the police can arrest a person who continues to commit a minor offense after being warned, and the Law on Consumer Protection, which requires local trade departments issuing licenses for the sale of alcohol to monitor the protection laws anti-discrimination clause, Furmann said that officials could halt discrimination against Roma in access to public establishments in Bekescaba.

Police brutality remained a significant human rights problem in Hungary. A joint survey by the Constitutional and Law Policy Institute and the Hungarian Helsinki Committee released on December 22, 1997, concluded that detainees at police stations were often held in substandard conditions and subjected to physical and psychological violence. With cooperation from the Hungarian Interior Ministry, monitors from the two groups were permitted access to police stations without advance notice. The group concluded that physical mistreatment was common and that foreigners, minors, and Roma were increasingly exposed to police violence.
Kazakstan
Human Rights Developments

In 1998, the government of President Nursultan Nazarbayev sought to control both the mass media and opposition political groups, in anticipation of presidential elections. These elections, hastily brought forward by parliamentary amendments to the constitution in October, were rescheduled from December 2000 to January 1999. Authorities subsequently moved swiftly to exploit amendments to the Kazak Law on Elections, which bar electoral candidates convicted of an administrative or criminal offense from standing for public office, by arresting and sentencing numerous opposition figures and activists on charges of participation in an unsanctioned demonstration. Parliament further amended the constitution extending the terms of office of deputies from both the upper and lower houses by one year and extended the presidential term from five to seven years. Political activists faced increasing harassment, and independent newspapers were closed. The government secured U.S.$4 billion in new foreign investment for energy development, yet abject poverty became more widespread, male life expectancy decreased, and the incidence of tuberculosis in prison populations and among the general public grew. June 10 saw the delayed official changeover of the capital, from Almaty to the northern city of Astana. Although precise figures for 1998 are not available and Kazak courts continue to pass death sentences, it is reported that the number of executions in 1998 has continued a downward trend, as witnessed in 1996 and 1997, from the high of 101 executions carried out in 1995.

On October 15, authorities arrested and convicted several political activists on charges of participating in unsanctioned demonstrations. Sentences ranged from three days of detention to fines. Those sentenced included Peter Svoik of Azamat, Irina Savostina of the Generation Movement, Mels Eleusizov of the Green Party, and political activist Dos Koshim. Under amendments to the Kazak Law on Elections, noone convicted of an administrative or criminal offense may stand for public office.

The Kazak government used both legal means and force to halt criticism in the independent media. In May, the procuracy opened an investigation alleging that the Kazak mass media had committed 273 violations of the Law on the Press in 1997. These violations were said to include abuses of freedom of speech, incitement of national enmity...aimed at instigating disputes and controversy over the countrys history and sovereignty. A procuracy official deemed the investigation necessary because the media frequently permit non-objective, insulting statements directed at government organs, officials and ordinary citizens... it is the media that should shape the ideals of our state and patriotic feelings. As of this writing there were no prosecutions; the announcements, however, probably reinforced the already prevalent practice of self-censorship.

The Kazak government closed two independent newspapers founded earlier in 1998  XXI Vek [21st Century] and Dat [The Vow]both known for their critical coverage of the government.

The campaign to close XXI Vek began on September 10, when Almatys Franklin printing press refused to print the weekly. Five days later, the Daoiys distribution company annulled its contract with XXI Vek . At 4:30 a.m. on September 26, unknown assailants threw a molotov cocktail into the office of editor Bigeldy Gabdullin. Finally, on September 28, the Almaty city justice department informed the independent weekly newspaper, XXI Vek of impending liquidation proceedings for alleged violations of the civil code and the law on the press and mass media.

On June 26, Dat reprinted an article from a major Russian newspaper, Izvestiya, that criticized the chief of the tax police, Rakhat Aliyev for alleged excesses during a hunting trip. On July 22 and 23, tax police raided Dat s offices and confiscated financial records, safes, computers, and cash. Dat has appealed the resulting fine of 1.5 million tenge (U.S.$20,000). In September, Dat was preparing to publish an article containing allegations of corruption against Aliyev, when authorities brought criminal charges against the newspaper under Article 22 of the Law on National Security (see below), which prohibits foreign ownership of a Kazak media outlet. These charges reportedly relate to three stamps and foreign companies letterhead that were discovered ( Dat editors maintain they were planted) during the earlier tax police raid.

The Nazarbayev government sought to neutralize political opponents. Following an unsanctioned demonstration it organized on November 30, 1997, three co-chairs of the Azamat opposition group came under fire. On December 1, four masked men beat Petr Svoik who had organized the demonstration in neighboring Kyrgyzstan; on December 2, Murat Auezov received a 2,480 tenge (U.S.$32) fine for participation in that demonstration. Also in December, police arrested Galim Abilseitov, in connection with the same demonstration. At his trial, Abilseitov alleged that he was not allowed to testify in his own defense, and that he was denied a public hearing and the services of a lawyer. Although sentenced to fifteen days of imprisonment, Abilseitov was released after seven days following a district procurators ruling that his trial had indeed been illegal.

In February 1998, local human rights groups reported that police detained and beat Madel Ismailov, chairman of the opposition Workers Movement, holding him incommunicado for several days before informing relatives of his whereabouts. On April 7, Ismailov was convicted under article 318 of the Kazak criminal code, of insulting the honor and dignity of the president, and received a one-year sentence to be served in a general prison colony. Ismailov was reportedly filmed sharply criticizing the authorities while speaking at a November 7, 1997, rally. A June 3 appeal hearing confirmed the sentence.

On September 18, police detained Mikhail Vasilenko, advisor to former prime minister Akezhan Kazhegeldin, as he attempted to deliver Kazhegeldins proposals on election law and constitutional amendments to President Nazarbayev. Vasilenko was held incommunicado, tried, and sentenced on charges of hooliganism, and released five days later. Earlier in September authorities confiscated the Russian edition of a book by Kazhegeldin on solutions to current political problems and prevented the printing of the Kazak version.

Most disturbingly, the Nazarbayev administration paved the way for a possible wholesale crackdown on political opponents and the independent media with a new Law on the National Security of the Republic of Kazakstan, passed on June 26, 1998. The law features a vague and expansive definition of national security that has already been used used to deter and punish political opponents of the government for peacefully exercising their rights of speech, assembly, and association. Threats to national security may include political extremism in any form, incitement of social...discord, unsanctioned gatherings, prevention of the growth of investment activity, a deterioration in the demographic situation, including a sharp reduction in the birthrate, increased mortality, and...unchecked migration, and a deterioration in the quality of education. Specifically outlawed is the dissemination of all overseas media whose content undermines national security. The law authorizes the procurator general to suspend the activity of the news media without providing for any right of appeal.
Kyrgyzstan
Human Rights Developments

In 1998, under the leadership of President Askar Akaev, Kyrgyzstan moved ever further from its popular image as a model new democracy and leader in rights reform. Police abuse, religious persecution, trafficking of women, and violations of the right to free expression made a mockery of Kyrgyzstans international reputation.

Several disturbing allegations of police abuse and deaths in custody raised concern about conditions in detention more generally. Torture occurred most commonly in pre-trial detention facilities during interrogation sessions, when police beat and threatened detainees in order to coerce self-incriminating statements. Prison conditions in general remained abysmal as lack of sanitation and significant overcrowding threatened the health of inmates.

There were at least two reported deaths in custody in 1998. On January 23, police in Tamga took Muratbek Sulaimanov into custody on suspicion of cattle theft, and hours later delivered his dead body to his relatives. The arresting officers denied wrongdoing, and even claimed that Sulaimanov was released in good health but then fell down the stairs; the autopsy revealed that Sulaimanov died from numerous injuries caused by a severe beating. The case went to the Jeti-Oguz court on July 24; however, as of September the verdict was not known.

One month after Sulaimanovs death, on February 27, police in the Lenin region brutally beat seventeen-year-old Sergei Skromnov and then buried him, unconscious but alive, in ashes at the city heating plant, where he died of suffocation. An investigation into Skromnovs death continued as of September, and officials were allegedly obstructing the investigation. In a possible instance of retaliation, one officer was dismissed from the department after giving testimony against the officers accused of the murder.

The trafficking of women and young girls from Kyrgyzstan to Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and other countries for work in the sex industry continued in 1998. Kyrgyz women and girls were commonly promised legitimate work abroad and then found themselves indebted to their traffickers for travel expenses and pressured to work in the sex industry to repay the debt. They reported that the traffickers confiscated their passports, locked them in rooms, beat them and forced them to have sex with as many as fifteen men a day. Officials from the visa and registration department in Kyrgyzstan were said to be complicit in the trafficking of women out of the country, by receiving bribes from the traffickers in return for forged travel documents. Russian border guards in Kyrgyzstan were allegedly willing to turn a blind eye to the transport of women for work in prostitution abroad.

More women reported incidents of domestic violence in 1998. It is not known, however, whether this reflected a real increase in the number of cases of domestic violence or a greater willingness on the part of victims to report it. Local womens groups took positive steps to address the needs of abused women, maintaining shelters where they could receive legal advice, medical attention, and protection from abusive husbands or others.

In late 1997 and 1998, the government campaign intensified against orthodox or fundamentalist Muslims, to whom officials refer as Wahhabis. In December 1997 the Ministry of National Security (MNS) set up special units to control the activities of Wahhabis and other so-called religious sects. In February 1998, Colonel Talan Razakov, head of the MNS department on religious organizations, reportedly stated, Regrettably, our Constitution says that every one is at liberty to choose the religion he wishes. Apparently not viewing such constitutional precepts as limitations on the MNS, he then proclaimed, We are taking definite measures to find, stop, and prevent the Wahhabis activities.

These threats were matched by strict punitive measures against perceived fundamentalist Muslim believers. The Muslim Spiritual Board of Kyrgyzstan, a quasi-governmental body, forced the closure of the Islamic Center after accusing Center leader Sadykjan Kamalov, a former mufti of Kyrgyzstan, of being a Wahhabi. The MNS targeted pious Muslims from other countries, whom they considered the source of Wahhabism. Twenty Wahhabi supporters, most from Pakistan, were expelled from Kyrgyzstan in 1997. This trend continued in 1998 with the expulsion of Imam Karimov, a refugee from Tajikistan, for allegedlyspreading Wahhabi ideas. At least one Uzbek national was also expelled for disseminating fundamentalist Islamic ideas. In April and May 1998, about twenty ethnic Uighurs were arrested on charges of illegal weapons possession and possession of Wahhabi video tapes. MNS employees also proudly declared they had confiscated 400 copies of a religious book published in Saudi Arabia.

In a positive move, President Askar Akaev attempted to follow through on his vows to decriminalize defamation and protect freedom of the press. In November 1997, he reportedly sent parliament a draft amendment to the criminal code that removed slander, making it a civil offense. When the upper house of Parliament rejected the bill on March 10, President Akaev put the issue to a referendum to change the constitution to guarantee greater freedom of speech. On October 17, 1998, voters reportedly elected to amend the constitution to state that the Adoption of laws limiting freedom of expression and of press is inadmissable. In December 1997, he vetoed a media law that sought to limit the topics legally covered by journalists and to force them to compromise the confidentiality of their sources in certain cases.

In practice, however, authorities continued to harass journalists who criticized the actions of government officials. Irina Stepkicheva of Nasha Gazeta (Our Newspaper), who faced a civil suit for articles critical of the procurator general, reported that procuracy officials repeatedly threatened her and her thirteen-year-old daughter. On May 9, 1998, unknown assailants set fire to the front door of the home of Tatiana Kchmada, a reporter from Res Publica newspaper. Kchmada regarded this attack as retaliation for an expos she had written about government corruption.

The Akaev government continued to display intolerance for political opposition members. In January, police arrested political activist Kubanichbek Apas when he returned to Kyrgyzstan from Russia, where he had relocated due to repeated government harassment. Apas returned to visit his wife and children and was promptly arrested on outstanding charges of criminal libel and insulting the honor and dignity of the president. Shortly after his arrest in January, he was released under a 1997 amnesty law.

What appeared to be an easing of the treatment of jailed opposition activist Tobchubek Turgunaliev took a turn for the worse in August 1998. Coinciding with U.S. First Lady Hillary Rodham Clintons visit to Kyrgyzstan in November 1997, Turgunaliev was allowed to return from a remote settlement colony to his home in Bishkek to serve the remainder of his four-year sentence for embezzlement. In May, the Supreme Court reduced his sentence to three years. In August, however, local authorities informed Turgunaliev that he would have to spend his nights at penal colony #35 in Bishkek. This followed his participation in a peaceful rally to protest the eviction of independent newspaper Asaba from its long-held office space in a building of the Ministry of the Interior.

On September 22, authorities from the Ministry of National Security in Bishkek arrested Nazarbek Nyshanov, chairman of the newly-formed Patriotic Block, a coalition of opposition political parties, for alleged embezzlement. Nyshanov was held in a pre-trial detention facility and reportedly denied access to an attorney.
Macedonia
Human Rights Developments

On paper Macedonia is a parliamentary democracy with a separation of powers and human rights guarantees. In reality, difficiencies remained in 1998, especially regarding abuse by the police, independence of the judiciary, and the treatment of ethnic minorities.

One of the main human rights problems was the misconduct of the police and other law enforcement officials. With disturbing frequency, individuals were arrested without a warrant and beaten until they confessed to a crime. Procedural violations were commonplace. Individuals were often held longer than the twenty-four hours allowed by law, not informed of the reason for their arrest, and denied immediate access to a lawyer. The practice of informative talkssummoning a person to the police for questioningcontinued even though it was forbidden by Macedonian law.

On many occasions, the courts collaborated with the police by backdating arrest warrants or refusing to accept a defendants complaint of police abuse. In some cases, the courts demanded money from defendants, apparently in exchange for their release. Very rarely did the courts hold abusive police officers accountable. As a result, many citizens were reluctant to complain of police mistreatment, believing that, at best, they would gain nothing and, at worst, they would invite retribution. The Ministry of the Interiors legal affairs bureau failed to take forceful steps to punish policemen, even when they were repeat offenders.

Macedonias ethnic communitiesAlbanians, Turks, Roma, and Bulgarians, among otherswere especially susceptible to abuse. But violations cut across ethnic lines: all ethnic groups in Macedonia suffered violence at the hands of the police, as well asprocedural violations, almost always with no recourse through the courts. The common characteristic among victims, rather than ethnicity, was usually the persons oppositional political activity or low social-economic status.

The most serious case of police violence took place in July 1997, when special forces of the Macedonian police, some of them trained in the United States, used excessive force against violent ethnic Albanian demonstrators in the western town of Gostivar, leaving more than 200 people injured, including nine policemen, and three people dead. A parliamentary investigatory commission was formed in September 1997 but did not produce its report until March 11, 1998. It recognized that some police abuse had taken place, but provided no details and failed to identify any of the abusive policemen or their superiors. The government was obliged to respond to the recommendations of the report, which included undertaking legal measures to establish responsibility, by April 31, 1998. By October 1998, the government had not yet responded.

A report by the European Roma Rights Center in July documented serious police abuse against Macedonias Roma population. The report detailed cases of racially motivated violence against Roma by civilians and the police, as well as the judicial systems failure to remedy these abuses. The report also criticized Macedonias citizenship law, by which citizenship has been denied to Roma who lived in Macedonia for most of their lives.

Ethnic Albanians continued to complain of state discrimination, particularly in state employment and education. Albanians remained underrepresented in government, especially in the police force, even in areas where they made up the majority of the local population. The highly disputed private Albanian-language university in Tetovo, which opened in 1994 against the wishes of the government, continued to operate in 1998 without government interference. But the government refused to recognize the diplomas of the first graduating class in 1998.

Four ethnic Albanian politicians, who had been arrested in 1997 for raising the Albanian state flag in front of two town halls, had their sentences reduced but not overturned in 1998, despite the fact that their original trials had been marred by due process violations. Rufi Osmani, mayor of Gostivar, had his sentence reduced from thirteen years and eight months to seven years for inciting national, racial, and religious hatred, organizing armed resistance, and disobeying an order of the constitutional court, after he raised the Albanian state flag in front of the Gostivar town hall. The mayor of Tetovo and two city council members were sentenced to lesser prison terms. Human rights groups that observed the 1997 trials raised concern about a number of due process violations, including poor access to the case files, restricted lawyer consultations, and the courts refusal to accept witnesses on behalf of the defense.

The Macedonian media were generally free, although some government restrictions remained in 1998. The state radio and television were still biased in favor of the government, and there were allegations of political decision-making in the allocation of private broadcast licenses. The state also maintained a disproportionate control over the printing and distribution of print media.

The fighting in Kosovo between Yugoslav government forces and the Albanian insurgency, known as the Kosova Liberation Army (KLA), exacerbated already existing ethnic tension in Macedonia. An estimated 8,000 ethnic Albanians from Kosovo entered Macedonia and were allowed to stay as visitors. Ethnic Albanians in Macedonia held a number of large and emotional demonstrations in support of Kosovar Albanians, although no incidents of violence were reported. Throughout the year, a number of bombs exploded in cities throughout Macedonia. Many suspected they were actions of the KLA, but this remained unproven.

Parliamentary elections were held on October 18, the third general election since the end of one-party communist rule. The nationalist VMRO-DPMNE party won the election and, in a right-wing coalition with the Democratic Alternative (DA) party, took control of the government from the Social Democrats (SDSM). A new electoral law adopted in June created a new, mixed electoral system that combined the majority and proportional systems. For the first time, the voter registry was made available to political parties for review, and voter identification cards were issued. Ethnic Albanian political parties, however, complained about the composition of the electoral commissions, district gerrymandering, and inadequate state funding for voter education. The opposition VMRO-DPMNE party complained of inaccurate voter registries. The two previous general elections in Macedonia were marred by irregularities, although they were both considered acceptable by international observers.
Romania
Human Rights Developments

In 1998 political instability and infighting among partners in the governing coalition slowed the pace of democratic and economic reform and inhibited progress on human rights in Romania. Romanias non-communist President, Emil Constantinescu, elected in 1996 in the first truly democratic presidential election since the overthrow of the dictator Nicolae Ceaucescu in 1989,forged a coalition government headed by Victor Ciorbea of the National Peasants/Christian Democratic Party. As a result of the Democratic Partys threat to withdraw from the coalition, and in order to avoid early elections, Prime Minister Ciorbea resigned on March 30, 1998, and was replaced by Radu Vasile, secretary general of the National Peasants Party, on April 2. In late September, the Union of Democratic Magyars (UDMR) of Romania also threatened to withdraw from the coalition government in protest against the governments refusal to establish a Hungarian-language university, a longstanding demand of the Hungarian minority. The UDMR and the government reached a compromise: a multicultural university with instruction in Romanian, Hungarian, and German is to be established, and the UDMR will remain in government.

Despite the governments promises and pressure from NGOs and the international community, Vasiles shaky coalition governmentcomposed of numerous political parties with conflicting agendasmade no noticeable progress in resolving long-entrenched human rights problems such as discrimination and other ill-treatment directed at ethnic and sexual minorities. In addition, the government prosecuted critical journalists under its libel statutes, and there continued to be nearly complete impunity for police brutality, especially when the victims were unpopular minorities.

On June 25, the Chamber of Deputies voted against a government-sponsored amendment to the penal code that would have decriminalized consensual homosexual acts. Under article 200 of the penal code, consensual homosexual acts that are committed in public or which cause a public scandal may be punished with imprisonment of one to five years. Article 200 also punishes conduct that incit[es] or encourag[es] . . . sexual relations between persons of the same sex, as well as propaganda or association or any other act of proselytism committed in the same scope, . . . by imprisonment of one to five years. Expressions of homosexual identity or solidarity, as well as the establishment of gay and lesbian organizations and the dissemination of information are also punishable under this law.

The Chamber of Deputies also failed to amend the criminal code provision prohibiting defamation of the nation and/or state authorities. During 1998, these provisions were used to punish journalists who exposed corruption among public officials. On March 13, three journalists from the Buzau newspaper Opinia received one year in prison for printing accusations that a former prosecutors mother rented her house for use by those involved in an illegal pyramid scheme. In Bistrita on May 25, Cornel Sabou, editor-in-chief of Trans-Press agency, received a sentence of ten months for publishing protests against a judge accused of using his influence for personal pecuniary gain. On July 23, a court in Iasi sentenced Ovidiu Scultelnicu and Dragos Stangu to one year of imprisonment, a fine of 1.5 billion lei (U.S.$175,000), and deprivation of some civil rights, as well as the right to practice journalism for twelve months, for criticizing police colonel Petru Susanus policing methods and questioning the origin of his personal fortune. On August 29, in Botosani, Florentin Florescu, and Radu Burlacu were fined 100 million lei ($11,250) for reporting a local politicians efforts to influence the magistrates assigned to his sons trial. Scultelnicu, Stangu, Florescu, and Burlacu all worked for Monitorul , a regional independent daily operating in northeastern Romania.

The Romanian Helsinki Committee (RHC) also received and investigated numerous reports from individuals who claimed to have been tortured or abused by the police. The RHC also reports numerous instances of the unlawful use of firearms by police. The military prosecutor has jurisdiction over such complaints, but was reluctant to indict police officers for such abuses. Romanian law provides no other remedy for victims of police abuse. Roma are disproportionately the victims of police misconduct. Conditions in detention facilities continued to fall well below international standards in 1998.

Women also faced police harassment and discrimination in Romania. In May, police in Braila summoned women suspected of traveling to Turkey to engage in sex work to the police station and threatened them with arrest and public exposure of their activities in Turkey if they refused to surrender their passports. Police then confiscated their passports, preventing the women from leaving the country. On a positive note, the Romanian parliament adopted a law on May 29 defining and punishing sexual harassment in the workplace and prohibiting discrimination against married or pregnant women in employment.
The Russian Federation

Human Rights Developments

The collapse of the ruble and the Russian banking system triggered a sharp political crisis in what President Boris Yeltsin had named the Year of Human Rights in Russia. In August, the Russian government defaulted on its short-term foreign debt and devalued the ruble, and the already crisis-stricken economy went into free-fall. President Yeltsin dismissed Prime Minister Kiriyenko, and, after a month of political haggling that nearly plunged the country into chaos, the parliament approved former Foreign Minister Evgenii Primakov as Prime Minister.

The financial crisis came after years of government arrears on wages and pensions, widespread corruption, and insider privatization deals. The governments response to these festering problems inertia, empty promises, and neglectwas similar toits response to human rights problems in 1998. The government neglected long-standing problems of police torture, appalling prison conditions and the grave abuse of conscripts. The federal government imposed further restrictions on freedom of information and freedom of conscience, and it did nothing to redress infringements on civil rights by regional leaders. Indeed the only positive developments were the transfer of the prison system to the Ministry of Justice, the ratification of the European Convention on Human Rights and the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment.

Political freedoms were increasingly under attack in 1998, both on a federal and regional level. Freedom of expression, which had flourished since the end of the cold war, suffered several blows in 1998. Prime Minister Evgenii Primakovs decision immediately following his appointment in mid-September to ban government officials from talking to reporters without prior permission was reminiscent of attempts by other governments in the C.I.S. to stifle freedom of information. New rules under discussion at the time of this writing threatened to compromise freedom of speech on the Internet and endanger the further development of Russias emerging civil society. Draft regulations submitted by the Federal Security Service (FSB) regarding the Internet and E-mail would allow the security services to monitor all such communications without obtaining prior permission, through a black box Internet service providers would have to pay for themselves.

In August, a Moscow tax inspectorate ordered the confrontational weekly newspaper Novaya Gazeta (New Newspaper) to pay a $127,000 fine after an apparently politically motivated audit. According to the newspapers editor-in-chief, tax inspectors questioned several undocumented expenses made, among others, during trips to Chechnya and Afghanistan. Despite rumors that the paper would be closed, it was still publishing as of this writing.

Russias provinces continued to devolve into fiefdoms that engage in civil and political rights violations with impunity from Moscow. In an apparent exchange for support of its policies or promises not to seek secession, the central government turned a blind eye to corruption by regional leaders, and refused to react to blatant human rights violations in the regions. Chief among these were harassment of ethnic minorities and violations of press freedom, freedom of conscience, and electoral rights.

Journalists in Russias regions suffered harassment as regional governors and presidents tried to expand their control over local media outlets. Regional leaders were believed to be behind threats, beatings, and even murders of numerous journalists. They also closed a variety of radio stations and newspapers. According to the National Press Institute, the economic crisis that started in August forced numerous regional newspapers to lay off staff, reduce the papers frequency and volume, and cancel subscriptions to outside news sources.

According to information from the Glasnost Defense Foundation (GDF), at least nine journalists were murdered in the first eight months of 1998. Six of them may have been killed for investigating and exposing criminal structures and corruption in government and banks; in most of these cases, police were quick to announce that they were a result of family arguments. Through July, the GDF registered at least sixty-six attacks on journalists, editors, and newspapers in regions throughout Russia, including Kaliningrad, Kirov, Saransk, Bashkortostan, and Rostov; this represented a sharp rise since 1997. In by far the most convincing case of government collusion in the death of a journalist, on June 7, Larisa Yudina, editor-in-chief of the opposition newspaper Sovietskaya Kalmykia Segodnya [Soviet Kalmykia Today] was found stabbed to death by a pond in the Kalmyk capital, Elista. She had last been seen heading out to meet a man who had promised to give her documents about misappropriation of funds by the Kalmyk Republics president, Kirsan Ilyumzhinov. Kalmyk authorities had previously threatened Yudina with closure of her newspaper. By November, the Procurator General in Moscow (which, under pressure from parliament and the media, immediately took charge of the investigation) had arrested four suspects. The Kalmyk authorities reverted to Soviet practices in early March when they placed Lidia Dordzhieva, head of the humanitarian organization Heart to Heart, in a psychiatric hospital after she had led a hunger strike of disabled people and mothers of large families to protest government allowance arrears. Doctors diagnosed her as healthy, she was released after about a week, and later granted asylum abroad.

In the run-up to the June presidential elections in the Republic of Bashkiriya, incumbent Murtaza Rakhimov harassed those media outlets that had evaded his tight control. After Radio Titan, the only independent radio station in the republic, broadcast an interview with three opposition candidates, police raided its offices, beating and rounding up staff members and supporters who had held a round-the-clock vigil around the building in anticipation of the governments response. Following the incident, the government closed Radio Titan; it also harassed two of the regions last opposition newspapers by closing Vecherny Neftekamsk [Evening Neftekamsk] in March and through a violent August 14 attack on Sergei Fufayev, of the newspaper Otechestvo (Fatherland). Both Otechestvo and Vmeste [Together], another opposition newspaper, are printed outside Bashkiriya; police at least twice confiscated copies of these newspapers as they were being transported in by car. Vecherny Neftekamsk appealed the closure to the Supreme Court. As of this writing, the paper remained closed.

President Rakhimov easily won the elections after striking three opposition candidates off the ballot. The Supreme Court ruled unlawful the Bashkir governments refusal to register two of these candidates and the postponement of the elections. Despite theserulings, neither the local nor central election commission annulled the election results.

Russias discriminatory religion law, adopted in September 1997, served to legitimize an already existing practice by regional authorities of arbitrary restrictions and harassment of non-traditional religious associations (e.g., non-Orthodox or not among the mainstream Orthodox denominations). Throughout the year, various regions have adopted new legislation that is even more restrictive than the federal law. Local authorities also attempted illegally to revoke the registration of religious associations, refused to register new ones, attempted to evict religious associations from Church buildings with the aim of granting the buildings to the Orthodox Church, arbitrarily evicted religious groups from public buildings where they had worshiped for several years, and imposed arbitrary and disproportionate rent hikes. Several religious associations reported arbitrary police searches of worship rooms and Church buildings. Among the most frequently targeted religious associations were the Pentecostal Church, the Catholic Church, alternative branches of the Orthodox Church, and the Jehovahs Witnesses.

The federal government ignored the overwhelming majority of cases of harassment against religious associations in the regions. The Keston Institute reported that in one exceptional case, the Prime Ministers office apparently interfered with a local government officials unlawful activities when his attempts to close a Lutheran parish in the Republic of Khakasiya threatened to become an international incident. In September, however, when intense attention from Western media subsided, a local court simply closed the parish down. In an attempt to appease international concern and to avoid U.S. Senate-proposed sanctions, government officials repeatedly promised to issue liberal implementation instructions to the law that would weaken its harshest provisions. However, the Ministry of Justice instructions issued in March upheld all of the laws restrictions and continued to deny religious associations the same rights as those associations that were registered in the pre-perestroika Soviet state. In July, several religious rights organizations submitted an appeal against certain provisions of the law to the Constitutional Court, which has not yet heard the case.

Regional governments continued to infringe on freedom of movement through a restrictive civilian registration system, despite a Constitutional Court decision ordering a loosening of a federal law governing registration. This was particularly practiced in the wealthier regions, such as Moscow, and in regions with large refugee populations, such as southern Russia. For example, the powerful mayor of Moscow, Yury Luzhkov, announced in March on public television that he would not implement the Constitutional Court decision and that he had instructed Moscows police departments to continue to enforce the old regulations. The federal authorities apparently took no steps to force the Moscow city government to comply with the courts decision.

The Moscow city police continued to enforce registration rules in a predatory and discriminatory way, beating and extorting bribes predominantly from people with dark skin, invading the privacy of their apartments, and destroying identity documents. As was the case a year earlier during Moscows 850th anniversary celebrations, police harassment and violence against ethnic minorities sharply increased during the Olympic Youth Games, held in July. During one of these routine document checks in June, Moscow police even detained a Council of Europe representative with dark features who had come to Moscow to participate in a human rights education seminar. Also during the games, police forcibly removed homeless people from Moscow and forced Mdcins sans Frontirs to close its medical aid program for the homeless at the time of the games.

Police violence against ethnic minorities in Moscow, and its silent endorsement by Mayor Luzhkov, fostered an atmosphere of impunity for racist violence; this no doubt contributed to the upsurge in skinhead attacks on minority groups. The attack on an African-American U.S. Marine in May attracted media attention but was not an isolated incident. Dark-skinned people, including refugees and students from the Caucasus, Central Asia, Africa, and Asia constantly encountered harassment, threats, and violence from teenage groups. Around Adolf Hitlers birthday in late April, skinheads escalated violence against Asians and Africans. Skinhead groups were also blamed for exploding a bomb in the Marina Roshcha Synagogue in Moscow in May. Krasnodar province governor Nikolai Kondratenko made blatantly racist and anti-Semitic statements; however no cases of police or Cossack violence against ethnic minorities were reported in 1998. The federal government sought to resolve the problem by prohibiting fascist groups, without addressing the problem of official racism and anti-Semitism.

Refugee protections deteriorated significantly in part due to the economic crisis. Police improperly denied many asylum seekers claims for status, and asylum seekers regularly lost court appeals against such decisions. Russia also failed to grant protection against persecution by security services from the persons country of origin. In one outrageous case, Azerbaijani law enforcement agencies attempted to kidnap Ali Gassanov an Azerbaijani citizen whom the UNHCR had recognized as a refugee in Russia in collaboration with the St. Petersburg police. The Russian Procuracy General had not only turned down Azerbaijans request to extradite Gassanov, it had ordered the St. Petersburg police to guarantee him protection from harm. According to Civic Assistance, a nongovernmental organization that provides legal assistance to refugees, the Federal Migration Service cooperated more with nongovernmental organizations than it had in previous years, with the exception of the Moscow migration service.

Russias criminal justice system degenerated and moved further away from Council of Europe standards. Government commitments before the Council of Europe to reform the procuracy, the FSB, and the code of criminal procedure remained unfulfilled.

Human Rights Watch research in 1998 on police torture found that corruption and abuse were the rule rather than exception. Criminal justice officials were known to solicit and accept bribes to drop charges and investigations. Crime-solving statistics were improbably high, due in part to torture. The Russian media in 1998 published an unprecedented number of articles about torture, yet this new public awareness did not move the Russian government to acknowledge the problem in a meaningful way or to take appropriate measures to deal with it.

According to Human Rights Watch research conducted in 1998 in three of Russias regions, torture occurred mostly in the early hours of detention when police isolated suspects from family and attorneys. Police forcibly extracted confessions using beatings, asphyxiation, electroshock, and other forms of physical and psychological violence. Demands for a lawyer were routinely refused and often resulted in more violence.

Torture victims who confessed faced almost insurmountable obstacles in proving that they had done so under duress. The Soviet-era criminal procedure code grants victims access to forensic medical examinations after gaining permission from investigators, who routinely refused such requests. Police and procurators offices frequently used forced confessions as the basis for criminal cases, and judges frequently used such confessions as the basis for a conviction.

Police tortured with almost complete impunity. The procuracy routinely reviewed complaints of physical abuse, but such procedures amounted to mere formalities at best. In the few cases where criminal proceedings were instituted against police officers, the procurators office gave no priority to the investigation and often tried to sabotage the proceedings, delaying and closing them without good reason. Police sometimes intimidated complaining torture victims as well as procurators and judges dealing with criminal cases against them.

An extreme shortage of judges slowed criminal trials and overwhelmed sitting judges. Acquittal rates were below one percent, reminiscent of the Soviet era. For example, the Moscow City Court tried to strip power from a leading Russian judge, Sergei Pashin who headed the presidential department for judicial reform before it was disbanded in December 1995. Pashin frequently acquitted defendants if evidence provided by the prosecution was insufficient and he actively filed judicial inquiries to police stations about torture allegations.

The combination of torture, low quality criminal investigations and court practice have led to serious judicial mistakes. For example, twenty-five-year-old Sergei Mikhailov from Arkhangelsk province was sentenced to death in April 1995 for raping and murdering a minor in October 1994. He confessed soon after his arrest, apparently under torture. However, several years later, after an identical murder was committed in the town, objective evidence was found that another man was guilty of the murder. Instead of releasing Mikhailov, the procurators office in Arkhangelsk has stubbornly tried to obscure its mistakes. Despite the fact that two special investigators in Arkhangelsk and the procuracy of a neighboring province concluded in June 1997 and June 1998 respectively that Mikhailovs conviction should be overturned, the procurators office had refused to initiate proceedings as of this writing. As of this writing, Mikhailov had been in detention for four years, three and a half of them on death row.

Conditions in Russias severely overcrowded prisons continued to be torturous. Defendants often spend excessively long times in pre-trial detention, sometimes up to four years or more, due to delays in the criminal investigation process and especially in the courts. Hygiene is very poor and tuberculosis increasingly common. Complying with Council of Europe conditions, the Russian government transferred the prison system from the Ministry of Internal Affairs to the Ministry of Justice. Minister of Justice Pavel Krashenninikov announced plans to alleviate overcrowding by limiting terms in pre-trial detention to one year, but in the midst of the political and economic crisis, it was unclear whether these plan would be realized.

Russia once again did not impose an official moratorium on the death penalty, although no executions were carried out. Death row prisoners remained in legal limbo as death sentences were generally not commuted to life imprisonment and courts continued to sentence people to death leading to growing numbers of death row prisoners. For example, in Arkhangelsk, the number of death row prisoners had grown to fifteen by July, while the average before the unofficial 1996 moratorium had been three to five. Due to the lack of facilities many death row prisoners were placed in special punishment cells.

The Russian government systematically failed to respond to violence against women. In the face of rampant rape and domestic violence, police and prosecutors routinely rejected or discouraged complaints, often suggesting that female complainants either provoked or fabricated attacks. In the rare cases in which rape reports were investigated, women were subjected to highly invasive and seemingly irrelevant broad inquiries into their psychological state, reputations, and sexual histories.

The FSB continued its prosecution on espionage charges of Alexander Nikitin, former navy captain and environmental activist. Nikitin was arrested by the FSB (and later released under city arrest) in 1996 for co-authoring a report for the Norwegian environmental group, Bellona Foundation, on the dangers of nuclear contamination caused by the Russian Northern Fleet. In violation of the constitution, the FSBs last indictment (like its previous indictments) cited secret legal acts that are central to its case against Nikitin. Moreover it improperly cited the Law on State Secrets. The offices of the St. Petersburg procurator and theProcurator General refused to acknowledge this and sent the case to court.

Nikitins requests for the Supreme Court to hear his case in first instance and to be tried by a panel of three professional judges were turned down. Subsequently, a panel of one professional judge and two lay assessors of the St. Petersburg City Court were to hear Nikitins case. Serious concern existed about the fairness of the trial, as the two lay assessors needed to undergo a FSB security clearance that could veto lay assessors FSB did not like. In a positive development, presiding judge Sergei Golets demanded to see the secret decrees and allowed the press and public to attend the first hour of the trial, which started on October 20.

In November 1997, the FSB detained military journalist Grigory Pasko at Vladivostok airport after a trip to Japan and accused him of espionage. There were allegations that the FSB had fabricated the charges against Pasko in retaliation for his highly critical publications about environmental pollution and corruption in Russias pacific fleet. Pasko had faced frequent FSB harassment since he produced a documentary film about the Russian governments dumping of nuclear waste in the Sea of Japan in 1993. This documentary shocked the Japanese public and embarrassed the Russian government. The local procuracy and the Procurator General ignored appeals from Paskos lawyers and human rights organizations about systematic violations of procedural law during the investigation. The court hearing on the case was set for late October.

In the ethnically complex northern Caucasus republic of Dagestan, tensions between various ethnic groups, especially the Dargins and Avars, rose sharply, and many feared inter-ethnic conflict. Unrest continued throughout the summer, including the storming of Dagestans parliament in May, several hostage-takings, and attacks on the mayor of the Dagestani capital, Makhachkala.
Slovakia
Human Rights Developments

In September elections, Slovakia ousted the government of Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar, whose term in office had been marked by dubious human rights practices. The opposition Slovak Democratic Coalition (SDK), led by Mikulas Dzurinda, promised reforms in areas of electoral process, freedom of the press, and the treatment of national minorities. As of this writing, however, a government had not yet been formed.

While in power in 1998, Vladimir Meciars government manipulated the electoral system, attacked the independent media while unfairly using Slovak State Television (STV) to promote its reelection campaign, and despite international condemnation, failed to prevent abuses against the Roma community.

On March 2, the term of Slovak President Michal Kovac ended with no successor in place. The ruling party, the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS), declined to nominate a candidate in any of the nine rounds of voting, making it difficult for anyone to win by the necessary three-fifths margin and passing most presidential powers to the prime minister. Meciar used these new powers to consolidate his political standing in the months before the September national elections when among other things, he canceled a referendum for the direct election of the president that had been scheduled for May. Additionally, on March 3, the government extended blanket immunity to those implicated in the undermining of the 1997 referendum, as well as the August 1995 kidnapping of the son of former President Kovac. Protesting the decision to cancel the May referendum, the SDK collected more than 400,000 signatures petitioning for the referendum to be reinstated. Though under Slovak law the parliament is required to discuss a topic if a petition obtains 100,000 signatures, the ruling coalition refused to raise the issue before the election.

The parliament, while controlled by HZDS, passed a revised election law in April that caused grave concern among opposition parties and international observers. The passage of the law so close to the general election undermined the electoral process by creating specific barriers to opposition parties. The new law required individual parties to garner at least 5 percent of the vote in order to qualify for seats in the parliament and forced the opposition SDK, which is made up of several small parties, hastily to form a single party only a few months before the election. In addition, the law called for participation of partisan government officials in the counting of ballots while not allowing independent domestic election monitors, increasing the likelihood of ballot fraud and manipulation. Though the government welcomed election observers from the OSCE, on August 24 Prime Minister Meciar announced that observers from the U.S., the U.K., Hungary, and the Czech Republic would not be invited because he did not want observers from those unfriendly countries to abuse their presence by possibly criticizing the election. The election law also contained provisions that restricted the right of the independent media to cover the national election campaign.

The government took steps to undermine free expression and press independence in 1998, especially during the election campaign. The state-run Slovak National Television (STV) was condemned by rights groups for biased coverage leading up to the September elections. According to MEMO 98, an independent media monitoring group, STV reportedly devoted 61 percent of its election coverage to the ruling coalition and only 16 percent to the opposition. Meanwhile, ten days before the election, the staff of the independent TV Markiza was dismissed without explanation. The governments role in the dismissals remained unclear as of this writing.

Radio Twist, an independent broadcaster viewed as sympathetic to the opposition and the only private radio station that broadcasts throughout Slovakia, was switched off briefly on two occasions in late 1997. Radio Twist accused Slovak Telecommunications, a government-run agency, of ordering the interruption of electrical power to Radio Twists transmitter for political reasons. In February 1998, Minister of Culture Ivan Hudec openly lobbied the Slovak Council of Radio and Television Broadcasting to deny Radio Twist a lucrative frequency. The Council withstood Hudecs pressure and granted the frequency nonetheless. In November 1997, the government attempted to increase the value-added tax on most daily newspapers from 6 percent to 27 percent. In protest, many papers printed blank front pages until the proposal was scrapped. Bratislava police closed the investigation into the September 1997 car bombing against Peter Toth, editor of the opposition newspaper SME (We Are), claiming that there were no leads in the case. Toth submitted a complaint against the police decision, pointing to the possible involvement of the Slovak security services.

The government repeatedly failed to protect Roma communities from racially motivated violence or to encourage local police to investigate properly skinhead attacks in 1998. In a case that exemplified the treatment of Roma throughout Slovakia, six skinheads in the town of Presov allegedly brutally beat three Roma children with baseball bats on their way home from school. Police reportedly denied the attacks had occurred despite credible testimony and physical evidence gathered by local monitors.

Two municipalities in the Medzilabordce district, eastern Slovakia, enforced ordinances that forbid Roma to settle in or enter the village center. In Spisk Nov Ves, in central Slovakia, several Roma families residing in the city center received notices from local authorities requiring them to move to the outskirts of the city, partially at their own expense.

Widespread discrimination and violence forced many Roma to seek asylum in western Europe and Canada. For the first time since a large number of Roma sought refuge in the U.K. in 1997, a Slovak Roma family was granted asylum in the U.K. in April on the basis of human rights conditions in Slovakia. In October the U.K. introduced visa restrictions on Slovak citizens after more than 1,600 Slovak Roma applied for asylum there in August and September.
Tajikistan
Human Rights Developments

Human rights in Tajikistan saw a steep downward spiral in 1998, fueled mostly by the failures of a government-United Tajik Opposition (UTO) peace process that consistently threatened to collapse. Both the government and the UTO were unable or unwilling to exercise control over lawless elements within their ranks, leaving the civilian population vulnerable to the unprosecuted criminal activities of their respective forces. Fighting continued between the two parties, resulting in some of the worst abuses since the height of the civil war in 1992-93: civilian deaths, hostage-taking, the looting and torching of houses, rape, and summary executions. Security conditions for those involved in humanitarian assistance efforts worsened dramatically.

Critical delays in the implementation of the June 1997 peace accord sustained mutual distrust between the government and UTO, and contributed to widespread disillusionment among the population. As of early November, fewer than half of those recommended under the amnesty law had been amnestied, while close to one thousand cases remained pending. The majority of UTO fighters retained their weapons instead of delivering them to the authorities, the thirty percent quota of UTO members to be named to central government positions had not been met by early November, and integration of UTO members into local government had not yet begun. Bans and limitations on the activities of political parties and movements belonging to the UTO and on the mass media remained in place as of mid-October, and parliamentary elections slated for 1998 were postponed to 1999.

Several political crises arising from the slow pace of the peace process threatened to bring it to a halt altogether. In January, the UTO withdrew for a week from the Commission on National

Reconciliation (CNR), the body that oversees the process. In May, the Majlisi Oli (parliament) adopted a draft law prohibiting the establishment of political parties based on religion. Following widespread national and international protest, the contentious articles were modified to limit the activities of political parties to those places not considered religious institutions. By the end of October, nonetheless, the revised law had not yet been adopted. A third crisis erupted in July following the murder of four United Nations Mission of Observers to Tajikistan (UNMOT) employees in the Karategin Valley. International organizations withdrew from the Karategin Valley altogether, and UNMOT suspended its assistance to the demobilization process, a critical component of the peace process. Following the assassination of UTO member Otakhon Latifi in September, the UTO once again briefly withdrew from the CNR.

Armed conflict between the government and the UTO, ongoing internal power struggles, and infighting and clashes within both camps were symptomatic of the fragile control the government and the UTO had over their respective military forces and the various armed factions dissatisfaction with the peace process. When government-UTO fighting broke out just east of Dushanbe in mid-January, tensions mounted steadily until mid-March, when events erupted into full-scale combat and a prolonged military stand-off in the Kofarnikhon area. At least several civilians were killed and scores were forcibly displaced. The two sides clashed again from April 30 to May 2. Human Rights Watch gathered testimony in the Karategin area pointing to disproportionate and indiscriminate force by government forces during the hostilities, and to rape, torture, and the looting and torching of civilian homes. Civilian deaths numbered at least twenty-five. In mid-July and at the end of August, fighting once again broke out among UTO groups in and close to Tajikabad. Elements of the Tajik Border Forces were allegedly responsible for gross violations including rape, theft, and looting in Pianj and Shaartuz.

Political instability and a weak central command characterized most parts of the country, but tensions were at their greatest in Dushanbe, where both government and opposition figures were assassinated and attacked, politically-motivated bombings continued, and high levels of murder and other crimes fostered an atmosphere of insecurity. Among opposition murders were those of prominent CNR member Otakhon Latifi; Usmon Khojayev, the deputy commander of a special U.N. protection unit and former UTO field commander; and relatives of prominent UTO members Yusuf Hakim and Kiyemeddin Goziyev. On the government side, the deputy head of the Customs Committee was killed by a car bomb, while the head of the same committee escaped a separate fatal attack on his own car.

In August, the head of the local government in Shakhrinau, along with the mayor and several other government officials in Tursunzade, were assassinated. The Karategin Valley, mostly

UTO-controlled, was subjected to the unchecked criminal activities of the UTO and other armed groups, and the Kulab region, the presidents regional base, witnessed abuses including hostage-taking, rape, murder, and extortion, committed by an organized criminal group allegedly headed by a Kulabi member of parliament.

In mid-June two UNMOT officials were detained, beaten, and threatened with execution by armed men near Hoit, in opposition-controlled territory close to Garm. One month later, four UNMOT employees were ambushed and murdered nearby by alleged UTO members. The sole road leading from Dushanbe to northeastern Garm remained off-limits for international organizations during most of 1998.

Marginalization of the northern region of Leninabad, almost completely excluded from the peace process, also continued. The CNR had denied The National Revival Movement (NRM), a northern-based party with significant national support, permission to participate directly in the peace negotiations, while the Party of Economic and Political Revival of Tajikistan, also northern-based, encountered significant registration difficulties, and by the end of November was not registered. Six defendants accused of attempting to assassinate President Emomali Rakhmonov in the Leninabad capital of Khujand in 1997, including Abdulkhafiz Abdullayev, the brother of the NRM leader, were sentenced to death in a closed trial. Human Rights Watch obtained testimony showing that witnesses were forced under duressincluding through beatingsto incriminate Abdullayev. Detained since May 1997, and stricken with terminal cancer, Abdullayev as of early November continued to be denied access to adequate medicaltreatment.

The government maintained nearly complete control over the electronic media, and authorities continued to harass independent television stations. In May the Majlisi Oli adopted a law on the defense of the honor and dignity of the president, which allowed only President Rakhmonov to use the title president; the law also set out excessive fines and prison sentences for those convicted of insulting or slandering the president. Following international protest, however, President Rakhmonov vetoed the law.

Journalists were denied access to conflict zones, received death threats, and were taken hostage by independent and UTO armed groups. In July, NTV (a Russian television station) correspondent Yelena Masyuk was declared persona non grata for having broadcast reports discrediting the countrys leadership and its policies. The presidents political party held regular meetings and was afforded extensive media coverage, while others were denied permission on technical grounds to hold meetings, experienced registration problems, and received next to no coverage by national and local media.

Prison conditions also deteriorated in 1998 when the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), citing reasons including misuse of food rations distributed since June 1996, halted its emergency nutritional program launched in 1996. Soon afterwards, the death rate among the countrys roughly 7,000 prisoners increased.
Turkey
Human Rights Developments

The continuing scandal surrounding illegal formations within the state security forces, the rise of political Islam, and the armed conflict in the southeast framed the human rights and political agenda in Turkey in 1998. Despite vigorous debates among state officials and in civil society on the rule of law, laws continued to be applied arbitrarily, especially to restrict freedom of expression and freedom of assembly. The military, through powers that it was granted in the 1982 constitution, continued to exert influence over politics in a manner largely incompatible with the standards of democratic states. National political parties with pro-Islam, pro-Kurdish, or leftist tendencies and their local branches were harassed or simply shut down. There were violent assaults against human rights advocates, and offices of human rights groups were occasionally closed. Freedom of expression was often curtailed by abusive and arbitrary police action and through legal prosecution; non-violent demonstrators, writers, and journalists were arrested; and several publications were closed down during the year. Although high-level state officials condemned the use of torture and promised reforms, torture in detention continued to be widespread, and those accused of torture received lenient or no punishment in several high-profile cases. Poor conditions prevailed in prisons. Amidst the persistence of severe human rights violations, a growing number of state officials, judges, and parliamentarians began to raise questions about the system that permits such severe abuse and an environment of impunity for the abusers.

Throughout 1998, Turkey was governed by a minority coalition government led by the center-right-wing Motherland Party (ANAP), which came to power after the military forced the government of Necmettin Erbakan, head of the pro-Islam Welfare Party (Refah Partisi), to resign in June 1997. Although the new government of Mesut Yilmaz was supported by the military and the mainstream media, the new prime minister immediately came into conflict with the National Security Councilan advisory body that enables the military to exert influence over politics when he called for a softer approach towards the Islamists.

When Mr. Yilmaz took office, he designated 1998 as the year of law, promising to change Turkish legislation, especially the penal code, to confront illegal formations within state security forces that have often been associated with serious human rights abuses, and to address deep flaws in the rule of law.

The ongoing scandal about the state security forces use of ultra-nationalists and members of organized crimeso-called illegal gangsto commit human right abuses remained in the forefront of Turkish political debate. Parliamentary and government investigations into the Susurluk scandala car accident in 1996 that first revealed concrete evidence of ties between the securityforces and fugitive ultra-nationalistsresulted in little or slow legal action. In 1998, several cases against alleged members of illegal gangs were under way, but investigations that might implicate high-level bureaucrats proceeded slowly. A number of incidents during the year, including the arrest of those suspected of having attempted to assassinate a prominent human rights activist, Akin Birdal, and Interpols apprehension of an infamous organized crime leader and ultra-nationalist, Alaaddin Cakici, who was carrying a government-issued diplomatic passport, underscored the extent to which organized crime had infiltrated the security forces.

As a belated positive development following the inconclusive first Susurluk investigations, the trial of two members of the parliament, Mehmet Agar, former head of the security department, and former minister of justice and of internal affairs consecutively; and Sedat Bucak, a parliamentarian and wealthy landlord in the southeast, began in April. The indictment against Mr. Agar and witness testimonies suggested that he was aware of, if he did not authorize, the illegal activities of these gangs.

On May 12, 1998, Akin Birdal, head of the Human Rights Association, was shot six times through his lungs and leg. Mr. Birdal survived the shooting. This vicious attack followed a reckless campaign in the mainstream press against Birdal and several liberal columnists. The trial of eleven individuals allegedly implicated in the attack, including one ultra-nationalist army sergeant, was pending as of this writing.

During 1998, the military continued to exert pressure on the political process, and in particular on political Islam, which the chief of staff described in March as the number one enemy of the principles of modern Turkey. In January the Supreme Constitutional Court banned the pro-Islam Welfare Party in a verdict based primarily on statements by the partys leaders and members. Some Islamist politicians, such as Istanbul mayor Recep Tayyip Erdogan, were also prosecuted for their statements on the role of religion in society. In September, the Diyarbakir State Security Court sentenced Mr. Erdogan to one year of imprisonment and a lifetime ban from all political activities. In September, the head of the Workers Party (IP) began serving a one-year prison sentence for peaceful comments he had made at a televised debate among the leaders of all political parties during the 1991 election.

The pro-Kurdish Peoples Democracy Party (HADEP) also faced intense surveillance and harassment by the security forces. In 1998, several HADEP offices, including its central office in Ankara, were raided, and party administrators and members were detained and tortured. As of this writing, four party officials in detention await trial on charges of committing separatism through publication and acting as the political branch of the PKK. Four parliamentarians from the now-banned Democracy Party (DEP), a predecessor of HADEP before it was closed by the Supreme Constitutional Court in 1995, remained in prison. Three other former DEP parliamentarians were sentenced in 1998 on charges related to peaceful expression.

Five provinces in southeastern Turkeywhere an armed conflict between security forces and the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) has raged since 1984, resulting in the deaths of approximately 35,000 people, mostly civilians, and the forced depopulation of thousands of villages and hamletsremained under a state of emergency. There was little change in six neighboring provincesprovinces that had previously been under emergency rulebecause extraordinary measures continued to give state-appointed governors extended and restrictive powers. Despite government promises to compensate villagers, little effort has been made to facilitate the return of displaced persons to their homes in the southeast or to compensate them for the destruction and loss of their property.

Although the armed conflict in the southeast lessened in intensity, both government forces and the PKK continued to commit serious human rights violations. Village guardsethnic Kurdish villagers who function as government-appointed civil guards in remote areas of the southeastcontinued to be implicated in many abuses, and civilians remained particularly vulnerable in the region. During a parliamentary human rights commission hearing in February, the governor of Batman was reported to have said that methods beyond the accepted norms were often used to convince villagers that they should not assist the PKK. Victims who petitioned the parliamentary commission described methods such as forcing villagers to walk on mine fields or torturing family members and neighbors. Several village guards stood trial during 1998 for crimes such as rape and the execution of civilians.

PKK members continued to execute civilians they suspected of cooperating with the security forces. In July, PKK members reportedly killed two girls, ages four and fourteen, after they failed to find their father who was the brother of the village headman. Three mayors in the southeast, who were said not to support the PKK, were kidnapped, and one was later murdered. In August, a bomb reportedly planted by the PKK killed seven people and injured more than one hundred in one of Istanbuls most crowded historical marketplaces.

While the press in Turkey is largely free, laws limiting expression continued to be enforced arbitrarily, severely jeopardizing freedom of expression. In the past, some journaliststypically mainstream and highly regarded columnistswere able to engage in vigorous debate even on such taboo topics as the role of the military and of religion, and could criticize Kemal Ataturk and promote pro-Kurdish issues. Pro-Islamic, pro-Kurdish, or leftist writers, however, were not guaranteed the same freedoms, often facing harassment by the police and criminal prosecution.

In 1998, however, even prominent and well-respected journalists and writers were prosecuted under the Anti-Terror law. Among the most troubling of these cases was the imprisonment of Professor Haluk Gerger (released after nine months), journalist Ragip Duran (sentenced to ten months of imprisonment), and lawyer and human rights activist Esber Yagmurdereli (sentenced to twenty years), all on free expression charges. In addition, on March 21, the chief of staff of the Turkish Armed Forces issued a statement that banned two liberal mainstream columnists, Mehmet Ali Birand ( Sabah-Show TV ) and Yalcin Dogan ( Milliyet , NTV), and one reporter, Muharrem Sarikaya ( Hurriyet ), from reporting any news about the military, entering military sites, or interviewing military personnel. The ban was lifted three days later with no explanation.

Some three hundred issues of leftist, pro-Kurdish, or pro-Islamic publications were confiscated and numerous journals were closed down during the year. The government often invoked the Anti-Terror Law to punish political expressions of Kurdish identity. Ulkede Gundem (Agenda in the Land), a newspaper advocating the recognition of Kurdish identity, was fined approximately 40 billion Turkish Lira (U.S. $12,000) during the year and closed by court order for 312 days. Issues of Hevi (Hope), a weekly newspaper in Kurdish known for its non-violent stance, were also confiscated forty-three times during the first nine months of the year. In March, the Diyarbakir State Security Court sentenced Sefik Beyaz, former head of the Kurdish Institute, to one year of imprisonment and a fine of U.S.$100 for making separatist propaganda by playing Kurdish music during his election campaign in 1995.

Islamists critical of the government were also subject to sanctions. In February, 128 members of the Aczmendi sect were sentenced to terms of twenty months to six years of imprisonment for insulting Ataturk and disobeying security forces. They were originally arrested in 1996 for not following the regulations of the modern dress reform of Ataturk. During the 1998 fall school semester, universities refused to register female students who wore traditional Muslim head scarves.

The Supreme Radio and Television Board (RTUK), formed in 1994 with a broad and vague mandate to regulate television and radio, arbitrarily restricted freedom of expression. In 1998, it closed several national television channels (such as Kanal D and Show TV) as well as local channels (such as Kanal 21 or Metro TV of Diyarbakir) for several days for using foul language, insulting individuals and institutions, featuring sexuality, instigating separatist propaganda, or airing programs in Kurdish in some of their programs. Many RTUK decisions continued to be enforced even after they were overturned by court decisions. Several local radio broadcasting channels, whose producers were charged with promoting separatism or with simply violating the broadly defined principles of broadcasting, were occasionally shut down.

A number of court verdicts also upheld freedom of expression guarantees. In May, the Criminal Court of Istanbul acquitted officials of the Kurdish Culture and Research Foundation of providing education in languages prohibited by law, because they had never begun the Kurdish language classes that were the basis for the charges; however, the judge ruled that they could not conduct Kurdish language courses. A former State Security Court prosecutor, Mete Gokturk, who was tried for publicly criticizing the lack of judicial independence in Turkey, was also acquitted.

Government officials condemned torture, several legislative efforts attempted to curtail police abuses, and some police officers accused of ill-treatment were prosecuted, but torture in detention remained widespread. In late 1997, when Minister of Foreign Affairs Ismail Cem referred to torture as an agonizing disgrace in the country, he became the highest state official to date to have acknowledged the extent of the problem. Prime Minister Yilmaz sent an official circular to ministries calling for stricter enforcement of measures to prevent torture and ill-treatment of those held in police custody. However, during 1998, there were hundreds of credible reports of mistreatment and torture from ordinary crime suspects, as well as security detainees. Previous governments had passed legislation reducing detention periods, requiring immediate registration of suspects, and providing suspects with legal assistance during the early stages of detention. Nevertheless, the head of the Istanbul Bar Association, Yucel Sayman, announced that several precincts in the country failed to follow these regulations. Suspects were not informed of their rights, and the bar association was rarely asked to provide lawyers for them. Physicians who documented torture were also coerced by security forces to withdraw their reports, or even prosecuted at times. In March, the Izmir Criminal Court acquitted Dr. Eda Guver, who had been charged with abusing her authority and violating the civil servants code after she asked security forces to leave her office while she was examining victims. In September, four members of the security forces involved in Dr. Guvers case were themselves charged with attempting to manipulate the results of a medical examination. They were ultimately convicted and issued a small fine.

Several police officers accused of torturing suspects stood trial during the year, but were ultimately given lenient sentences that will not deter abuse. A court acquitted ten policemen accused of torturing fourteen teenagers from the town of Manisa, despite the fact that Sabri Ergul, a lawyer and member of parliament, testified that he had witnessed the torture, and hospital records supported the charges of police brutality. The Manisa teenagers, eight of whom were under eighteen when they were detained, testified that they had been beaten, raped with truncheons, and given electric shocks. In March the court ruled that there was insufficient evidence to support their claims of torture and mistreatment. The judge in the case rejected the hospital reports as evidence when the prosecutor claimed that the tuberculosis diagnoses of the three teenager girls may be due to their anguish for the crimes they committed. The teenagers, who had been charged with being members of a terrorist organization, were later acquitted and/or had their convictions overturned.

In April, when six police officers were sentenced to five and a half years each for torturing a suspect to death in 1993, the defendants and about sixty plainclothes policemen brutally beat the victims sister and lawyer in the courtroom. The policemen appealed the verdict. In March, eleven policemen were arrested and charged with torturing suspects five days after an eighteen-year-old theft suspect died in police custody in Adana. Two years after the journalist Metin Goktepe died in police custody, the higher court overturned the verdict that had acquitted half of the accused police officers; a new trial was pending as of this writing.

In 1998, ten people were killed during a house raid in Adana and in Istanbul; witnesses and human rights observers reported no evidence of a shootout in either case, as claimed by the police. Extra-judicial killings by police forces during house raids or demonstrations had become common in Turkey after the Anti-Terror Law entered into force in 1991; between 1991 and 1994, 174 people died during house raids and peaceful demonstrations. In 1998, several police officers faced trial for extra-judicial killings they allegedly committed during previous years.

The police routinely used brutal force to break up demonstrations. In March, police in Ankara used pressurized water, fog bombs, and truncheons to disperse a demonstration of civil servants. Around eighty demonstrators were treated at nearby hospitals for respiratory problems and bruises. The Turkish Physicians Union protested the security forces use of fog bombs with extremely harmful chemicals on the human body. Police occasionally harassed the Saturday Mothers, relatives of missing people who hold weekly protests in Istanbul, and detained some participants for promoting illegal organizations.

Prisons remained poorly administered and underfunded. The prison administration and prisoners clashed over prisoners legitimate demands for improved conditions and, at other times, their quest for political control, but no serious structural reform was achieved. A parliamentary human rights commission launched investigations at four southeastern prisons, at the Istanbul Women and Juvenile Prison, at several detention centers and at police precincts. The commission reported in April that inmates were tortured by various methods, including reverse hanging by the arms, beating the soles of feet, and the use of pressurized water and electric shocks. Commission members themselves reported having seen evidence of torture on prisoners and in detention rooms. Commission members described finding tools, such as manual electric generators, wooden sticks, metal pipes and truck tires, that had initially been hidden from them. The investigating parliamentarians described as atrocious the conditions at the Juvenile Prison, where an undercover journalist from the mainstream media had witnessed during regular visiting hours seven or eight guards beating a child.
Turkmenistan
Human Rights Developments

Under the dictatorship of President Saparmurat Niyazov, the government of Turkmenistan in 1998 continued to deny its citizensnearly every civil and political right. With no political opposition, no freedom of assembly, no opportunity for public debate, and a Soviet-style secret police, very little information on human rights abuses was available. One of the poorest of the former Soviet republics, the Central Asian nation worked to keep human rights off the agenda as it courted foreign investors eager to exploit its untapped natural resources, especially oil and gas. On two occasions, however, international pressure on President Niyazov forced the release of a handful of high-profile political prisoners.

President Niyazovs visit to the United States in April occasioned ten releases. On the eve of Niyazovs arrival in the U.S., police detained former foreign minister and dissident Avdy Kuliev in the capital, Ashgabat, as he was attempting to return to Turkmenistan from Moscow after five years in exile. Subsequent pressure from the Clinton administration and others sources led Turkmen officials to release Kuliev and Durdymurat Khoja-Mukhamedov. A leader of the banned Party of Democratic Development of Turkmenistan, Khoja-Mukhamedov had been incarcerated since February 1996 in a psychiatric hospital on medically unjustifiable grounds.

Six of the eight members of a group known as the Ashgabat Eight were also freed in April. The eight were imprisoned after an ill-fated march in 1995 to protest wage arrears and the lack of democracy. Begenchmurat Khojaev and Baytr Sakheliev, both imprisoned since 1995 for their alleged participation in the rally, were released the same day; two days later the government released Amanmyrat Amandurdyev, Khudayberdi Amandurdyev, Charymurat Amandurdyev and Kakamurat Nazarov, also members of the Ashgabat Eight. Also released were Mukhammetkuli Aimuradov and Khoshali Geraev, convicted in 1995 of anti-state crimes and attempted terrorism, for maintaining contact with Turkmen political activists abroad. Both men had been serving time in strict-regime labor camps in the western city of Turkmenbashi.

Unfortunately, Charymurat Gurov, also of the Ashgabat Eight, died in custody in January under suspicious circumstances. The government asserted that he died of natural causes (heart aliments and tuberculosis), but according to eyewitness reports his corpse was bruised and bore other evidence of mistreatment and torture. The remaining member of the Ashgabat Eight, Gulgeldi Annaniyazov, remained in prison. Mr. Kuliev, who saw Annaniyazov during his own imprisonment in April, reported to Human Rights Watch that the latter was in such poor health that he could barely walk or speak, and that he was extremely thin and pale.

While the government reneged on its promise to release additional political prisoners, the president, did sign an amnesty decree in October freeing women, disabled prisoners, those suffering from tuberculosis, juveniles, war veterans, and male prisoners over the age of sixty. Individuals convicted of murder, rape, terrorism, or drug-related crimes were not included in the amnesty. The decree did not appear to reflect a real change in the governments policy toward those it deemed a threat; authorities continued to threaten, assault, and imprison perceived opponents. As of this writing, there were no reports of prisoners having been released.

In early September, the Committee for National Security (KNB) arrested former presidential spokesman Durdymuhammend Gurbanov on charges of embezzlement. He was released a week later after some thirty people demonstrated in Ashgabat to demand his release, an extraordinary event. As of September, the government had taken no measures to punish or imprison the demonstrators. In April, Gurbanov had given a series of interviews to Radio Liberty in Prague during which he severely criticized President Niyazov and the government. Upon his return to Ashgabat in June, the KNB repeatedly summoned him to their offices and kept him under constant surveillance.

In early August, three assailants kidnapped and beat Durdymurat Khoja-Mukhamedov as he was returning home from a meeting at the British Embassy.They drove him outside Ashgabat, kicked and beat him until he lost consciousness, and left him. Khoja-Mukhamedov was still bandaged and in pain one month after the attack.

November of 1997 also saw the arrest of Radio Liberty stringer Yovshan Annakurbanov as he prepared to board a flight to Prague to attend a journalists seminar. Though Turkmen police later alleged that Annakurbanov possessed a computer disc containing information on Turkmen opposition parties, no mention of the disc was made at the time of his arrest. Annakurbanov was released about a week later, on the eve of U.S. Secretary of Energy Federico Penas visit to Turkmenistan.

The death penalty cases of Andre Voronin and Kamal Nepesov highlighted Turkmenistans arbitrary and capricious criminal justice system. Amnesty International reported that the two men were sentenced to death in April by a court in the Mary region for the murder of a Bayramali sanitorium director. Voronin and Nepesov claimed they were tortured their toes crushed with pliers and electric shocks applied to the anus and that their families were threatened. Further, the men were allowed access to their lawyers only a month after their arrests and only after signing confessions obtained under psychological and physical pressure. While Human Rights Watch could not independently confirm the mens charges, according to the report, the men also alleged that the authorities failed to investigate their claims of innocence.
United Kingdom
Human Rights Developments

Northern Ireland

The April 1998 Multi-Party Agreement, confirmed by a clear majority in a public referendum on May 20, established new political arrangements for Northern Ireland and dominated the news throughout the year. The agreement, steered to completion by former U.S. Senator George Mitchell as peace talks chairman, confirmed the principle of consent, requiring that any change in the constitutional status of Northern Ireland must be agreed upon by a majority of its people. It provides for a Northern Ireland Assembly, cross-border bodies between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland, andat the urging of human rights groupsa series of initiatives aimed at the enhanced protection of human rights. The agreement appeared to have survived the worst act of political violence in the history of the Troublesa car bomb explosion on August 15, 1998, claimed by republican paramilitary dissidents belonging to the Real IRA, which killed twenty-nine people in Omagh. In the wake of the bombing, public revulsion evolved into a united resolve to ensure that the historic agreement survived. On October 16, 1998, John Hume, leader of the Social Democratic and Labor Party and long time civil rights campaigner, and David Trimble, leader of the Ulster Unionist Party, were awarded the Noble Peace Prize for their efforts to advance the peace process in Northern Ireland.

Although the agreements human rights provisions are strong, the initial implementation phase proved disappointing as the U.K. government consistently failed to translate the provisions into practical and effective human rights protections. Moreover, rights groups criticized the government for failing to bring the U.K. into compliance with existing international obligations in areas not directly addressed in the agreement. The continuation of draconian emergency laws, strengthened in response to the Omagh bombing; intimidation of defense lawyers; allegations of security force collusion in loyalist paramilitary murders; routine police abuse; and the indiscriminate use of plastic bullets remained serious human rights concerns.

Despite the agreements commitment to normalize security arrangements, the U.K. government immediately moved to strengthen existing emergency laws in Northern Ireland in the aftermath of the Omagh bombing. On September 3, 1998, parliament passed new laws relaxing the rules of evidence to facilitate convictions for membership in illegal organizations. The new laws require the testimony of a senior police officer, claiming that a suspect is a member of a proscribed organization, as the basis for prosecution. Inferences of guilt can be drawn from a suspects silence in the face of questioning about potential membership or refusal to cooperate with any relevant inquiry. Such inferences can be used to corroborate the polices opinion that a suspect is a member. The new laws abrogate the right to remain silent, undermine the prohibition against self-incrimination, and run contrary to the presumption of innocence by unacceptably shifting the burden of proof from the prosecution to the accused. Bestowing the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC), Northern Irelands police force, with such extraordinary powers in the face of longstanding allegations of human rights violations committed by the police under cover of the emergency laws belies the U.K. governments stated commitment to change fundamentally Northern Irelands policing and security arrangements.

Although the agreement reflects a basic understanding that human rights are an essential component of any just and lasting peace, other early indicators pointed to a lack of commitment by the U.K. government to translate words into action. The agreement provides for the establishment of a human rights commission, an essential building block in the creation of a human rights culture in Northern Ireland. Unfortunately, the draft legislation establishing the commission fell far short of ensuring that it is an effective institutional mechanism for the protection of human rights. Despite the agreement calling for a commission independent of government, commissioners will be appointed by the secretary of state. Moreover, the draft legislation does not provide the commission with any powers of investigation. The inability to investigate individual cases and patterns of human rights violations will profoundly compromise the commissions authority and undermine the crucial role it can play as an independent accountability mechanism. In July 1998, U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson wrote the U.K. government urging it to provide the commission with the necessary investigatory powers.

Human rights provisions in the agreement also provide for the incorporation of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR); a bill of rights augmenting the ECHR with relevant minority, economic, social, and cultural rights; enhanced protections for language rights; a review of the criminal justice system; and the establishment of a commission to monitor anti-discrimination legislation. Noticeably absent is language regarding much-needed judicial reform.

The most significant human rights issue addressed by the agreement is Northern Irelands longstanding problems with policing, exemplified by a police force plagued by serious allegations of human rights abuses. The agreement established the Independent Commission on Policing for Northern Ireland, chaired by former Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten, whose remit is to ensure that future policing arrangements result in a policing service that is professional, effective and efficient, fair and impartial, [and] free from partisan control; accountable, . . . and operat[ing] within a coherent and co-operative criminal justice system, which conforms with human rights norms. Areas for the commissions review include composition (the RUC is 93 percent Protestant and 11 percent female), recruitment, training, culture, and accountability. Significantly, the agreement states that the commission should consult widely. . .with non-governmental expert organizations. Deep concern has emerged that the commission will focus solely on the managerial dimensions of downsizing and diversifying the force in anticipation of creating a peacetime policing service, instead of emphasizing accountability for human rights violations by the RUC and the creation of effective accountability mechanisms for the future. The commission is expected to present its findings and recommendations by the summer of 1999.

Human Rights Watch has urged the U.K. government to take action on a number of immediate human rights concerns that cannot and should not be required to await the final report of the policing commission. The governments embarrassingly inadequate response to a United Nations report condemning police intimidation of defense lawyers ( see section on United Nations), continuing allegations of police abuse under Northern Irelands emergency laws, and the excessive use of force by RUC officers during the 1998 marching season are emblematic of longstanding policing problems rooted in an implicit government policy of impunity.

In a rare judicial comment on police abuse, the Northern Ireland High Court awarded David Adams 30,000 (U.S. $50,100) on February 2, 1998, after finding that RUC officers lied about their involvement in a series of brutal assaults upon Mr. Adams following his arrest under the emergency laws in February 1994. Adams injuries included broken ribs, a punctured lung, a serious head wound, and a broken legthe result of officers taking running kicks at him during his detention. An independent investigation into police involvement in the assaults is underway.

None of the police officers on duty the night of Robert Hamills murder have been subject to disciplinary action or charged in the killing of the Portadown Catholic man. Hamill died on May 8, 1997, after a brutal attack by a crowd of Portadown loyalists on April 27, 1997. The RUC acknowledged that a land rover with four officers in it was stationed twenty feet from the spot where the beating took place. The RUC was accused of gross negligence for failing to come to Hamills aid. Despite eyewitness testimony concerning the proximity of the police vehicle to the beating scene and the improbability that officers inside could have remained unaware of the attack, no action had been taken against the officers as of this writing. On April 22, 1998, one of six men arrested was remanded into custody to await trial for the attack; five others were released.

Human Rights Watch observers in Northern Ireland to monitor security force operations during the July 1998 marching season reported that RUC officers fired plastic bullets indiscriminately and in violation of RUC guidelines. On July 5, 1998, the Protestant Orange Order and its loyalist supporters commenced a standoff against the security forces at Drumcree Church in Portadown after a Parades Commission ruling that rerouted the orders parade away from the predominantly Catholic Garvaghy Road. Orangemen and loyalist supporters massed around the church for seven days. Loyalists breached the security cordon erected around the area and were targeted with plastic bullets by police and British troops stationed opposite a barbed wire barrier, although it appeared that no threat to life or of serious injury to security force personnel existed. The high number of head and upper body injuries indicated that plastic bullets were fired in violation of RUC guidelines that require officers to target people below the waist. One woman lost the sight in her right eye and a man required brain surgery as a result of plastic bullet wounds.

On July 12, 1998, three young boys died in Ballymoney in a sectarian arson attack perpetrated by loyalists. This tragic event, coupled with a police operation on the Drumcree site July 15-17, 1998which revealed a small cache of explosives and arms and resulted in arrests of dissident loyalistseffectively ended the standoff. A small group of Orangemen have been permitted to carry on a symbolic protest. Loyalist supporters of the Orangemen continued to riot in Portadown. On October 6, 1998, a police officer died from injuries suffered on September 5, 1998, when he was wounded by grenades and petrol bombs thrown by a crowd of loyalist rioters.

Cease-fires called by the major paramilitary groups were broken intermittently throughout 1998 but the political wings of the major paramilitary organizations survived to participate in finalizing the Multi-Party Agreement. Dissident republican paramilitary groups opposing the agreement executed a number of bombings in the aftermath of the referendum, culminating with the car bomb explosion on August 15, 1998, in the town of Omagh (near the Irish border) that killed twenty-nine people and injured hundreds, both Catholic and Protestant. The Real IRAbased in the Republicclaimed responsibility for the bombing and subsequently publicly apologized for the loss of civilian life. In the face of public outrage across Ireland and in the U.K., the Real IRA announced the complete cessation of all military activity on September 7, 1998. As of this writing, cease-fires called by the major republican and loyalist paramilitary organizations, as well as cease-fires called by most of the dissident groups, remained intact.

On January 29, 1998, Prime Minister Tony Blair announced the establishment of a new inquiry into the events of Bloody SundayJanuary 30, 1972when British paratroopers in Derry fired on civil rights marchers killing thirteen people. Blair repudiated the findings of the original Widgery Tribunal which was plagued by allegations that its findings of impunity for the British soldiers involved were politically influenced. Blair also noted that recently recovered evidence deserved a fair and impartial adjudication. The families of the victims cautiously welcomed the new inquiry. Relations between the tribunal and the families have been strained by questions regarding possible immunity from prosecution for anyone giving evidence and problems with the level of legal counsel requested by the families. Substantive hearings begin in February 1999.

On March 9, 1998, Roisin McAliskey was released from custody after U.K. Home Secretary Jack Straw declared her medically unfit and announced that it would be cruel and inhuman to extradite McAliskey to Germany. McAliskey was pregnant when arrested in November 1996 for alleged complicity in an IRA bombing in Germany. She was ill throughout her detention and gave birth while on bail in the hospital. Human rights campaigners criticized the quality of Germanys evidence against McAliskey and questioned the motives of British security forces and prison officials in her arrest and ill-treatment in detention.
Uzbekistan
Human Rights Developments

The year 1998 was disastrous for human rights in Uzbekistan. In a sweeping effort to eliminate religion as a potential source of political opposition, the government of Islam Karimov employed mass arbitrary arrests, torture of men in custody, religious discrimination, and harassment of independent human rights activists and journalists.

Beginning in December 1997, the government of Uzbekistan stepped up its almost seven-year campaign against independent Muslims. It was triggered by the brutal murder of several policemen in Namangan, one of whom was beheaded. In response, police arrested hundreds of people in the Fergana Valley and Tashkent, many of whom were practicing Muslims who do not follow official Islam. Some men were taken directly from the street simply because they had beards, a perceived sign of piety. Police routinely fabricated evidence by allegedly planting small amounts of narcotics or ammunition on suspects, and beat and threatened arrestees, both at the time of arrest and during interrogation.

On January 23, a group of about 100 women assembled outside a police station in Tashkentto protest the arrest and detention of their male relatives. Police broke up the demonstration [an extraordinary event in this repressive country] and detained the women until late evening. Police fined human rights activist Mukhtabar Akhmedova a portion of her monthly pension for her alleged role as an organizer of the protest.

Several show trials of those arrested during the crackdown took place in May, June, and July and were featured prominently in the state-controlled media, which were already running a propaganda campaign justifying the mass arrests as a necessary measure to counter a surging fundamentalist Islamic movement allegedly bent on overthrowing the existing state order. In one of the trials, which involved eight men, several defendants testified that police beat and tortured them with electric shock and suffocation while in detention, and coerced them into signing self-incriminating statements. The sentences in this trial, heard by the Supreme Court and seriously compromised by due process violations, ranged from three years in a reform colony to the death sentence.

Following sustained protest by the international community and human rights groups, the three-and-a-half year prison sentence of Rakhmat Otaqulov was commuted to forced labor and he was allowed to return home. Otaqulov, a Muslim religious teacher whose arrest was widely believed to be politically motivated, was convicted on June 10, 1997, for alleged illegal possession of narcotics and pistol cartridges. His brother, who actively protested his arrest, was among the eight defendants sentenced in the Supreme Court trial.

The government systematically closed independent mosques and harassed religious leaders, several of whom disappeared. In September 1997, Ne'matjon Parpiev, imam of a mosque in Andijan and former assistant to Sheikh Abduvali Qori Mirzoev, reportedly disappeared. Sheikh Mirzoev and another assistant, Ramazanbek Matkarimov, are believed to be in police custody or to have died in custody after the National Security Service (SNB) detained them in 1995.

Leading independent imam Obidkhon Nazarov suffered persistent government harassment in 1998 and has not been seen since March 5. The Spiritual Directorate had removed Nazarov from his position as imam in December 1995 for disobedience to decrees of the Spiritual Directorate. On April 29 the Fergana regional court sentenced his brother, Abdumalik Nazarov (arrested in the December crackdown), to nine years in prison for possession of illegal narcotics. Also in April, the government attempted to evict the Nazarov family from their home, but that effort failed thanks to intervention by international observers and local supporters. The criminal charges against and harassment of Nazarov were presumably designed to silence him and to discourage others from active participation in non-official Islam.

The Law on Freedom of Conscience and Religious Organizations, adopted by the Supreme Council (or parliament) on May 1, sets out a legal framework for the broader repression of non-official religions. It serves to marginalize religious groups that might be perceived as a forum for opposition to President Islam Karimovs administration, and it criminalizes the practices of some foreign religious groups that have places of worship in the country.

The laws article 5 prohibits proselytism; penalties range from a fine of fifty to 100 times the minimum monthly wage (about U.S.$11) to three years of imprisonment. The law also prohibits private teaching of religious principles. Article 14 forbids non-clerics from wearing ritual attire in public. Wearing such clothing can result in a fine of five to ten times the amount of the minimum monthly wage or administrative arrest for up to fifteen days.

Under the law, religious groups face excessively burdensome registration requirements: for example, they must have one-hundred members who are citizens of Uzbekistan and over the age of 18. As of September, however, preliminary reports indicated that the government was allowing for exceptions on the membership requirement, and it appeared that it was not implementing the law fully with regard to non-Muslim groups. The law, together with amendments to the criminal code, sets out penalties of up to five years of imprisonment for religious leaders who fail to register their groups and for those who participate actively in a prohibited religious group.

In 1998, dozens of students were expelled from state institutions of higher education for wearing Islamic attire. Female students who wore hijab (traditional Muslim covering, usually including a head scarf, sometimes covering the face, and a long, loose-fitting robe or dress) were expelled, and male students with beards were subjected to pressure to shave or else were expelled. University administrators pointed to the law, particularly the prohibition on ritual dress in public, to support their decisions to deprive pious Muslim students of their right to education. Even primary and secondary school girls were expelled for wearing hijab . The SNB followed several expelled university students who had met with Human Rights Watch, and warned them not to speak with foreigners again.

Pastor Rashid Turibaev of the Baptist Full Gospel Christians Church in the Karakalpakstan autonomous region was sentenced in late October 1997 to two years of hard labor and internal exile for carrying out church services, on charges of organizing unsanctioned gatherings, meetings, and demonstrations. In May, police in Shakhrisabz reportedly raided the homes of Jehovahs Witnesses.

There was no free and independent media in Uzbekistan. The State Control Inspectorate continued to censor all press materials, and a new government body, the Qanoat (Uzbek for Abstemiousness) Center, was established in 1998 to review all religious literature and video and audio tapes, with the aim of stopping the flow of certain religious materials from abroad. Rahmonberdi Abdurakhmanov, an official of the Procuracy General, aptly stated in July that with the establishment of the Qanoat Center, no non-state organization or state organization has any right to do anything concerning religion without the knowledge of our state.

On August 1, unidentified men in plain clothes assaulted and beat Russian journalists Vitalii Ponomarev and Nikolai Mitrokhin on the street in Tashkent in broad daylight. The attackers had apparently been waiting for the two journalists to emerge from the home of Murat Zahidov, chair of the Committee for the Protection of Individuals of Uzbekistan. Ponomarev and Mitrokhin had just returned from the Fergana Valley, where they were investigating cases of arbitrary arrest of Islamic religious leaders.

The government apparently attempted to silence criticism by prosecuting journalists for slander as a criminal offense. On June 11, the Syr Darya regional court sentenced radio journalist and satirist Shodi Mardiev to eleven years in prison for slander, illegal acquisition or sale of foreign currency, and extortion. The charges against Mardiev were brought by Talat-Abdukhalikhazada Abasov, deputy procurator of Samarkand. Mardiev had satirized Abasov in a June 1997 radio broadcast that reportedly exposed Abasovs abuse of power in favoring a local business man. Sixty-two-year-old Mardiev was reportedly held in solitary confinement until the time of his appeal, which he lost. He is in seriously poor health and is said to have suffered two brain hemorrhages while in detention.

In a positive development, participants in the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europes June seminar on womens issues were given a forum to discuss openly the pervasiveness of domestic violence in Uzbekistan. This was a welcome first step toward addressing domestic violence, but major obstacles remained, among them, police indifference to womens complaints.
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
Human Rights Developments

The government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), led by President Slobodan Milosevic, continued its blatant disregard for human rights in 1998. Police and army actions in Kosovo involved grave breaches of international humanitarian and human rights law. Milosevic also took steps against the independent Serbian-language media and the autonomy of Serbias universities, and failed to cooperate with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).

By far the most serious violations occurred in the southwestern province of Kosovo, inhabited predominantly by ethnic Albanians who seek independence. After years of peaceful resistance to Yugoslav government repression, some ethnic Albanians formed an armed resistance against the state, known as the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), or Ushtria Clirimtare e Kosoves (UCK) in Albanian. By early 1998, the KLA had taken credit for a series of attacks on policemen and ethnic Albanians it considered collaborators with the government.

The first government atrocities took place in late February and early March when special police forces attacked three villages in the Drenica region, known for its KLA presence, with artillery, helicopters, and armored vehicles. At least eighty-eight peoplewere killed, twenty-four of them women and children. Although it is unclear to what extent the KLA was offering resistance, the evidence strongly suggests that at least seventeen people were executed after they had been detained or surrendered.

The police attack in Drenica was a watershed in the Kosovo conflict; thousands of outraged Albanians who had been committed to the nonviolent politics of their political leader Ibrahim Rugova decided to join the KLA. In the ensuing months, the KLA took control of an estimated 40 percent of Kosovos territory.

The government began a large-scale offensive against the KLA in mid-May, a few days after Milosevic agreed to U.S. demands that he meet with Rugova. The special police together with the Yugoslav Army attacked a string of towns and villages along the border with Albania in the west, with the specific intent of depopulating the region. Until then, the KLA had been receiving arms and fresh recruits from across the border.

Many villages from Pec in the north to Dakovica in the south were shelled while civilians were still present. Noncombatants who fled the attacks were sometimes fired on by snipers, and a still undetermined number of people were taken into detention. In three cases, helicopters marked with the Red Cross emblem reportedly fired on civilians. Landmines were placed in strategic points along the border, as well as along the southern border with Macedonia. Most villages in the region were systematically destroyed, and farmers livestock was shot, to ensure that no one could return in the short-run. Fifteen thousand people fled to Albania, and an estimated 30,000 went north to Montenegro.

The KLAs first major offensive began on July 19 when it attempted to capture the town of Orahovac. The offensive failed and the police recaptured the town two days later. In the fighting at least forty-two people were killed. Witnesses reported summary executions and the use of human shields by the police. Foreign journalists received reports of mass graves, although these reports were not confirmed.

The government forces intensified their offensive throughout July and August, despite promises from Milosevic that it had stopped. By mid-August, the government had retaken much of the territory that had been held by the KLA, including their stronghold of Malisevo. Unable to protect the civilian population, the KLA retreated into Drenica and some pockets in the West.

Some of the worst atrocitiesto date occurred in late September, as the governments offensive was coming to an end. On September 26, eighteen members of an extended family, mostly women, children, and elderly, were killed near the village of Donje Obrinje by men believed to be with the Serbian special police. Many of the victims had been shot in the head and showed signs of bodily mutilation. On the same day, thirteen ethnic Albanian men were executed in the nearby village of Golubovac by government forces. One man survived and was subsequently taken out of the country by the international agencies in Kosovo.

The government offensive was an apparent attempt to crush civilian support for the rebels. Government forces attacked civilians, systematically destroyed towns, and forced thousands of people to flee their homes. One attack in August near Senik killed seventeen civilians who were hiding in the woods. The police were seen looting homes, destroying already abandoned villages, burning crops, and killing farm animals.

The majority of those killed and injured were civilians. At least 300,000 people were displaced, many of them women and children now living without shelter in the mountains and woods. In October, the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) identified an estimated 35,000 of the displaced as particularly at risk of exposure to the elements. Most were too afraid to return to their homes due to the continued police presence.

At least one hundred ethnic Albanians disappeared in Kosovo between February and September 1998, about half of whom were last seen in the custody of the police. The precise number was impossible to determine since the Yugoslav authorities did not make public the number of people they had in detention. Some of the disappeared may have been in prison, others were possibly dead. Others unaccounted for in the conflict may have gone into hiding, fled Kosovo, or joined the KLA.

As of October 4, 1,242 ethnic Albanians had been charged with terrorist acts, according to the government, although only 684 of these people were in custody. Detained individuals included human rights activists, humanitarian aid workers, political party members, doctors, and lawyers, many of whom were physically abused. The use of torture against detainees was widespread, and five people were known to have died from abuse in prison during the year.

The government restricted the ability of humanitarian aid agencies to treat the internally displaced. On various occasions, the police blocked access to needy populations, confiscated supplies, and harassed and even attacked humanitarian aid workers. Three humanitarian aid workers were killed by mortar fire while trying to deliver food near Kijevo on August 24. The government justified the restricted access by claiming that some humanitarian organizations had distributed supplies, including arms, to the KLA.

The KLA also committed serious violations of international humanitarian law, including the taking of hostages and extrajudicialexecutions. At least one hundred ethnic Serbs, and a number of ethnic Albanians and Roma, were missing in circumstances in which KLA involvement was suspected: at least thirty-nine of them were last seen in KLA custody. In some villages the KLA tried to drive ethnic Serbs from their homes. In some cases, elderly Serbs stayed behind, either too old to flee or unwilling to abandon their homes. Some of these people were missing and feared dead. Four Serbian journalists were known to have been detained by the KLA.

On September 9, the police reported the discovery of bodies they claimed had been killed by the KLA in Lake Radonjic near Glodjane. By September 16, they had gathered thirty-four bodies, eleven of whom were identified, including some ethnic Albanians. At the end of August, the police claimed to have discovered the human remains of twenty-two people and a kiln used by the KLA to cremate the bodies in the village of Klecka. The manner in which the allegations were made, however, raised serious questions and underlined the importance of an investigation by an impartial forensics team to investigate Klecka, as well as the other areas where summary executions were reported.

On September 11, the Montenegrin government decided to close the internal boundary between Montenegro and Kosovo to all persons seeking refuge from the armed conflict. Two days later, a group of 3,200 ethnic Albanians from Kosovo, the majority of them women, children, and the elderly, were expelled to Albania by Montenegrin authorities.

The Yugoslav government restricted the work of domestic and foreign journalists who sought to report the atrocities in Kosovo. Some ethnic Albanian journalists were threatened, detained, or beaten by the police. Independent radio and television stations in the Albanian language continued to be denied licenses and, in one case, a station was closed down. The international media covering Kosovo also faced a number of restrictions, starting with the denial of visas to critical journalists whom the state considered anti-Serb. One journalist was declared persona non grata. A number of foreign journalists were beaten or fired upon by the police. Other minority groups in FRY also complained of discrimination, especially the Muslims in Sandzak and Hungarians in Vojvodina. Members of the countrys large Roma population, the poorest ethnic group in FRY, were occasionally subjected to violence by individuals, usually skinheads, as well as by the police. Roma in Kosovo were harassed and occasionally attacked by both ethnic Albanians and the police.

The countrys ethnic minorities were hardly the only victims of human rights abuses in 1998. Throughout the year, the Yugoslav government continued to take repressive measures against all citizens who challenged or criticized its authority, regardless of ethnicity. Police abuse against common criminals, as well as those publicly demonstrating against the government, remained a common occurrence. The court system was closely controlled by the state, providing little opportunity for a fair hearing or a remedy for abuses committed by the state.

On May 26, the Serbian parliament passed a new law, the University Act, which gave government authorities exclusive power to appoint rectors, faculty deans, and governing boards at all public universities. The new law also required that all faculty members sign new employment contracts, regardless of the terms and conditions of their existing contracts. After the adoption of the new law, rectors, deans, and members of governing boards at universities across Serbia were replaced with government appointees, many of them prominent members of the ruling political parties in Serbia. Protests against the new law were violently dispersed; and professors involved with opposition political parties or publicly opposed to the policies of President Milosevic were verbally attacked by the government.

Government attacks on the Serbian-language press picked up throughout 1998, especially towards the end of the year. The government maintained direct control of the state radio and television, which provided news for the majority of the population. State programs continued to glorify the governments accomplishments, conceal its failures and, most importantly, manipulate the fears of the population. As was the case during the wars in Bosnia and Croatia, the state-run radio and television purposefully spread disinformation about Kosovo and promoted images of the enemy intended to inflame the conflict.

Independent media faced serious restrictions, including the confiscation of radio equipment and arbitrary bans. On October 8, in response to the threat of NATO intervention, the Serbian government passed a Decree on Special Measures that allowed for the direct censorship of local and foreign media. The decree banned the broadcast of foreign news programs like the BBC, RFE, and VOA, and ordered local media not to disseminate material that was against the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of the country. On the basis of the decree, the police closed down two newspapers, Danas and Dnevni Telegraf, and confiscated their computers on October 13. The next day, the independent daily Naa Borba was also closed. Two radio stations, Radio Index and Radio Senta, were also shut down.

On October 20, the Serbian parliament adopted a new Law on Public Information that incorporated many of the restrictions from the special decree, notably a ban on foreign radio and television broadcasts that were of a political-propaganda nature. The law imposed exorbitantly high fines on those who breach the law. On October 23, the owner of Dnevni Telegraf and Evropljanin magazine, Slavko Curuvija, was charged with publicizing information jeopardizing the territorial integrity and independence of the Republic of Serbia and Federal Republic of Yugoslavia because of an open letter to Milosevic published by his magazine that strongly criticized the government. He and the magaziness editor and publisher were found guilty and fined $230,000.

The least obvious but highly effective restriction on the media was the deliberate lack of a coherent legal framework for the establishment of private radio and television stations, which the government used to justify the denial of broadcast licenses. Without a license, stations could be summarily closed down, as happened to at least four stations in 1998.

Throughout 1998, the federal and Serbian authorities failed to cooperate fully with the ICTY. A number of prominent indictees remained on FRY territory during the year, and the government refused visas to some ICTY investigators who wished to conduct investigations in Kosovo, as well as U.S. Ambassador at Large for War Crimes Issues David Scheffer.
Asylum Policy in Western Europe
Human Rights Developments

Restrictive trends in Western European asylum policy generally continued in 1998, as many countries saw dramatic increases in the number of asylum applications. While there were procedural improvements in some countries, the general response to the increase in asylum seekers was to tighten borders against illegal migrants, shorten asylum procedures, limit the right of appeal, and pass responsibility to other nationssafe third countries through which the asylum seekers traveled en route to Western Europe.

An influx of Turkish and Iraqi Kurds in January set off a bureaucratic panic over a potential mass influx, leading the European Union (E.U.) Council of Ministers on January 26 to adopt an EU Action Plan on the Influx of Migrants from Iraq and the Neighboring Region. The action plan, though paying lip service to the humanitarian needs of asylum seekers, was clearly aimed at developing means to satisfy those needs in the home region of asylum seekers, so that persons would not seek refuge in the E.U. member states. Moreover, the plan, with a majority of its provisions devoted to preventing abuse of asylum procedures and combating illegal immigration, reflected the official position that most of the arriving Kurds were economic migrants, not refugees. In fact, approximately one half of the Turkish and Iraqi Kurds who arrived in Italy between mid-December and mid-January filed applications for asylum. Italy took the principled decision to give these applications individualized consideration. This decision was criticized by other European countries that feared the asylum seekers would leave Italy for other destinations in Europe.

A second influx of much larger proportions came from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as a result of the conflict in Kosovo (see Federal Republic of Yugoslavia). Again, the response by West European countries was to try to contain refugee flows in the conflict region. The German government gave the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) DM500,000 (U.S.$312,500) to assist Kosovo Albanian refugees, making clear that it expected the UNHCR to provide this assistance in the Balkans. Most West European states heeded the UNHCRs plea to halt expulsions of rejected Kosovo Albanian asylum seekers. However, Germany and Switzerland refused to ban expulsions for the first five months of the conflict; together they expelled hundreds to Kosovo, where upon return many were detained and interrogated, and some were severely beaten, according to interviews with Human Rights Watch.

The safe third country rule remained a favored means of limiting states obligations to asylum seekers. Those who traveled through a country deemed safe were often returned to that country with limited rights of appeal. Application of the safe third country rule among E.U. member states was governed by the Dublin Convention, which came into effect on September 1, 1997. Member states experienced difficulties in applying the Dublin Convention and safe third country rules, because most asylum seekers lacked travel documents or evidence of their travel routes. In response, member states made a priority of negotiating theEurodoc Convention, which will provide for fingerprinting of all asylum seekers. A number of countries also considered measures to strengthen the legal presumption against undocumented asylum seekers. Refugee lawyers reported cases of safe third country policies resulting in deportations from one safe third country to another, and in some cases to the country of origin where the asylum seeker faced a threat of persecution.

Many asylum seekers who did not run afoul of the safe third country rule received summary rejection of their claims as manifestly unfounded. Asylum seekers whose claims were deemed manifestly unfounded generally faced accelerated procedures, with limited opportunities to appeal the decision. In some positive developments, an Austrian court struck down a law that gave those with manifestly unfounded cases only two days to appeal. Germany finally complied with a 1996 Constitutional Court decision requiring that it make legal assistance available at the airports to assist applicants whose claims are deemed manifestly unfounded. Sweden approved a six-month pilot project to give nongovernmental organizations access to airport areas.

Large numbers of asylum seekers were held in detention throughout Europe in 1998. Detention was particularly prevalent for rejected asylum seekers awaiting deportation. Deportation was often stymied by the absence of proof regarding nationality and the unwillingness of countries of origin to accept the return of their citizens. In other cases, rejected asylum seekers fearing persecution upon return put up fierce opposition to deportation. Many went underground, others sought and received church asylum, and some engaged in hunger strikes or even committed suicide to avoid return. In September, a Nigerian woman died in Belgium after policemen who were trying to deport her pressed her face into an airplane seat cushion to stifle her screams, she lost consciousness, and fell into a coma; the two policemen faced criminal charges, and the Belgian minister of the interior resigned over the ensuing scandal.

Throughout Europe, states continued to struggle with the refugee legacy of the conflict in Bosnia and Hercegovina. Some countries, hosting relatively small numbers of Bosnians, gave them permission to remain. Germany, which received 350,000 Bosnians during the war, took the toughest stance. By mid-1998, more than 200,000 had left the country190,000 voluntarily returned to Bosnia and Hercegovina, 2,000 were forcibly repatriated, and 10,000 were sent to third countries. For many of those returning voluntarily, the threat of deportation and other penalties rendered their return less than fully voluntary. German authorities warned that the remaining 150,000 would be expected to leave the country by years end.
Middle East and North Africa
Human Rights Developments
The lack of progress in ending the civil strife in Algeria, the on-off weapons inspections and comprehensive sanctions regime in Iraq, and the nearly moribund negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian Authority dominated the headlines about the region and generated largely negative human rights consequences. But what went largely unnoticed was the steady erosion of freedoms of expression and association. In addition, other basic rights were not respected in most countries in the Middle East and North Africa and the pattern of violations persisted or worsened. There were disappointingly few discernible improvements in longstanding problems such as arbitrary arrest, torture, disappearances, and the death penalty.

The international attention that was finally paid to Algerias ongoing internal conflict did not prevent the killing of thousands of men, women, and children, and continued growth of the number of disappeared persons. In Iraq, sanctions combined with government policies continued to have a devastating impact on the welfare of civilians. In September, then-U.N. humanitarian aid Coordinator Denis Halliday stated that 4,000 to 5,000 children were dying unnecessarily every month due to the impact of sanctions because of the breakdown of water and sanitation, inadequate diet and the bad internal health situation. The military conflict in occupied south Lebanon again yielded violations of international humanitarian law and civilian casualties, as did the conflict between Palestinians and Israelis in the occupied territories. Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Libya, and Syria remained civil society wastelands, where the exercise of freedom of association and expression was completely beyond reach. In Tunisia, the government sought not only to present its own version of human rights and democratization but employed repressive and sometimes brutal measures to muzzle Tunisian human rights activists who tried to portray a truer picture.

Palestinian refugees in the region and beyond continued to suffer from the consequences of the inability to exercise the right to a nationality. Palestinian refugees served by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) did not enjoy international refugee protection available to all other refugees because the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol specifically did not apply to those who continued to receive protection or assistance from other organs or agencies of the U.N. Over 300,000 Palestinian refugees in Lebanon, many of them living in conditions of extreme poverty, experienced sharp restrictions on their freedom of movement and right to work.

Several positive developmentsincluding prisoner releases, governmental accountability for past abuses, and ratifications of international human rights treatiesprovided some reprieve from an otherwise bleak year. Perhaps the most encouraging highlights were the several instances when the local human rights community and civil society institutions mobilized in efforts to prevent the further shrinking of rights and hold those in power accountable for their actions. But governments themselves could also be credited for some encouraging developments.

Morocco took concrete action to resolve some of its longest-standing human rights problems. King Hassan II, in an October 9 address to parliament that was broadcast live, said, We are determined to close the human rights file finally within the next six months. Over the next two weeks, twenty-eight Islamists were released from prison. Also, official information was disclosed for the first time about more than one hundred Moroccans who had disappeared, some as long ago as the 1960s: it was announced that fifty-six of them had died. But Moroccos two largest independent human rights organizations insisted that much remained to be done in order to close the files on these issues, such as resolving additional cases of disappearances and political prisoners; returning the remains to families and compensating them; and prosecuting those responsible for disappearances and deaths in detention. The groups insisted that only an independent inquiry could credibly address the disappearances issue.

In Syria, several of the longest-held political prisoners in the region were released, including lawyer Riad al-Turk, who was detained without charge since 1980, and Mustafa Tawfiq Fallah, who was arrested in 1970 and held for thirteen years beyond the expiry of his prison term. Syrian authorities also released 121 Lebanese who had been held in Syria without charge or official acknowledgment of their whereabouts. During the year Iraq released a number of Egyptian and Jordanian prisoners and Iran and Iraq repatriated thousands of POWs held since the 1980s. Kuwait pardoned a number of Jordanian and Iraqi prisoners convicted in unfair trials in 1991, and announced in June that it would close its notorious Talha prison. In Algeria, the issue of disappearances finally captured public attention, thanks to persistent agitation by the families of the missing and their advocates, increased local press coverage, demarches by visiting delegations, and interventions by human rights organizations. In Oman, Sultan Qaboos made it possible for women to stand for election to the advisory Shura Council, broadening the participation of women in public affairs.

Two Gulf states ratified key international conventions. Saudi Arabia signed the Convention against Torture (CAT) and the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, and Bahrain signed the CAT. Although both countries ratifications included important reservations, Bahrain, under the threat of a possible second critical resolution at the U.N. Sub-Commission on Human Rights, announced its willingness to allow a visit by the U.N. Working Group on Arbitrary Detention.

Many countries of the region experienced a further closing of the public space for free expression. This was brought about both by governments seeking to silence criticism and violent or intolerant political groups bent on quashing diverse views or departures from their own notions of religious orthodoxy. Despite this continuing and alarming trend, examples were plentiful, from Morocco to Iran, where independent media, professional associations, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), political parties, and elected parliamentarians, often at some risk to themselves, called attention to rights abuses and official corruption, criticized existing or proposed restrictive legislation, and championed the human rights cause.

The Freedoms Committee of the Arab Journalists Union, meeting for two days in Beirut in July, noted the deteriorating conditions in some Arab countries regarding freedom of expression as well as political and legislative restrictions imposed on the press. The committee cited, in particular, tightening sanctions on journalists, including jail sentences, increased financial penalties, and mounting manifestations of intellectual terrorism by various forces and trends. Indeed, during the year authorities arrested journalists and closed newspapers and other media outlets in over half the countries in the region and for a variety of reasons.

For the first time in Egypt, six journalists were sentenced to prison terms as of October 22 following convictions for criminal libel, while the independent press continued to face censorship and other restrictions and the popular weekly al-Dustour was banned. In Iran, the authorities closed the leading independent newspaper Tous and jailed four of its editors. Other Iranian newspapers, journals, and magazines were also closed down as conservatives tried to stifle open debate which continued to flourish under the reform-minded President Mohammad Khatami. In Lebanon, a military court sentenced in absentia Pierre Attalah, a journalist with al-Nahar daily newspaper, to three years imprisonment and a fine for his published interviewwith Etienne Saqr, leader of a Lebanese militia who was sentenced to death in absentia for collaboration with Israel. A Kuwaiti court sentenced al-Qabas editor Mohammad al-Saqr in June to a fine and six months imprisonment for publishing a joke that the information ministry deemed offensive; an appeals court stayed execution of the prison sentence pending an appeal to the Constitutional Court.

Bahrain continued an effective ban on reporting by the local Arabic-speaking stringer for the BBC, and threatened to penalize a well-known local columnist, Hafedh al-Shaikh, if he published in Bahrain or elsewhere. In Tunisia, indirect controls on the press were so heavy that the private and governmental newspapers were virtually indistinguishable in their coverage of government policies. Foreign publications were plentiful on the newsstands but did not appear whenever issues contained material deemed unfavorable about Tunisia, such as the June issue of Le Monde Diplomatique .

In Jordan, forces of civil society campaigned vocally throughout the year against a proposed restrictive press and publications law, and continued their efforts after the law went into effect on September 1. In response, newly appointed Prime Minister Fayez Tarawneh promised a soft implementation of the new law and an improved relationship with the press. But Jordan Press Association President Seif Sharif and others stressed that the law should be amended. We cant leave a law like this to the will of people in office, he said. Under the present law, journalists cannot feel at ease. Things have to be changed legally for us to feel secure.

In at least one instance, censorship was eased. The government of Algeria retired the committees that had exercised prior censorship on the print media, and enforced less rigorously the requirement that security-related items be cleared by the authorities before publication. Live coverage of parliamentary debates also gave state television a bit more political diversity. In another positive development, people in many countries of the region were able to watch European and Middle Eastern television via satellite, as most governments decided not to block this popular new medium. Also, governments that allowed public access to the Internet generally regulated it less than they regulated print and broadcast media. However, as of October public Internet access remained unavailable in Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Libya, and Syria.

In several countries the struggle between defenders of freedom of association and assembly and those seeking to restrict these rights was played out openly. In Bahrain, members of the Lawyers Society brought a court challenge to the minister of labor and social affairs March decree replacing the elected governing board with a handpicked slate of pro-government lawyers. The Iranian government continued to restrict independent associations, and violent vigilantes with ties to prominent conservative clerics continued to restrict freedom of assembly and expression. Human rights and other activists worked closely with the Palestinian Legislative Council to improve draft legislation governing NGOs working in the territories controlled by the Palestinian Authority. Although the legislation was submitted to President Arafat for ratification in August, as of this writing it still had not been signed into law.

The human rights community in Egypt quickly mobilized to publicize the dangers of a draft law designed to restrict further the activities of all NGOs and give the state a significantly intrusive hand in the conduct of their affairs. Minister of Social Affairs Mervat Tellawi acknowledged in June that NGOs played an increasingly important role in Egypt, and said that the controversial and highly restrictive draft law designed to regulate their activities had emerged after six months of negotiations and several earlier drafts. In a reference to the long-maligned Law No. 32 of 1964, which the draft law was set to repeal, she said that one of the reasons for the new legislation was to remove the articles that have so often been a source of complaint from NGOs, especially human rights groups.

With respect to freedom of assembly, Jordan experienced further restrictions. On February 10, then-Interior Minister Nadhir Rashid issued a categorical ban on all demonstrations, which was followed by the polices use of force against Jordanians peacefully protesting the prospect of U.S. and British military strikes in Iraq. The day after the ban was announced, then-Deputy Prime Minister Dr. Abdallah al-Nusur said: Our people do not need demonstrations as a tool to express their opinion. The Jordanian people express their opinion through civilized means followed by civilized nations. Jordanian human rights organizations condemned the ban and the subsequent use of force by riot police against peaceful protesters. The Jordanian Society for Human Rights noted that the pattern of repression predated the pro-Iraq rallies, citing the use of force in 1997 to disperse journalists protesting restrictive amendments to the press law and university students demonstrating about the right to form a student union. The Jordanian branch of the Arab Organization for Human Rights called for prosecution of those responsible for beating peaceful demonstrators on February 13 at al-Husseini mosque in Amman.

In backhanded acknowledgment that governments were being judged on how well they were protecting human rights, officials increasingly used human rights terminology even when defending proposed restrictive legislation. For example, in Yemen, where a draft law governing demonstrations and assemblies was introduced in August, Minister of Legal Affairs Abdallah Ahmad Ghanim cited the democratic right to organize processions and demonstrations in an interview with al-Sharq al-Awsat (London) published on August 31, and noted that the proposed legislation did not aim at confiscating or restricting the right to express opinions. In Jordan, following the elected lower house of parliaments August 9 endorsement of the highly restrictive press law, Jordans then-Information Minister and Deputy Prime Minister Abdallah Ensour termed the legislation an important step for press freedom. Ignoring the laws explicit bans on a wide range of subjects, he said that it upholds the right to investigate issues freely and express opinions at liberty.

Women faced systematic gender discrimination, particularly in states that maintained religiously based personal status laws and where blatantly discriminatory family codes granted husbands superior rights in terms of divorce, child custody, and inheritance. In Tunisia, where the family code provided for greater equality between the sexes, the independent Tunisian Association of Democratic Women reminded the government that womens rights included the political right to promote their cause publicly, something they were frequently blocked from doing. Israel made no provision for civil marriage, and Israeli law deferred to Jewish, Muslim, Christian or Druze religious courts on issues of marriage, divorce, and child custody. Rulings by such courts were often highly discriminatory; for example, in cases where husbands refused to grant wives a divorce, Jewish religious courts allowed the husbands to remarry while prohibiting women from both divorcing and remarrying. Irans parliament attempted to silence campaigners for family law reform by passing legislation making it an offense to advocate equality between women and men in family law and respect for womens rights on the grounds that such advocacy created division within the society. In Saudi Arabia and many of the Gulf states, women faced institutionalized discrimination, affecting their freedom of movement and association and the right to equality, employment and education.

The administration of justice remained problematic throughout the region. Impartial legal systems, free of corruption and fully independent, were as difficult to find as they were essential for the protection of basic rights. Emergency or exceptional laws, which international law permitted only in extreme circumstances and for limited periods, remained in effect and circumscribed basic rights in Algeria, Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Israel and the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, and Syria. Special security courts, whose procedures did not meet international fair-trial standards, continued to operate in Egypt, Bahrain, Jordan, Syria, and the territories under Palestinian control. Irans Islamic Revolutionary Courts and Special Court for the Clergy were grossly unfair while in Lebanon there was no right of appeal against sentences passed by the Justice Council, including death sentences. In 1995 Algeria disbanded the special courts set up under the anti-terrorist decree, but the latter was incorporated into the Penal Code and Code of Criminal Procedures, thereby turning what had been an emergency decree into permanent legislation. In Israel the Supreme Court upheld the use of emergency law to detain indefinitely Lebanese nationals as bargaining chips for future negotiations, even while recognizing that the detainees were not themselves a threat to state security.

Courts continued to impose the death penalty, and executions occurred in Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, Syria, and Yemen. In August Yemens President Ali Abdallah Salih announced the extension of the death penalty to cases of kidnapping. Also in August, the Palestinian Authority conducted its first executions, killing two men by firing squad the day after a summary trial by military court. At least thirteen other death sentences were pending.

Prisoners endured harsh conditions and treatment that did not meet minimum international standards. In Lebanon in April, attention was dramatically focused on prison conditions when inmates rioted for two days at overcrowded Rumieh Central Prison in Beirut, the countrys largest facility. All we are seeking is better, decent conditions, read banners that some protesting prisoners displayed. The disturbances, reportedly ignited after guards beat and burned one prisoner, prompted a visit by Interior Minister Michel al-Murr, who conceded that thirty or forty prisoners sharing cells was abnormal. In a press release, the Lebanese Association for Human Rights held authorities responsible for the violent outburst at Rumieh because it said that the problem has been known and recognized for a long time. In Egypt, two local human rights groups issued detailed reports throughout the year, focusing on extreme medical neglect of prisoners which led to inmate deaths. In Tunisia, political prisoners were subjected to extreme overcrowding, beatings, and other cruel disciplinary measures, and were shuttled incessantly among institutions, forcing families to travel great distances for visits.

Against this sobering backdrop, independent judges in several countries played a positive role and issued welcome decisions in a number of instances. Jordans High Court of Justice ruled in January that the controversial temporary amendments to the press and publications law, enacted in May 1997 while the elected parliament was in recess, were unconstitutional. In the wake of the decision, independent newspapers that had been forced to close were able to resume publishing. Egypts Supreme Constitutional Court in February found unconstitutional the first paragraph of Article 195 of the penal code, which held editors-in-chief criminally liable for the publication of material in their newspapers judged to violate broadly worded content bans. The Cairo-based Center for Human Rights Legal Aid, representing editors of five newspapers and magazines separately charged under Article 195, brought the appeals before the high court.

The Israeli Supreme Court ruled in August that the education ministry must extend electricity to eleven Bedouin schools in the so-called unrecognized villages of the Negev desert, where an estimated 50,000 Bedouin citizens lived. Israel had refused to provide services to the villages in an effort to force inhabitants to move to permanent towns. Judges under the Palestinian Authority showed great courage by ordering on several occasions the release of political opposition figures detained illegally. Such bravery was not without cost, as evidenced by the forced retirement of High Court Chief Justice Qusai al-Abadlah in January.
Algeria
Human Rights Developments
Algerias human rights emergency provoked more international concern and diplomatic activity during 1998 than at any time since the violence became endemic in 1992. The catalyst for the international outcry was a series of large-scale massacres, officially attributed to armed Islamist groups but with disturbing evidence suggesting possible collusion by the security forces. Other human rights violations committed by the security forces, including disappearances and torture, also received a higher profile, due to the efforts of relatives of victims and their advocates, greater local press attention to these issues, the willingness of some deputies to raise them in parliament, and interventions by human rights groups and visiting foreign delegations.

In January 1998, Prime Minister Ahmed Ouyahia gave the first official death toll from the six years of strife: 26,536 through the end of 1997. The U.S. State Department, around the same time, cited an estimate of 70,000, a figure in line with the prevailing estimates by Western observers. Thousands more were killed during 1998.

Most civilian casualties in 1998 occurred not in the massacres that grabbed headlines but rather in smaller-scale attacks, including bomb explosions in markets and other public places, and assaults on cars and buses traveling the countrys roads. In most of these cases the responsibility of Islamist armed groups was not questioned.

There was overwhelming evidence, including the testimony of survivors, that Islamist armed groups had since 1992 carried out the murder of thousands of individuals singled out for opposing or defying Islamist demandsfrom refusing to contribute money or provisions to armed groups, to refusing, in the case of women, to adhere to a dress codeor merely because they were related to members of targeted categories, such as security force members. Islamist groups killed whole families, sometimes abducting young women to be held in sexual servitude in guerrilla camps; survivors who escaped some attacks of this kind told Human Rights Watch of religious harangues preceding the murder of their families.

The string of large-scale massacres that began in August 1997 continued into the new year. Massacres in mostly isolated villages in the west of the country claimed at least 800 lives in late December 1997 and early January 1998. An attack on the night of January 11-12 on Sidi Hamed, thirty kilometers south of Algiers, left at least one hundred dead. In Chouardia, a village in Medea province, more than forty persons were reported killed during three hours of carnage on April 27.

The Islamic Salvation Front (Front Islamique du Salut, FIS), the now-outlawed political movement that was on the verge of winning the 1992 parliamentary elections before they were halted, condemned the massacres of civilians through its spokespersons in exile. Its own armed wing, the Islamic Salvation Army (Arme Islamique du Salut, AIS), was said to have largely observed a truce it began on October 1, 1997, although occasional clashes between the AIS and certain other armed groups reportedly continued.

Domestic and international outrage at the massacres was directed both at the shadowy perpetratorsinitially identified as the Islamic Armed Group (Groupe Islamique Arm, GIA) and at the security forces failure to protect civilians. In some instances, massacres occurred within a few hundred meters of security force barracks and posts. Even though the slaughter lasted for hours, generating fire, smoke, explosions, and cries for help, no effort was made by the authorities to intervene to halt the attack or to apprehend the attackers as they withdrew, according to interviews with survivors.

The GIA, a group or groups with a record of brutal attacks on security personnel and terror attacks on civilians, had no visible political structure that commented authoritatively on its program or actions. Increasingly extreme edicts were issued in its name, which authorities permitted to be published in the press despite a strict censorship regime that encompassed statements by FIS leaders. Since the killing in 1994 and 1995 of the GIAs original leaders, mass killings increasingly became part of the pattern of atrocities attributed to it.

Nearly all of the massacres occurred in isolated or semi-rural communities that had voted for the FIS in the elections of 1990 and 1991 and some of whose residents had provided support to the armed groups since 1992. The attacks were in some cases explained as retaliation by the GIA for communities having withdrawn support from the more extremist group.

The attackers exhibited spectacular cruelty. In addition to guns, they used crude weapons such as knives and saws to behead or disembowel men, women, and children. The attackers sometimes abducted women, raping and enslaving them. The extent of the practice was difficult to gauge. According to interior ministry sources cited in the August 5 issue of the Algerian daily al-Khabar , 2,884 women had reported being raped by armed Islamist groups between 1993 and 1998. Among women who were kidnapped, 319 were still missing.

The succession of massacres between August 1997 and January 1998 were concentrated near the heavily militarized outskirts of Algiers and in the province of Relizane near the western oil port of Arzew. The precinct of Beni Massous on the outskirts of Algiers, where about eighty persons were killed, according to press reports, on September 5, 1997, was virtually surrounded by military installations. Survivors told Algerian reporters the day after the Chouardia massacre that even though a paramilitary gendarme post was located only one kilometer away, security forces did not arrive until four and one-half hours after the killing ended.

Doubts that all of the killings attributed to the GIA were the responsibility of a single organization acting alone were fueled by the posture of the security forces towards the perpetrators of the massacres in 1997 and 1998 and by a series of statements by former security officials in exile claiming Algerias military intelligence apparatus, the Securit Militaire, had both deployed forces masquerading as Islamists and manipulated GIA groups through infiltration.

The questions surrounding the massacres received no conclusive answers. Through September, no independent Algerian body had conducted a thorough inquiry. The government allowed no international human rights organization or U.N. human rights rapporteur to investigate the violence.

The suspicions, however, were reinforced by interviews conducted by Human Rights Watch outside of Algeria and by others on the ground with survivors, witnesses from neighboring communities, rescue workers, journalists, and former security personnel. The attackers, numbering sometimes 200 or more, were found to have moved in and killed and departed freely through militarized areas, without any effort on the spot by the security forces to protect civilians or make arrests. At Rais, where the death toll on the night of August 29, 1997 reportedly reached 335, the killings began when men in military uniforms brazenly arrived in two open-backed trucks, firing on men playing dominoes at the entrance to the community, according to accounts that survivors gave to a rescue worker who arrived shortly after the attackers withdrew.

The attackers who killed over 250 people at Bentalha on the night of September 23, 1997 entered the community on foot through orange groves, but according to at least one account, some also arrived in open-backed trucks. Even after the arrival of the army, police, and communal guard on the perimeter of village, the killers were reportedly able to load spoils into trucks before departing unchallenged.

In Bentalha, as elsewhere, the attackers acted with apparent confidence that the security forces on the scene would not attack them. One of the survivors, who had fled to a rooftop with other residents, told Human Rights Watch he saw two military armored-personnel carriers arrive: They came up to about one hundred meters away from where we were being attacked. Then they turned on their floodlightsI dont know why, since they didnt rescue us. The people started to shout that the military had come to their rescue, but the [leaders] responded by saying, work calmly, the military will not come, dont worry.

At about 11:30pm on August 29, 1997, about the time that the first shots were fired in Rais, rescue workers who regularly recovered the bodies after massacres were ordered to stand by for work. A rescue worker told us his Algiers team was instructed to drive twenty ambulances to a staging point near Rais, but was then held there for up to two hours by the gendarmerie, before proceeding into the devastated community at about 2 a.m. Although official sources often cited the danger of mines and ambushes laid by the armed groups to explain the lack of response to massacres in progress, the rescue teams police escort showed no concern for mines or booby traps as they entered Rais, and no interest in identifying or preserving evidence of the crimes committed there. By the rescue workers account, there was no military presence when they arrived, although the army brought in the press at dawn. He said the gendarmerie intervened to prevent the few survivors from speaking to rescue workers and afterwards, to outsiders. He added that he andhis colleagues removed 335 bodies from the scene and identified all but some 40 of the dead, more than three times the official death toll of 98 that was announced.

The massacres in Relizane took place in villages located near a junction of the principal oil and gas pipelines leading from the production areas of the far south to the port of Arzew and the spur pipelines to Algiers. The armed wing of the FIS, the AIS, had reportedly been operating in this strategically sensitive area since 1993, and AIS troops reportedly assisted survivors to bury their slain kin in the massacres aftermath.

Survivors from Relizaneone of whom had been forced to guide the attackers before escaping into a ravinetold Algerian interviewers that the attackers were strangers to the area, most of whom did not speak the local dialect, and included some men wearing military uniforms. Villagers who were interviewed by an Algerian human rights activist stated that on the morning of one of the massacres, communal guards and gendarmes at the regional market warned them to leave their homes that very day; otherwise, said one, You will count the lives of your children tonight in front of us.

There continued to be reports of reprisal killings and extrajudicial executions committed by the security forces and the thousands of armed civilian self-defense groups that operated mostly in rural areas, ostensibly under military and police supervision. In April, the authorities arrested two mayors in Relizane who, the press reported, were suspected of leading government-backed self-defense groups that had executed more than seventy persons, mostly civilians, between 1995 and 1997. The mayors were released pending trial after a few days in detention.

The vast majority of human rights violations went unpunished in Algeria. Despite numerous requests, authorities never provided specific information to human rights organizations about how alleged abuses were handled; such information appeared only rarely in Algerian media. Algerias report to the U.N. Human Rights Committee said that through December 1997, the courts had punished 128 members of the security forces and self-defense groups for excesses in the performance of their duties, but provided no verifiable details. A U.N. delegation reported receiving official lists of such cases; these lists had not been reviewed by Human Rights Watch at the time this report went to press.

There were many fewer killings by armed groups of intellectuals, cultural figures, foreigners, clergymen, and journalists than during the mid-1990s. One prominent personality who was almost certainly killed for his outspoken views was singer and Berber activist Lounes Matoub. A few days after he was gunned down in June, the press reported that the GIA had claimed responsibility. Matoub was both critical of the government and vehemently anti-Islamist.

Algerians continued to disappear during 1998. Despite official denials, evidence pointed to government responsibility in the many cases in which witnesses saw the victims being seized by groups of armed men they took to be security-force members, or in which family members heard unofficially that the missing person had been sighted in a detention facility.

The U.N. delegation visiting Algeria in July-August met with families of the disappeared and their advocates and raised the issue with officials. Three weeks after the delegations departure, the interior ministry, without acknowledging government culpability, announced the establishment of offices countrywide to handle complaints concerning missing persons. On October 8, the interior ministry said in a statement that it had received inquiries about 1,735 missing persons, but by the end of October had provided little if any concrete information about the fate of individuals. One week later, an association of families of the disappeared said it had documented more than 3,000 cases of presumed disappearances; other estimates were much higher.

Security forces commonly tortured security-related detainees during the period when they were held in pre-arraignment detention. The torture was facilitated by the holding of detainees incommunicado and for prolonged periods in unacknowledged detention sites, and by the willingness of judges to convict on the basis of confessions even when there was evidence they had been obtained through improper coercion.

Authorities banned many demonstrations and gatherings using a state of emergency decree in force since 1992. Following local elections in October 1997, which were won by a pro-government party, more than 15,000 supporters of other major parties took to the streets to protest alleged fraud. Police prevented a second march a few days later. Peaceful marches by supporters of the legal opposition Socialist Forces Front party (Front de Forces Socialistes, FFS) were forcibly dispersed on February 12 and June 30.

While two Islamist parties held seats in parliament and one held government portfolios, the FIS remained outlawed. Those of its leaders who had been released from prison remained under various restrictions, including a ban on making public statements or meeting with visiting delegations. Imprisoned FIS deputy chief Ali Belhaj spent much of the year held in a secret location. In September, he saw his family for the first time in two years.

Algerias private press and its state-controlled television and radio exhibited more breadth of coverage in 1998. Authorities withdrew the Interior Ministry-guided reading committees empowered to censor newspapers prior to publication, and enforced with less rigor the requirement that authorization be obtained to publish any security related item.

However, after the publication of a slew of unprecedentedly harsh articles targeting certain government ministers, the state-run printing presses announced they would halt printing four private dailies that ran the articles unless they paid their outstanding bills within forty-eight hours. These four dailies and three others launched an open-ended strike on October 17 to protest what they said was a politically motivated reprisal by the government that violated existing agreements between the papers and the presses.

Television remained primarily a government mouthpiece. But opposition and critical viewpoints received more air time due partly to the broadcast of parliamentary debates and the sometimes sharp questioning of ministers by deputies. Private newspapers provided bolder first-hand reporting of massacres and more coverage of rights abuses committed by the security forces and self-defense groups. But their reports on clashes generally omitted mention of security-force casualties and referred to those they killed simply as terrorists without furnishing their names, ages, or circumstances of their death. Many Algerians watched European or Middle Eastern newscasts via satellite.
Bahrain
Human Rights Developments

The government of Bahrain continued to engage in serious human rights violations in 1998. The family of a young Bahraini man who died on July 21, two days after being arrested, reported that his body bore marks of torture. Street clashes between security forces and protesters calling for political reform, which had been intermittent in the first part of 1998, increased in the wake of this incident. In 1998 the government tightened already severe restrictions on the right to freedom of association and freedom of expression.

In February, the government appointed Shaikh Khalid bin Muhammad Al Khalifa, a nephew of the ruler, to head the Special Investigation Service. He replaced Ian Henderson, a Briton who had served as Bahrains top intelligence and internal security official since 1966. Henderson presided over a security establishment within which officials committed serious human rights abuses, including arbitrary and prolonged detention and torture. The seventy-year-old Henderson remained in Bahrain as a special adviser to the minister of interior. Another British citizen, David Jump, was employed as legal advisor to the minister.

Human Rights Watch had received reports of at least seven deaths due to torture, mistreatment, or medical neglect of detainees since the political unrest began four years ago, in December 1994. The most recent victim, Nuh Khalil Abdallah al-Nuh, twenty-three, was reported to be in good health when he was detained in the al-Naim district of Manama by members of the security forces on July 19. When his body was returned to his family for burial two days later, on July 21, it reportedly bore marks of torture. According to press reports, a government spokesperson said that no one had died in prison or under torture, but British Minister of State Derek Fatchett, responding to a parliamentary question, said the government had responded to British embassy inquiries by claiming that the matter was still under investigation. The authorities did not respond to a letter from Human Rights Watch requesting information about the case.

The government continued to rebuff calls by the Peoples Petition Committee and other critics inside the country for the release or fair trial of persons detained without trial or convicted by the State Security Court in unfair trials, the return of persons forcibly exiled, relaxation of restrictions on free expression and association, and future elections to a restored National Assembly, the partially-elected parliament which was suspended by decree in 1975. According to relatives who had met with Shaikh Abd al-Amir al-Jamri, a detained leader of the committee, the authorities subjected him to a week of intensive interrogation and rough physical treatment in April and then brought him before an investigating judge for the purpose of signing a prepared confession alleging that he had ordered arson and sabotage attacks and had acted on behalf of a foreign power. Shaikh al-Jamri refused to sign the document and remained in detention. The shaikh, who was sixty years old and was hospitalized on several occasions in 1998, had been in continuous detention since January 1996 under the State Security Law of 1974, which allowed for up to three years of detention without trial. As of October the government had not publicly produced any evidence that Shaikh al-Jamri or the other seven Shi'a community leaders detained at the same time had participated in or advocated political violence.

The government continued its policy of providing no information concerning the numbers or identities of persons arrested, tried, convicted, acquitted or released under the State Security Law or brought before the State Security Court, where procedures did not meet basic fair trial standards and verdicts were not subject to appeal. Shaikh Muhammad bin Khalifa al-Khalifa, the minister of interior, insisted in a May 17 interview in Akhbar al-Khalij, a pro-government daily, that incidents of sabotage and rioting were few and isolated. A few hundred people were involved. Even at the peak of disturbances a little over 1,000 were held. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) reported in June that in 1997 it had visited 2,111 persons detained for security reasons in twenty-three places of detention. In keeping with ICRC policy, its findings and recommendations to the government were not made public.

The authorities continued to suppress free expression in the country. For example, persons convicted by the State Security Court included those charged with offenses such as chanting slogans against the existing political system and spreading false rumors liable to undermine state security. Abdallah Fakhroo, an elderly resident of the capital, Manama, was arrested in February after he raised questions regarding political conditions in Bahrain at a lecture by a visiting Sunni religious dignitary, reportedly in the presence of the minister of justice. After being detained for a month under the State Security Law, he was released at the end of March but rearrested several hours later. In September, while still in detention, Fakhroo was reportedly transferred to a hospital security wing after suffering heart or respiratory problems. He was reportedly released from custody in late September.

Public criticism of government officials and policies remained off-limits. The BBC reported in September that its Arabic-speaking Bahraini stringer had not been allowed to file stories for the past year. Al-Quds al-Arabi, a London-based pan-Arab paper, reported on May 8 that the Bahraini government had conveyed to Hafedh al-Shaikh, a columnist for the pro-government daily Al-Ayam, that he could no longer write for publication inside or outside Bahrain after he submitted a column criticizing the militarization of the education sector and questioning the policies of the president of the University of Bahrain, Jasim al-Ghatam, a former military officer.

Bahrainis could, to a limited degree, express themselves and receive information on the Internet. The government apparently appreciated the importance of Internet access for the countrys position as a regional business hub, and the state-controlled telecommunications monopoly, Batelco, reportedly generated considerable revenue from Internet users, including persons who phoned in from Saudi Arabia, which had no public access. Bahraini authorities, however, apparently continued to block access to some websites, including that of the London-based Bahrain Freedom Movement (BFM), an opposition group, and to seek ways to improve its capacity to monitor political speech on the Internet. Jalal Alawi Sharif, a Batelco engineer who was arrested in March 1997, reportedly on the grounds that he was transmitting information to the BFM via the Internet, remained in detention without charge or trial in September 1998.

Despite the guarantee of freedom of association in Article 27 of Bahrains constitution, authorized civic associations, clubs, and professional societies were closely monitored and effectively prevented from conducting discussions or activities that touched upon Bahraini politics. The Bahraini Lawyers Society had been a very partial exception, on the grounds that the duties of the legal profession required lawyers to interpret legislation and to represent clients in politically sensitive trials. Building on this margin of exemption, the society occasionally held internalevents, which did not require prior government permission and to which non-lawyers were invited. In a January 1998 meeting, according to participants, the discussion ventured into matters such as income distribution in Bahrain and the absence of democracy. In the days immediately following, security forces reportedly visited the societys office to interrogate the staff about participants and speakers, and the ministers of justice and interior separately called in Lawyers Society President Abbas Hilal to question him about the meeting. On February 28, Minister of Labor and Social Affairs Abd al-Nabi al-Shu'ala informed the societys elected board that the general assembly meeting scheduled for March 19, at which new elections were to be held, would not be allowed to take place, and that their membership on the board had been terminated. The minister then issued Decree 4 of 1998, which charged the society with violating the law governing societies and clubs and appointed a new board.

More than seventy members filed a legal challenge to the governments action. The government appointed Shaikh Khalifa bin Rashid Al Khalifa, a member of the ruling family and the head of the State Security Court, to hear the case. The minister of labor reportedly met with lawyers leading the court challenge to press them to drop the appeal, to agree to seek permission for all society activities including internal meetings three months in advance, and to refrain from any participation in politics. The lawyers were also instructed to remain silent about these meetings. Court hearings in June, September, and October were postponed at the governments request, effectively leaving the government-appointed board in charge of the society.

A statement from Bahrains embassy in Washington, D.C., in an April 15 response to Human Rights Watch asserted that a significant portion of the Societys members had appealed to the Ministry of Labor to intervene in the organizations internal affairs owing to alleged serious financial mismanagement and discontent over the course that the previous Board seemed intent on following. This statement and a subsequent letter from Ambassador Muhammad Abdul Ghaffar in Washington failed to specify what activities the government considered to be seriously enough in breach of the law as to require the removal of the board less than three weeks before already scheduled general elections. As of October, Human Rights Watchs requests for clarification on these and other points went unanswered.
	Egypt
Human Rights Developments
Wide-ranging human rights violations continued to blemish the government of President Hosni Mubarak, which ruled under a quasi-permanent state of emergency, currently in force until May 2000. Authorities showed no sign of loosening the tight grip of the security apparatus, and documentation of its impunity  including torture, deaths in custody, disappearances, and abysmal prison conditions  filled the pages of reports published by Egyptian human rights organizations. Nor did the government take any significant steps to provide additional space to independent institutions, or peaceful political opponents and critics. In an ominous trend, there were harsh restrictions on the press in 1998, and as of late October six journalists had been sentenced to prison terms. The ruling National Democratic Party, which swept the consultative Shura Council elections in June, continued to dominate the countrys static legal political landscape, and in May the Islamist-led Hizb al-Wasat (Center Party) lost its only and final legal appeal for a license to operate. The circulation of a draft law governing private associations raised fears that the state sought to impose significant curbs on the activities of independent nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and local human rights organizations mobilized vigorously during the year to meet the challenge.

The massacre at the Temple of Hatshepsut in Luxor on November 17, 1997, in which fifty-eight tourists and four Egyptians were killed in a forty-five minute attack by a small group of men armed with guns and knives, was the most devastating carnage since the military wing of the Islamic Group launched its sustained if sporadic campaign of violence in 1992. The indiscriminate slaughter brought to an abrupt end the tenure of General Hassan el-Alfi, who had served as interior minister since 1993. He was replaced by General Habib el-Adli, former head of State Security Investigation (SSI), the elite internal security force whose personnel have historically enjoyed impunity for torture and other human rights abuses.

Suspected Islamist militants again faced unfair trials before state security and military courts, and were sentenced to death and executed, without the right to appeal to a higher tribunal as required under international human rights law. In February, EOHR expressed concern about the increased use of the death sentence by military courts despite the fact that most of the cases referred to these courts do not contain specific charges of violence or terrorism. As of July 29, forty-one death sentences were handed down in 1998 and thirty-two criminal and political prisoners had been executed, according to Amnesty International.

Senior government officials repeatedly emphasized to the international community the threat posed by Egyptian militants based abroad, seeking their extradition and even extra-legal return, but remained unresponsive publicly to calls from militant and moderate Islamists inside Egypt for a halt to politically motivated violence. In January, leaders of the Islamic Group held in Tora High Security prison reiterated their appeal, first made in July 1997, for a suspension of all attacks. In a handwritten statement, they challenged Islamic Group leaders abroad to issue a clear statement for an end to military activity. The same month, Mustafa Mashur, the supreme guide of the Muslim Brotherhood, said that his beleaguered group sought a dialogue with the various parties to firmly oppose violence and terrorism and end extremism. He argued that the states lifting of limits on freedom of expression and political action would be the best way to fight against the deviant thought of the armed militants. Suspected Muslim Brotherhood activists continued to be detained for membership in an illegal organization and possessing leaflets opposed to the regime.

At least twice during the year, ordinary Egyptians were prompted to violent confrontations with police by alleged torture deaths in police custody. On April 9, residents of Belqas, in Daqahliyah province, clashed with police following the death of twenty-four-year-old Wahid el-Sayid Ahmed Abdallah, who was arrested on suspicion of theft. He was brought to the local police station, bound, and then whipped and beaten with sticks and the butt of a machine gun, and electric-shocked on the ears, nipples and penis, according to a detailed EOHR report. An officer and other policemen returned the body to the family, saying only that Wahid had lost conciousness. When the family realized that he was dead, they brought the body back to the police station, where authorities initially refused to accept it and prepare a report. Family members, including Wahids grandmother and three aunts, were arrested before police permitted the body to be buried under tight security. During the burial, several hundred residents assembled at the police station, calling for the prosecution of the officer who had ordered the torture. Angry citizens threw stones at the police and public buildings and burned tires in the streets. Security forces shot rubber bullets and tear gas and beat residents with clubs and gun butts. One man was killed, others, including police, were injured, and at least thirty-three were arrested.

On August 21, residents of al-Hamoul village in Kafr al-Sheikh, reacted violently to the death in police custody of Samir Ramadan, who was arrested when he went to the local police station the previous day to visit his son who was detained there. On learning that Ramadans body had been brought to the local hospital bearing signs of torture, residents stoned policemen and set fire to public buildings and vehicles, and thirty-six people reportedly were arrested. Following the longstanding practice of security forces when suspicious deaths in custody occur, police buried Ramadans body under heavy security and the official death certificate attributed his death to natural causes.

The lack of accountability of the security apparatus remained a major human rights problem. Continuing the pattern from past years, security forces shot dead known or suspected militants in operations that remained shrouded in secrecy. EOHR noted in a November 1997 report that the circumstances of the killings of some of the victims indicate that they may have been extra-judicially executed. In March alone in Upper Egypt, there were at least twelve officially reported shooting deaths of men whom the government claimed were terrorists. The official news agency MENA provided little information about these killings, other than the names of the victims, the weapons allegedly found at the scene, and assertions that in each case security forces did not open fire first.

The files also remained open on tens of cases of individuals who disappeared in the 1990s, most of them taken into custody by police or security forces. In August, both EOHR and the Human Rights Center for the Assistance of Prisoners (HRCAP) issued reports on the subject. Written complaints that HRCAP sent last year to Egyptian government officials about eleven men who disappeared between 1992 and 1996 went unanswered. Authorities did not publicly release any information relevant to the reported cases; the only official response to families who submitted written inquires was that their relatives were not being held in any Egyptian prison.

EOHR continued to campaign against police abuse of ordinary citizens. In a report issued in May, following the violence in Belqas, it charged that torture and ill-treatment have become systematic and widely practiced by policemen during the interrogation of suspects....The most widespread acts of torture are the use of electric currents and hanging the victim in the position of a slaughtered animal. EOHR also noted that police abuse also included the detention and torture of relatives both to obtain information and force the surrender of suspects.

Some 2,000 Islamist prisoners were quietly released between February and April, all of them detained without charge and most of them sick, according to one knowledgeable Egyptian human rights lawyer. Appalling prison conditions remained a problem of staggering dimensions. Reports of EOHR and HRCAP made clear that medical care for prisoners was grossly inadequate, particularly for inmates suffering from serious illnesses, and that the negligence of medical professionals in prisons required urgent remedy. In Doctors Indicted, published in February, HRCAP noted, for example, that the only doctor at Fayoum prison, which housed about 4,000 inmates, visited prisoners once a month. Inmates have to stand up facing the wall and with their hands raised above their head until the doctor comes and asks if there are any sick prisoners, HRCAP reported. Then he examines them verbally. Prisoners remain four meters away from him and they are insulted and accused of pretending to be sick. The work of both groups demonstrated the link between abysmal conditions  such as severe overcrowding, poor ventilation and sanitation, inadequate daily diets  and the development and spread of diseases such as tuberculosis. Thousands of inmates at four prisons  Fayoum, Liman Abu Zabel, Tora Istiqbal, and Tora High Security  remained completely isolated from the outside world because the interior ministry continued its punishing ban on visits by lawyers and families.

There were major setbacks for freedom of expression during the year as books and newspapers were banned, and journalists criminally prosecuted and imprisoned. Twice during the year authorities confiscated and banned books that official or self-appointed censors deemed insulting to Islam. On January 14, two books by Khalil Abdel Kerim were seized by police at a publishing house, on the order of the higher state security prosecutor, because religious authorities at the Islamic Research Academy of al-Azhar disapproved of their content. Censors also banned the March 19 issue of the fortnightly Cairo Times , which carried an interview with the author. On May 13, Minister of Higher Education Mufeed Shehab officially requested that the American University in Cairo remove from its curriculum Muhammed , a biography of the Prophet written by French scholar Maxime Rodinson. The minister said that the book, which is freely available in Egypt, contained fabrications harmful to the respected prophet and to the Islamic religion, the state news agency reported. The action swiftly followed journalist Salah Muntassers criticism of passages of the book as insulting to Islam in a column in al-Ahram , Egypts leading daily newspaper.

Independent newspapers and journalists also came under serious pressure. On February 26, information ministry censors informed the independent weekly al-Dustour , which was licensed abroad, that its license to print and distribute in Egypt had been revoked, effectively banning the newspaper. On March 7, President Mubarak signalled his dissatisfaction with the freewheeling independent press, charging that some journalists were destroying our country. He indicated that unfavorable press coverage of certain foreign governments was not welcome, asserting that someone has contacted a cheap newspaper and paid it a monthly fee in order to curse Saudi Arabia. In the wake of his comments, censors banned the March 19 issue of the Cairo Times, which is licensed abroad and thus subject to pre-publication censorship, for several articles found objectionable, including the review of a book about life in Saudi Arabia written by Ibrahim Abdel Meguid and published by the American University in Cairo Press. On August 12 and August 19, authorities did not approve the distribution in Egypt of the first and second editions of Alf Leila , the newly launched cultural weekly that was licensed in Cyprus as a foreign publication and was widely viewed as Dustour s successor.

Six journalists were sentenced to prison terms in 1998 for libel offenses: Magdi Hussein, editor-in-chief, and Muhamed Helmi of al-Shab ; Gamal Fahmy, deputy editor of the banned al-Dustour ; Amr Nasif of al-Usbou; and Mustafa Bakri and Mahmoud Bakri for articles that appeared in al-Ahrar . For example, on February 24, an appeals court upheld the 1997 libel conviction of Hussein and Helmi, and imposed sentences of one year with hard labor and fines for damages to Alaa al-Alfi, the son of former interior minister Hassan al-Alfi. The case stemmed from articles published in al-Shab in 1996 accusing the younger Mr. al-Alfi of influence-peddling in his business dealings in Egypt. The newspaper has been repeatedly targeted by authorities for its investigative reporting, particularly on issues related to corruption. Hussein and Helmi were released from prison after the Court of Cassation on July 2 overturned the appeals court decision.

The government continued to restrict freedom of association, including the right of Egyptians to form political parties. Political parties cannot operate legally in Egypt unless a license is secured from the Political Parties Committee of the Shura Council, a government-controlled body that since its establishment in 1977 has never approved the licensing of a new political party, often on the stated grounds that the programs of fledgling political groups were not sufficiently different from those of existing political parties. Decisions of the committee can be appealed to the Political Parties Court of the Higher Administrative Court. On May 9, the court rejected the Wasat Partys appeal for a license on the grounds that it did not offer any idea which would give it a distinctive feature which would represent a new addition to political action and distinguish it from the programmes of other parties, MENA reported. Wasat activists, determined to continue their quest for legal status, two days later submitted an application for a license for a new party, the Egyptian Center Party, with what they described as a distinctive new platform. On September 21, the committee rejected this application because it again said that the platform was not unique.

Local and international human rights groups had long criticized Law No. 32 of 1964, which governed private associations in Egypt, calling for its replacement with less restrictive legislation. The law had been used to close down independent NGOs and deny legal status to others. In 1998, a draft law to replace Law No. 32 was circulated and became the subject of intense criticism by Egyptian rights organizations, and heated discussions between NGOs and the ministry of social affairs. The draft law included a categorical prohibition of any political activities regardless of their nature, and empowered the state to object to the proposed activities of any NGO. It criminalized any activity occurring outside the framework of legally registered organizations; permitted the ministry of social affairs to veto candidates for election to boards of directors and to add government representatives toboards; and required government approval before soliciting funds inside Egypt or abroad, sending funds abroad, or joining non-Egyptian organizations. Penalties for violating the law included temporary closure or dissolution, imprisonment of up to two years, and fines. As of this writing, a draft law had not yet been submitted to parliament.

Discriminatory treatment of the predominantly Coptic Christian minority remained a sensitive and controversial issue inside Egypt. In January, an issue of the Arabic daily newpaper al-Hayat (London) was banned because of an article about the situation of minorities in the region, written by Suleiman Neguib, an Egyptian Christian. Authorities defended the longstanding prohibition on church construction and repair without the express permission of senior government officials. In a speech in al-Arish on June 11, President Mubarak said that the regulations were in place because we want to be sure that we do not give any Christian or Muslim extremist the chance to exploit the situation. As in past years, Christians in some areas of Upper Egypt were targeted and killed by suspected Islamist militants, and the perpetrators escaped unapprehended, generating fear in these villages.

In a positive development for womens and childrens rights, on December 28, 1997, the State Council, Egypts highest administrative court, upheld the Ministry of Health ban on female circumcision, which a lower court ruled illegal last year. The high court found that circumcision of girls is not an individual right under Islamic law because there is nothing in the Koran which authorizes it and nothing in the Sunna....henceforth, it is illegal for anyone to carry out circumcision operations, even if the girl or her parents agree to it. (See Womens Rights Division, below, for additional information.)
Iran
Human Rights Developments
Human rights failed to improve, and in some areas deteriorated, as the power struggle intensified between supporters of President Khatamis reformist program and those seeking to maintain the grip on power of a closed circle of clerical rulers associated with the leader of the Islamic Republic, Ayatollah Khamenei. While the political rivalry between these increasingly polarized factions helped highlight important human rights issues, it nevertheless appeared to drive and even promote violations of human rights as hardliners in the judiciary and the parliament sought to undermine President Khatamis efforts to normalize Irans relations with the West and the United States by speaking out in support of fundamental rights and the rule of law. Efforts for reform were met with repression and threats of further violence. For example, the head of the Revolutionary Guards Corps, General Yahya Rahim Safavi warned reformers in April, we are seeking to root out counterrevolutionaries wherever they are. We have to cut the throats of some and cut off the tongues of others. A few days later he threatened, we will go after them when the time is ripe...fruit has to be picked when it is ripe. The fruit is unripe now.

Executions after unfair trials proliferated, including cases of stoning to death in public. For the first time since 1992 a follower of the Bahai faith was executed in prison. Other religious minorities, including Sunni Muslims, Evangelical Christians, and Jews were subjected to discrimination and persecution. Prominent dissidents, including writers and editors, were subjected to arbitrary detention and independent newspapers were closed down. New laws were passed discriminating against women and aimed at restricting debate about womens rights. Torture was widespread during interrogation, and the government failed to take steps to halt violent attacks by vigilante groups which serve as enforcers for conservative clerics, known as the Partisans of the Party of God (Ansar-e Hezbollahi) . As tensions with the Taleban rulers of neighboring Afghanistan mounted, Afghan refugees, more than a million of whom have lived in Iran for many years seeking refuge from civil war, were attacked and beaten by crowds leading to several deaths.

Hundreds of people were executed after trials that failed to comply with minimum international standards. In June, the daily newspaper Hamshahri, reported the public hanging of four young men in the city of Ahvaz, in the south, for insulting Leader Khamenei and armed robbery. Seven people were reported by opposition groups to have been convicted of adultery and stoned to death in October 1997 and six more were reported to have been sentenced to stoning in January. On July 21, Ruhollah Rowhani was executed in the city of Mashhad on charges of converting a Muslim to the Bahai faith. This execution marked a deterioration in the situation of this intensely persecuted minority. At least fifteen other Bahais were held in prison and seven were facing death sentences because of their faith. There were further detentions of Bahais in September when dozens were detained in a new wave of repression. In May, Jewish businessman Ruhollah Kakhodah-Zadeh was arrested and later hanged in prison. His crime was never declared in public and any legal proceedings which occurred did so in secret. In June, Molavi Imam Bakhsh Narouie, prayer leader of a Sunni mosque in the town of Miyankang in Sistan va Baluchestan province in south-eastern Iran was killed, leading to protests from the local community who believed that the authorities were responsible. Sunni Muslims form a minority in predominantly Shia Iran, but a majority of ethnic Kurds and Baluchis are Sunni, which exacerbates their already tense relations with the central authorities in a state in which Shia Islam is the established religion.

Attempts by the judiciary and other supporters of the status quo in Iran to discredit leading associates and supporters of President Khatami focused national and international attention on long-standing human rights problems. For example, the prosecution on corruption charges, of the mayor of Tehran, Gholam Hossein Karabaschi, exposed the widespread torture of suspects during investigation. Judicial officials reportedly tried to build a case against the mayor on the basis of coerced statements taken from detained municipality officials, including elected district mayors and deputy mayors. On being released, the detained mayors complained about their ill-treatment and produced medical evidence to substantiate their allegations. Their statements were widely reported in newspapers sympathetic to President Khatami and the mayor.

In March, responding to hostile questions from reporters about the treatment of the officials, Ayatollah Yazdi, the head of the judiciary, stated the allegations were all a political campaign aimed at the police and the judiciary and threatened to prosecute reporters for making unfounded accusations against the judicial branch.

In May, the former editor of Adineh magazine, Faraj Sarkouhi (s ee Human Rights Watch World Report 1998), who had been released from his one-year jail term for circulating harmful propaganda and permitted to travel to Germany to be reunited with his family, was able to reveal information about torture and ill-treatment he had suffered while in detention, including mock-execution. Together with the testimony of the mayor of Tehrans associates, Sarkouhis experience made public the continuing prevalence of torture in Iranian prisons.

The Tehran mayors trial, in open court in the presence of international reporters exposed other long-standing problems in the criminal justice system. The defense in the June hearing challenged the impartiality of the judge, arguing that it is not in accordance with the principles of justice for you to occupy the positions of investigating magistrate and trial judge in the same case. In the General Courts, first introduced in 1994, the function of the prosecutor was doubled up with that of the trial judge, removing fair trial safeguards (s ee Human Rights Watch World Report 1995) . The mayor also called attention to the torture of his officials, and the inacceptability of anything written under duress while these people were in prison. The mayor was convicted and sentenced to lashes and five years in prison, but was at liberty pending an appeal.

The mayors prosecution brought to the fore dissension between Irans leaders, often played out at a cost to human rights protection. In April, after the detention of the mayor, Minister of the Interior Abdollah Nouri criticized the judiciarys arbitrary action and announced that his ministry was setting up a defense committee for the mayor. Nouris criticism of the judiciary led to a vote of no confidence in him from the parliament, and his dismissal from office on June 26. President Khatami responded by appointing Nouri to the position of deputy-president for development and social affairs.

Nouri had also provoked conservative anger by calling for the elimination of the role of the Council of Guardians in vetting and excluding candidates for election to the parliament, the presidency, and the Assembly of Experts - an eighty-six member body responsible for choosing the leader of the Islamic Republic. The Council of Guardians vetoed almost all of the candidates associated with the reformers in the October election. In May, Nouri had granted a permit to students to demonstrate in favor of reforming laws governing participation in elections. The peaceful rally of several thousand students in Tehrans Laleh park was violently broken up by a group of Hezbollahi vigilantes while police stood by. In August, under pressure from conservatives, the cabinet declined to submit a bill to parliament to restrict the powers of the Council of Guardians.

While the treatment of Abdullah Nouri highlighted violations of the right to participation in public affairs, freedom of assembly, and the illegal activities of vigilantes, Minister of Culture and Islamic Guidance Ataollah Mohajerani became identified with increasing the diversity of the Iranian press by issuing permits to new publications with independent views. Mohajeranis efforts were countered by the increased zeal of the judiciary to close down independent publications and imprison and prosecute journalists and editors; by attacks from vigilantes on newspaper offices; and by new laws passed by the parliament seeking to ban publications dealing with womens rights and the reform of family law.

Newspapers continued to be subject to harassment and closure orders both through the legal channels of the press courts and extra-legal administrative acts or attacks from vigilante groups. Akbar Ganji, the editor of Rah-e No weekly newspaper was held in incommunicado detention for three months following a speech he made in Shiraz critical of government policy. In January, a newly established journalists union accused the head of the judiciary of obstructing the freedom of the press after he had declared that the judiciary was under no obligation to explain to the media why people were detained. In February, the newsletter published by Habibollah Payman, head of the unrecognized Islamic Militant Movement party, was banned and he was fined after proceedings that did not meet international standards of due process. In April the offices of Hamshahri, Iran, and the Iran Daily News , daily newspapers which had been supportive of the mayor of Tehran, were raided by police in an operation which failed to comply with mechanisms established under the press law for investigating alleged violations by newspapers. In July, three other newspapers, Panshambeha, Gozaresh-e Rouz, and Khanneh, were closed under official pressure. The editors of Gozresh-e Rouz and Khanneh were each imprisoned for a week for interrogation.

In August, Jameh , which within a few months had gained a reputation and a wide readership for its championing of reform, was closed down, although the jury in the press court had advised minimal punishment. In an apparent turnabout Minister of Culture and Islamic Guidance Mohajerani stated, the opponents and enemies of liberty can also be those who do not respect their limit. Within a few days of the closure, a newspaper appeared under the title Tous which was accused of being Jameh under another name. Head of the Judiciary Yazdi objected, The publication of a previously forbidden newspaper under a new name is illegal. We are asking the ministry of culture to take action before someone else does. Ayatollah Yazdis words were followed by an attack by Hezbollahi on the editorial offices. Conservative pressure on Tous did not relent on September 15 Ayatollah Khamenei threatened to use extra-legal force to silence independent newspapers which he characterized as a dangerous, creeping cultural movement...writing against Islam, unless government officials took action against them. The next day, Tous managers Hamid Reza Jalei-Pour and Mohammad Javadi Hessar, editor Mashalla Shamsol-va-Ezin, and staff writer Ebrahim Nabavi, were arrested by order of the Revolutionary Courts on charges of publishing articles against security and general interests. The newspaper was ordered closed. The four journalists were all released in October, and no legal reason for their detention was provided by the authorities.

Also in September, the independent newspapers Rah-e No and Tavana were ordered closed by administrative decree. The judiciary declared that it was creating a special body to monitor the conduct of the press and to refer writers to revolutionary courts. The Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance protested this move and insisted that, it is necessary to deal with press violations according to the law and in ordinary courts and with the presence of a jury.

Freedom of expression was restricted in other ways. In November 1997, after Grand Ayatollah Montazeri had delivered a lecture in Qom criticizing Ayatollah Khameneis interpretation of the doctrine of Velayat-e Faqih (Rule of the Supreme Jurist), on which the position of the leader of the Islamic Republic rests, Hezbollahi ransacked his residence. Throughout the year, Grand Ayatollah Montazeri, the former designated successor to the late Ayatollah Khomeini as leader, was subjected to house arrest and banned from teaching and commenting on public affairs. In February, a special court for the clergy ordered the freezing of assets controlled by Ayatollah Montazeri assets, including funds received in tithes from Shiites in Iran and throughout the world. Scores of his relatives and supporters were imprisoned for their views. For example, in December 1997, the leader of the Iran Freedom Movement, Ebrahim Yazdi, was detained for eleven days, apparently for his role in organizing support for a public letter, signed by fifty-five people, protesting the restrictions placed on Ayatollah Montazeri. In April, about forty bazaar shopkeepers and teachers were detained for leading protests against the restrictions on Ayatollah Montazeri in his home town of Najafabad in central Iran. Ayatollah Montazeris son-in-law, Hadi Hashemi wasdetained in May and held incommunicado. Mohammad Movahedi Savoji, the son of a member of parliament, was also arrested in May and condemned to twenty months imprisonment in September for speaking out against the harsh treatment of Ayatollah Montazeri.

In June, independent legal scholar Hojatoleslam Mohssen Saeidzadeh was detained, apparently because of his public criticism of the status of women in family law. He was not able to challenge the legal basis for his detention before a court and he was denied access to his lawyer, he remained in custody at the time of writing.

Opposition views outside the differing factions of the clerical leadership, including those of political parties like the Freedom Movement and the Irans Nation Party, continued to be denied expression. Opposition publications were banned and their meetings were frequently attacked by vigilantes. In contrast, the Ministry of the Interiors Committee on Political Parties agreed in May to license the Servants of Construction (Kargozaran Sazandeghi), led by supporters of clerical leaders associated with economic reform, as a first political party.

Violent vigilantes restricted freedom of association and limited political debate unchecked by the authorities. In November 1997, Hezbollahi disrupted a speech by the dissident philosopher Abdol-Karim Soroush and caused extensive damage to student union offices at Amir Kabir university. On the same day, the same mob beat Hishmotallah Tabazadeh, a radical student leader, for his call for the leader of the Islamic Republic to be elected by direct suffrage, and for limits to be placed on the leaders powers. In March, Hezbollahi broke up a peaceful demonstration by students in Tehran criticizing the role of the Council of Guardians in excluding candidates from parliamentary by-elections. In May, after statements threatening such action by parliamentarians, attackers beat a speaker and disrupted a conference of surgeons which had criticized a proposed law to segregate health care along gender lines. Eventually, on September 11, reacting to the beating of a minister and a vice-president by Hezbollahi..., President Khatami declared: The authorities must not dither or show mercy in dealing with this ugly vengeance against the rule of law and freedom. The law breakers, who are either ignorant or have a mission, understand no logic but force. No action was taken against those responsible for the public attack on senior government officials.

Womens rights were also a battleground in the confrontation between reformers and social conservatives. In November, reformers achieved some success with the passage of a law by the parliament allowing judges to award custody of minor children to the mother in divorce cases if the best interests of the child would be served by so doing. This was an encouraging moment in a mixed year for womens rights in Iran, but a year in which activism for change in the discriminatory treatment of women, especially in the family, achieved considerable public prominence.

Conservatives responded to increased activism for womens rights by trying to ban it. In April the parliament passed a bill, yet to become law, making it a crime to create division between women and men through defending [womens] rights outside the legal and Sharia frameworks. The proposed law also sought to ban pictures of unveiled women appearing in the press. Minister of Culture Mohajerani opposed the bill, but his objections were overruled by the conservative majority in the parliament. The bill passed a second reading in parliament in August.

In a similar vein, the parliament overruled objections from ministers, several women members of parliament, and the medical profession to pass a bill seeking to enforce gender separation in the provision of medical care. Many commentators pointed out the impracticality of the proposed law given the lack of sufficient women doctors to meet even the minimum medical requirements of Irans women. Some observed that it would require the recruitment and training of thousands of new women doctors, and male gynecologists objected that they would be unemployed. The bill was widely viewed as a show of force by conservative parliamentarians who intended to put an end to efforts to reform family law. In October, the Council of Guardians sent the bill back to the parliament without its approval.

Enforcement of the dress code for women varied with the political climate. Women detained for failing to cover their hair and to wear a flowing garment hiding the shape of their bodies were subjected to fines, up to seventy-four lashes or to prison terms of up to three months. Detentions increased during May, the period of Moharram , associated with mourning and increased piety in Shia Islam. Celebrations following the Iranian national soccer teams qualification for the soccer World Cup in France in June were characterized by public mixing between the sexes and open flouting of the dress code.
Iraq
Human Rights Developments
The Iraqi government continued to engage in a broad array of human rights violations, including mass arrests, torture, summary executions, disappearances, and forced relocations. In Iraqi Kurdistan armed Kurdish political parties and Iraqi security forces were also responsible for a wide variety of human rights violations, including the arbitrary detention of suspected political opponents, torture, and extrajudicial executions. The United Nations economic sanctions against Iraq entered their ninth year. The Security Councils resolution 1153 increased the amount of oil Iraq could export to meet humanitarian needs, but the public health crisis facing the Iraqi population continued.

Human Rights Developments in Government-Controlled Iraq
Opposition groups in exile and the U.N. reported mass arrests and summary executions of detainees. U.N. Special Rapporteur for Iraq Max van der Stoel reported that in November and December 1997 the government executed more that 1,500 political detainees in Abu Ghraib and Radwaniyah prisons as part of the Prison Cleansing Campaign following visits there by Qusay Saddam Hussein, the presidents son. All prisoners with sentences of more than fifteen to twenty years were reportedly summarily executed and some of the bodies returned to families were said to have shown signs of torture. The Tehran-based Supreme Council for Islamic Revolution in Iraq (SCIRI) reported a mass execution of sixty people in February and claimed one hundred detainees at Radhwaniya prison were buried alive, but did not identify any of the alleged victims by name or provide other information to support the charge. The London-based Iraqi Communist Party reported the execution in May of thirty-five Shia prisoners, originally arrested during a failed uprising in 1991. These and similar reports could not be verified due to Iraqis restriction on travel, free expression, and contacts with foreigners.

No details were available about the fate of the approximately 16,500 people reported disappeared in the last ten years, mainly ethnic Kurds and Shias but including the approximately 600 Kuwaitis reported to have been in Iraqi custody but unaccounted for since the 1991 Gulf War. Although the Iraqi government claimed that it had established a committee to deal with the issue, little information was available about its activities and Iraq did not allow the U.N. Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances to visit the country.

The repression of the southern Shia population continued. Tehran-based SCIRI reported a government campaign of house burning intended to suppress resistance in the southern marshes. Two Shia clerics, one an Iranian, were killed in April and June. The Iranian, Ayatollah Ali al-Gharavi, had an extensive following in the southern region, and had been threatened by government officials in the past. The government conducted no public investigation and prohibited a funeral procession or any public mourning.

Freedom of the press and expression were suppressed. Iraqs major media outlets, including national television, radio, and the main newspapers were government owned and private media was subjected to strict control and severe penalties. Dawoud al-Farhan, a prominent journalist, was arrested in August and detained for two months after writing columns that hinted at government corruption. Most foreign publications and the ownership of satellite dishes were banned.

The U.N. Security Council Resolution 687 (1991) sustained the economic sanctions against Iraq, now in their ninth year following Iraqs 1990 invasion of Kuwait. Sanctions remained in the face of Iraq's refusal to comply with conditions for their lifting made in the resolution, including the destruction of its chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons program and allowing unobstruced investigations of possible weapons sites. In September the Security Councils resolution 1194 responded to Iraqs suspension of cooperation with the United Nations Special Commission and International Atomic Energy Agency weapons inspectors by removing the periodic sixty day review of Iraqi compliance with U.N. conditions for the lifting of sanctions, rendering them effectively indefinite. The sanctions contributed to a massive public health crisis, marked by malnutrition, increasing levels of infant mortality, and the reemergence of eradicated diseases.

The approval process for humanitarian contracts under resolution 986 (1995), which allowed the annual sale of $4 billion of oil for the purchase of food supplies, continued to be problematic, with the Iraqi government maintaining its opposition to U.N. conditions. In September, the executive director of the U.N. Office of the Iraq Program, Benon Seran, reported that the calorie level of foodstuffs per day was 2,000, up from 1,300 to 1,400 calories per person when the enhanced distribution program started in 1995. Denis Halliday, the U.N. relief coordinator for Iraq, resigned in July and made statements highly critical of the long-term sanctions policy. In September, at a news conference in the U.S., Halliday said he felt unhappy that the U.N. was responsible for implementing trade sanctions at the same time it operated a humanitarian programme, and that the imposition of sanctions does not impact on governance effectively and instead it damages the innocent people of the country.

In February the Security Council passed resolution 1153, allowing Iraq to export $5.26 billion in oil every six months, up from the previous $2 billion under the original oil-for-food resolution 986 (1995). However, Iraqi oil fields, already derelict and damaged during the Gulf War, reportedly could not produce more than $3 billion of oil during a 180-day period. In late June the Security Council authorized Iraq to import the parts and equipment needed to increase its exports to meet the $5.26 billion target. A group of U.N.-sponsored oil experts surveyed Iraqi oil fields during this time and reported that even if the spare parts were ordered immediately, Iraq would not be able to increase its export capacity until December 1998, and only then to $3.9 billion every six months. Iraq had not received any of the spare parts required by September. The low price of oil compounded Iraqs difficulty in increasing its export revenues.

The limited number of U.N. monitors allowed into the country, as well as infrastructural problems such as fuel shortages, made it difficult for monitors to determine if distribution of humanitarian supplies was equitable. In some instances, the government used rations as a tool of political leverage upon the population. Male citizens were required to attend Bath Party training centers or forgo their food rations; one U.N. official described the purpose of the centers as creating battalions of fighters. In the southern marshes thousands of people were reportedly denied rations for alleged cooperation with the opposition.

UNICEF reported in October 1997 that one million children were chronically malnourished and that the death rate of children under five in 1996 was eight times greater than before the Gulf War. What we are seeing is a dramatic deterioration in the nutritional well-being of Iraqi children since 1991, said Philippe Heffinck, UNICEF representative in Baghdad. And what concerns us now is that there is no sign of any improvement since Security Council resolution 986 came into force. In September, former U.N. coordinator Denis Halliday observed that 4,000 to 5,000 children dying unnecessarily every month due to the impact of sanctions because of the breakdown of water and sanitation, inadequate diet and the bad internal health situation.

According to Amnesty International the governments Arabization policy in the oil-rich province of Kirkuk continued, as 1,468 Kurdish families were expelled to the Kurdish-controlled region in the north between 15 April and June. A number of relatives of the targeted families were apparently detained in preparation for the expulsion and the food rationing tickets as well as properties of the target families were reportedly confiscated by the Iraqi authorities.

Human Rights Developments in Iraqi Kurdistan
Iraqi Kurdistan remained under the control of the two main political factions, the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK), led by Jalal Talabani, and the Kurdistan Democratic Party, (KDP) headed by Masoud Barzani. The PUK-KDP rivalry and conflict increasingly hobbled the Kurdish-controlled region, which was also wracked by frequent Turkish military incursions targeting the bases of Workers Party of Kurdistan (PKK), in northern Iraq. The northern airspace was patrolled by the U.S. and the U.K. as part of the no-fly zone established after the Gulf War.

In November, undeterred by the U.S. policed no-fly zone, 2,000 Turkish troops launched an attack against the PKK, in KDP-controlled areas killing over 1,200 people and displacing thousands of civilians from their homes. Both Iraq and the PUK alleged that Turkey dropped napalm bombs in indiscriminative attacks on PUK areas during the offensive, resulting in civilian casualties. The Turkish army continued to attack the region at will during 1998.

The PUK-KDP fighting and Turkish military offensives resulted in a significant displacement of civilians, aggravating the regions chronic humanitarian crisis. In one month alone at the end of 1997, 23,000 Kurds fled from the safe-haven into Turkey. Many ethnic Kurds were expelled from their homes because of presumed support for one party or the other or displaced from government-controlled Iraq due to the governments Arabization policies. In August, institutions belonging to the Turkman minority in Irbil, including NGO and political party offices, were attacked by KDP fighters. Turkmen groups allege that these attacks were part of what they describe as ethnic-cleansing directed against this minority by the KDP. Relations between the Turkmans and the KDP were reported to improve after the KDP permitted Turkman institutions to reopen in early September and paid compensation for damage caused in the attacks. On September 18, Barzani and Tallabani met in Washington D.C. and agreed to new power sharing arrangements designed to put an end to factional fighting in the north.
Israel, The Occupied West Bank, Gaza Strip, and Palestinian Authority Territories
Human Rights Developments
The 1992 Basic Law: Human Dignity and Liberty, Israels main law addressing human rights, defined Israel as a religious state and did not prohibit discrimination or guarantee equality before the law. Many laws and practices openly discriminated against ethnic and religious minorities and against women on issues ranging from housing and employment to personal status. Israeli law did not guarantee freedom of religion, and as of mid-October Israel had still not fully implemented a two-year-old law allowing civil burial, and had no provisions for civil marriage. On May 20 a Knesset bill providing for a three-year prison sentence or NIS 50,000 (U.S.$13,700) fine for preaching with the intent of causing another person to change his religion passed its first reading.

The U.N. Human Rights Committee concluded in July that discrimination against Palestinian citizens of Israel had produced significantly lower levels of education, access to health care, [and] access to housing, land and employment compared to Jewish Israelis. According to the Legal Center for Arab Minority Rights in Israel (Adalah), the police response to demonstrations in September against Israels confiscation of Palestinian citizens land near Um al-Fahm left 400 injured, some by live ammunition. Deputy Commander Elihu Ben-On explained the police actions, telling reporters, In the territories its common in such situations to fire live munitions with intent to harm. In July the interior ministry acknowledged that from 1984 to 1990 Israel had revoked Palestinian womens Israeli citizenship if they married non-citizen Palestinians and lived with them in the occupied territories or Jordan.

Israel revoked permanent residency permits of Palestinian residents of East Jerusalem who could not produce the many documents required to prove that their center of life was within Jerusalem municipal boundaries. According to interior ministry officials, 1,641 Palestinians and their families lost their right to reside in Jerusalem between 1996, when the policy began, and August 1998. Five hundred other cases were under review. Individuals who lost residency rights also lost health insurance and social benefits, and risked being barred from reentering Jerusalem.

On March 13 Mordechai Vanunu was transferred to regular custody, after spending more than eleven years in solitary confinement, a form of punishment characterized by the U.N. Human Rights Committee as constituting torture. Vanunu was serving an eighteen year sentence for providing evidence of Israels nuclear capability to the press.

Workers groups like the Tel Aviv-based Kav LaOved/Workers Hotline continued to criticize government labor policies which left foreign and Palestinian workers vulnerable to exploitation by employers and labor contractors. In March Labor Minister Eli Yishai announced plans to reduce the number of foreign workers in the labor force from 10 percent to 1 percent by 2005, replacing them with Palestinian workers from the West Bank and Gaza Strip. The number of foreign workers had significantly increased after 1993 when Israel severely limited West Bank and Gaza Palestinians access to Israel and East Jerusalem. Yishai promised to increase deportations of unregistered workers to up to 2,000 per month and reduce processing of deportation orders to about ten days. Israel jailed migrants pending deportation and workers who could not pay their repatriation costs sometimes spent up to six months in prison, without judicial oversight, awaiting deportation.

Israel exercised full or partial control over 97 percent of the West Bank and 40 percent of the Gaza Strip, while the Palestinian Authority (PA), established in 1994 pursuant to the Oslo Accords, had full control over the rest. Although most Palestinians lived in areas under some degree of PA control, Israel exercised extensive control over the freedom of movement of all West Bank and Gaza Strip Palestinians, impeding the exercise of those rights dependant on freedom of movement.

Israel had barred Palestinians living in the West Bank and Gaza Strip who lacked hard-to-obtain permits from entering or transiting through Israel or East Jerusalem since March 1993. The closure obstructed Palestinian economic activity and access to health care, schools and universities, places of worship, and family members in other parts of the territories or in Israeli prisons. Despite Israeli claims that closure was a justified security measure, the arbitrary nature of the procedures and criteria for issuing permits and the policys imposition in an indiscriminate fashion on an entire population made it an act of collective punishment.

Roadblocks used to enforce closure were a frequent point of friction, leading to several deaths and numerous injuries. Two Palestinian infants died during a closure and curfew imposed on Hebron in August, after soldiers blocked their mothers from reaching hospitals. The Israeli Defense Force (IDF) characterized the deaths as the result of wrong judgment and an unfortunate misunderstanding. Even when IDF regulations were followed, the closure policy sometimes resulted in deaths, as when three Palestinian workers were killed and six others wounded on March 10 at a roadblock at Tarqumiya. Soldiers fired on their van after it went out of control, apparently because of a mechanical failure. General Uzi Dayan, then head of the armys Central Command, told reporters During the two years that I have had this assignment, no soldier has been brought to trial because of events that occurred when he was in the field, and in May a military prosecutor closed the investigation without bringing charges.

Despite rules of engagement intended to minimize civilian injuries, the IDF and border police were implicated in at least twelve other deaths and numerous injuries during the first ten months of the year. On May 14 five Palestinians were killed and as many as 300 wounded, some seriously, by soldiers using live ammunition and rubber-coated bullets to disperse demonstrations in the West Bank and Gaza. According to the Gaza-based Palestinian Center for Human Rights (PCHR), forty-six of the seventy-one Palestinians injured in Gaza that day were shot with live ammunition, and fifty-two were shot in the upper body.

As of mid-October Israel had not released the bodies of Adel Awadallah, thirty-one, and his brother, Imad Awadallah, twenty-seven, killed by a police special forces unit on September 10. Both were wanted by Israel for suspected activities with the armed wing of the militant Islamic Resistance Movement, HAMAS. The exact circumstances of the killings remained unclear, and Israel refused requests for an independent forensic investigation. Imad had been in PA custody from March 29 to August 15, when he was reported to have escaped from an unlocked cell. Brig. Gen. Yitzhak Eitan responded to early questions about whether the men had an opportunity to surrender, saying What do you want me to do? Knock on the door? West Bank commander Major General Moshe Yaalon later denied charges by PA chief of intelligence Amin al-Hindi and others that the two had been assassinated, saying They tried to shoot the [police] dogs and our men killed them.

As of August, more than 3,000 Palestinians from the West Bank and Gaza Strip were held in Israeli prisons, in violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention. Almost 1,400 were serving life sentences. Many were held in poor conditions with inadequate health care. In addition to these prisoners, as of mid-September at least fifty-three other persons were held as administrative detainees under similar conditions. Many had been held for years, without charge or trial and without effective judicial review of their detention. The Supreme Court ruled in November 1997 that administrative detention could be used to hold Lebanese nationals as bargaining chipsin effect, hostageseven though the detainees were not themselves a threat to state security. The longest-held administrative detainee, Ahmad Qatamesh, was released on April 15, after being held almost six years without charge.

Torture or ill-treatment during interrogation by the General Security Services (GSS) continued to be widespread and systematic. In January and May a nine-member panel of the Supreme Court heard arguments on GSS interrogation methods, but postponed ruling on whether these methods constituted torture under Israeli law, although the U.N. found them to violate two treaties prohibiting torture (see below). The Knesset also debated legislation that would codify these methods in a new GSS Law, in effect legalizing torture, but as of October the bill had not passed its final reading.

Israels demolition of Palestinian homes built without permits continued around Israeli installations in the West Bank including East Jerusalem, displacing hundreds. Building permits were almost impossible for Palestinians to obtain, and according to Israeli officials as many as three thousand homes in the West Bank could be subject to demolition. At the same time Israel targeted Palestinian homes for destruction, Israel authorized massive housing construction, tax incentives, and roads and related infrastructure for Jewish settlements in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Government approval of new construction often immediately followed attacks by Palestinians on settlers, as in the decision in August to expand the Yitzhar and Tel Rumeida settlements, and to allot NIS 90 million to build new settlements and expand existing ones. In response to a survey in August by Peace Now that found 5,892 new units under construction in 142 settlements, while 2,888 completed units stood empty, the Housing Ministry admitted that almost a quarter of all units built by the government in the West Bank between 1989 and 1992 had never been occupied.

Israel pressured the Palestinian Authority (PA) to extradite to it approximately thirty-six suspects and defendants as a condition of progress in Oslo Accord negotiations. The transfer of persons protected by the Geneva Conventions to the territory of an occupying power is illegal, and extradition to a state where there is substantial risk of torture is prohibited by the Convention against Torture, which Israel has ratified.

Palestinian Authority
The Palestinian Authority (PA) failed to institutionalize important safeguards against human rights abuses that included patterns of arbitrary detention without charge or trial, torture and ill-treatment during interrogation, grossly unfair trials, and persecution of its critics. PA president Yasir Arafats refusal to ratify the Basic Law, passed by the Palestinian Legislative Council in October 1997, left Palestinians without any clear statement of their rights, or of the duties and responsibilities of the executive, judicial, and legislative branches of government. Officials with specific responsibilities to safeguard human rights, like the attorney general, as well as judges, often found themselves under pressure to follow the executives wishes, and unable to enforce their own rulings.

Palestinian security forces arbitrarily arrested and detained individuals for long periods without charge and sometimes without access to lawyers or family visits, even in cases where the attorney general or courts ordered access to lawyers. As many as 150 arrests followed the March 29 killing of HAMAS activist Mohiyadin al-Sharif. As of October many detainees from these and other arrests were still being held without charge or trial, including Mahmud Muslih, arrested on September 14, 1997; Dr. Abd al-Aziz al-Rantisi, arrested on April 9; Dr. Ibrahim Maqadama, arrested on April 10; and Ghassan al-Adassi, arrested on March 29.

Lawyers reported difficulty in seeing their clients, despite receiving permits from the attorney general or court orders allowing visits. Detainees at several prisons held hunger strikes demanding trial or release. In cases where the High Court did order a detainee released, the security services sometimes refused to act on the order. As of mid-October security forces still held Muslih, ordered released on November 30, 1997, al-Rantisi, ordered released on June 4, and al-Adassi, ordered released on October 6. Attorney General Fayez Abu Rahmeh, who had promised to investigate cases of arbitrary arrest and detention when he was appointed in July 1997, resigned on May 1 and as of mid-October the post remained unfilled. In explaining his resignation, Abu Rahmeh criticized the justice minister for trying to limit my role and my powers, and security officials for not consulting him when detaining political prisoners.

Trials often lacked minimal due process guarantees, and judges who complained about judicial abuses sometimes faced retaliation. In January Chief Justice Qusai al-Abadlah was reportedly forced to retire after publication of an interview critical of the judicial system. The State Security Courts (SSC) and military courts lacked almost all due process rights, including the right to appeal, and were responsible for the majority of the twenty-three death sentences issued since 1994. Sentences in these courts were sometimes issued only hours after arrest. On August 30 brothers Mohammad and Raid Abu Sultan, both military intelligence agents, became the first persons executed by the PA after being convicted of the murder three days earlier of two brothers and the wounding of a third during a dispute between their two families. The death sentence of another Abu Sultan brother, Faris, was commuted to life imprisonment. The trial took place in a military court presided over by former attorney general Khaled al-Qidra, who had been removed from that office in 1997. Despite the extreme speed of the trial and execution, Minister of Justice Freih Abu Medein said he was 100 percent satisfied with the legal proceedings.

Security forces were repeatedly implicated in torture and corruption. On August 11 President Arafat appointed a prosecutor to investigate the death in General Intelligence (GI) custody of Walid Mahmud al-Qawasmi, forty-eight, on August 9. It was the twentieth known death in custody since 1994. Al-Qawasmi had reportedly been arrested in Hebron in July, released, then rearrested in Jericho in August. According to the Jerusalem-based Palestinian Society for the Protection of Human Rights and the Environment (LAW), al-Qawasmi told his son during an August 7 visit that he was being tortured, and an autopsy revealed skull fractures and internal bleeding. In September Palestinian sources reported Hussein Abu Ghali, fifty-five, died after being beaten by the chief of Presidential Security, Jazar al-Ghoul. According to family members, Abu Ghali had gone to the presidents office to ask for help obtaining a travel permit for his sons medical treatment. The police told them a few hours later to pick up his body at the hospital; the family then found footprints on his clothing and blood around his nose and mouth.

Press freedom remained restricted. On April 9 police ordered Reuters Gaza office closed for three months after it broadcast a taped interview with Adel Awadallah (see above). Police Chief Ghazi al-Jabali explained the closure, saying The Reuters correspondent intentionally broadcast news and subjects which spread divisions in Palestinian society. The office reopened on April 15 but Abbas al-Mumani, the journalist who received the tape, was arrested on May 5 and held until May 14, when he was released after a visit by Reuters representatives. Al-Mumani alleged he was tortured while in General Intelligence custody. On March 18 the Supreme Court ordered al-Risala, a weekly newspaper of the Khalas party, reopened, and on July 11 al-Istiqlal, a weekly newspaper affiliated with Islamic Jihad, issued its first edition since its closure in 1996.
Saudi Arabia
Human Rights Developments
The government of Saudi Arabia, an absolute monarchy, continued to violate a broad array of civil and political rights, allowing no criticism of the government, no political parties, nor any other potential challenges to its system of government. Arbitrary arrest, detention without trial, torture, and corporal and capital punishment remained the norm in both political and common criminal cases, with at least twenty-two executions and three judicial amputations of the hand carried out by mid-October. Human rights abuses were facilitated by the absence of an independent judiciary and the lack of public scrutiny by an elected representative body or a free press.

Women continued to face institutionalized discrimination affecting their freedom of movement and association and their right to equality in employment and education. Muslim religious practices deemed heterodox by government-appointed Islamic scholars and all non-Muslim religious practices were banned and subject to criminal prosecution. In July the Philippines embassy in Riyadh reported that twelve Filipino nationals who had been detained in early June on charges of proselytizing and handing out bibles were deported to the Philippines. A Dutch citizen arrested at the same time was also deported.

Labor laws banned the right to organize and bargain collectively and gave employers control over foreign workers freedom of movement. Many foreign workers were denied promised wages and benefits and suffered under oppressive labor conditions. Labor protections did not extend to domestic workers, and labor courts rarely enforced the few protections provided by law when workers sought to have the terms of their contracts honored or pursued similar claims. In July the Council of Ministers issued a decision placing new limits on foreigners holding public sector jobs and prohibiting foreign workers with less than ten years in Saudi Arabia from acquiring new expertise. The restrictions followed a campaign to limit the number of foreign workers begun in July 1997, and in August the government announced that over 750,000 foreign workers had been expelled for violating residency regulations since October 1997.

The Saudi government has not disseminated a penal code or code of criminal procedure, and only a limited number of laws existed in published form. The Saudi monarchy enjoyed broad powers, enabling the king to appoint and dismiss judges and to create special courts, undermining judicial independence. In addition, principles of Islamic law were subject to reinterpretation by government-appointed religious leaders. Judges enjoyed broad discretion in defining criminal offenses and setting punishments, which included severe floggings, amputations, and beheading, and in determining which witnesses would be called to testify. These factors encouraged arbitrariness in sentencing and allowed great scope for manipulation of the justice system by well-connected interested parties.

Under the Principles of Arrest, Temporary Confinement, and Preventative Detention regulations issued by the minister of interior in 1983, detainees had no right to judicial review, could be held for fifty-one days before their detention was reviewed by the regional governor, and could be held indefinitely if neither the governor nor minister of interior ordered their release or trial. Detainees had no right to legal counsel, to examine witnesses, or to call witnesses in their own defense. Saudi law also allowed conviction on the basis of uncorroborated confessions. In cases of crimes involving national security, the minister of interior had virtually unlimited authority over suspects in crimes against state security, which were defined so broadly as to encompass nonviolent opposition to the government.

Foreigners were particularly vulnerable to manipulation of the judicial system, as in the case of Farzana Kausar and her three small children, all Pakistani nationals, who were detained for almost ten months, apparently in an attempt to force her husband to return to Saudi Arabia. Kausars husband, Mohamed Ijaz Ahmad, also a Pakistani national, was employed as office manager for Said Ayas, the business manager of Prince Mohammad bin Fahd bin Abd al-Aziz Al-Saud, son of King Fahd and governor of the Eastern Province. Both Ahmad and Ayas were wanted by Prince Mohammad in connection with a business dispute, and Ayas had been placed under house arrest in June 1997 when he returned to Saudi Arabia at the princes request. After Ahmad went to Pakistan in September to visit an ill parent, he learned from neighbors that his wife and children were detained by General Investigations officers on October 8, 1997, a day before they were to join Ahmad. In March the Saudi ambassador to Pakistan reportedly sought the aid of Pakistans minister of interior in returning Ahmad to Saudi Arabia, and claimed that Kausar remained in Saudi Arabia because she was unwilling to travel without her husband. Ahmad fled Pakistan and applied for asylum in Britain, where he indicated he would testify on Ayas behalf in a London court case brought by the prince. In response to the courts request for clarification of Kausars status, on July 14 the princes lawyers for the first time submitted affidavits claiming that Kausar had been charged with criminal offenses on February 28. They did not explain why the Saudi ambassadors March appeal to Pakistan made no mention of charges, or why Kausar and her children were detained more than four months before charges were filed. The family was allowed to leave Saudi Arabia on July 27, the day before a scheduled court judgment in the legal dispute, on the condition that Kausar return to Saudi Arabia for a September 5 hearing. As of early October Kausar remained in Pakistan, in hiding, after the government of Pakistan banned her from traveling abroad on August 24.

The sentences of British nurses Deborah Parry and Lucille McLauchlan were commuted and they were released on May 20 and allowed to return to the United Kingdom. The two had been convicted of the December 1996 murder of an Australian nurse, apparently solely on the basis of coerced confessions the two later withdrew. McLauchlans additional sentence of 500 lashes was not carried out.

The Shia community in Saudi Arabia, which comprised about 10 percent of the population, faced widespread government discrimination, including unequal access to social services, education, and government jobs, especially those in the national security sector. The government rarely permitted private construction of Shia mosques or community centers, and even books on Shiism were banned.

Shia sources reported that the family of Mohammad al-Hayek, twenty-nine, of Qatif, was notified on June 21 that their son had died in prison and was buried in Riyadh, but the authorities declined to say when or how he died. Al-Hayeks body was not returned to his family, causing speculation that he may have been tortured.

The government owned all domestic radio and television stations, and allowed the domestic privately-owned media no margin to criticize government policies. According to the Committee to Protect Journalists, the domestic media was subject to close supervision by the minister of information, who approved the hiring of editors and could dismiss them at will. Foreign publications were often censored or banned, and several important foreign-based print and broadcasting media were owned by members of the Saudi royal family or their associates, including United Press International, al-Hayat, a major daily in the Middle East, and MBC, a London-based satellite television network. Private satellite dishes were outlawed, but unofficially tolerated, and local Internet service, scheduled to begin in December 1998 or January 1999, was also subject to extensive censorship.In anticipation of the new service, Council of Ministers Decision 163 required parties using the Internet to refrain from any activities violating the social, cultural, political, media, economic, and religious values of the Kingdom, and prohibited sending or receiving coded information without prior authorization.
Syria
Human Rights Developments
I do not go into the prisons, but I believe that there are not many prisoners any more, President Hafez al-Asad said in an interview with the French television station TF-1 in Damascus on July 11, the week before his official state visit to France. Indeed, there were welcome releases during the year of 121 Lebanese political prisoners and an unconfirmed number of Syrians. But the underlying features of Syrias bleak human rights landscape did not change. Emergency law remained in force, peaceful expression and association were criminalized, newspapers and other media were tightly controlled, and no political will was evidenced to encourage the development of independent institutions of civil society. There were no legal mechanisms by which opposition groups could operate freely as political parties, and the prospects for timely and effective monitoring of human rights conditions were severely circumscribed. Prisoners who refused to compromise their political principles continued to be treated with cruelty, and their families and supporters found it exceedingly difficult to communicate information to the outside world.

In May, in advance of President Asads July 16-18 trip to Paris for meetings with President Jacques Chirac and Prime Minister Lionel Jospin, at least thirty Syrian political prisoners were released, including several whose cases were well-known internationally. There were unconfirmed reports that several hundred others had also been set free. Among those known to have been released was lawyer Riad al-Turk, leader of the unauthorized Communist Party Political Bureau, who had been held without charge and in solitary confinement since his arrest in October 1980. According to information that reached Human Rights Watch, al-Turk endured extremely harsh conditions and was allowed books and newspapers only during the last two years of his imprisonment. Also released was Mustafa Tawfiq Fallah, who was arrested in 1970, tried by the Supreme State Security Court the next year, and sentenced to fifteen years in prison for conspiring to overthrow the government. Fallahs imprisonment continued after the expiry of his sentence in 1985 and his health deteriorated. Lawyer and human rights advocate Aktham Nuaissa, a leading figure in the independent Committees for the Defense of Democratic Freedoms and Human Rights in Syria (CDF), gained his freedom too. Nuaissa was arrested in December 1991, tried by the security court in March 1992 with other CDF members, and sentenced to nine years in prison for membership in an illegal organization, among other offenses. He had been tortured and injured under interrogation and suffered poor health in prison.

For the hundreds of political prisoners who remained behind bars, there were reports throughout the year of gross medical neglect. Amnesty International called attention to the deteriorating health of some of these prisoners, many of them serving ten- to fifteen-year sentences imposed after unfair trials in the security court, whose decisions cannot be appealed to a higher tribunal. Most were in Adra and Sednaya prisons, but sixty-year-old lawyer Abdallah Qabbara, a chronic diabetic who was sentenced to fifteen years in 1994, was held in the infamous Tadmor military prison. In September, word reached the international community that Nizar Nayouf, the thirty-six-year-old writer and human rights activist serving a ten-year sentence at Mezze military prison in Damascus, had been diagnosed with Hodgkins disease. According to information that Human Rights Watch received, authorities made provision of medical care to Nayouf conditional on his pledge to refrain from all political activities, and his signed statement announcing the dissolution of CDF.

Nayouf, a founding member and secretary general of CDF, was a driving force behind the organization and a strong advocate that the group maintain its independence from Syrias various unauthorized political parties. He was arrested in January 1992, during the states crackdown on the nascent CDF network and after his wife and infant daughter had been arrested to force his surrender. He was tortured in detention at the Syrian Military Intelligences Palestine Branch, and tried with Aktham Nuaissa and other CDF members in the security court. Nayouf was sentenced in March 1992, drawing the longest prison term, for founding and leading an unlawful organization, activated to shake public confidence in the revolution and the regime, and publishing false information concerning human violations in Syria. With the news of his life-threatening illness, international human rights organizations rallied to publicize Nayoufs plight, urging the Syrian government immediately to provide specialized medical care without conditions, release him on humanitarian grounds, and permit him to leave Syria for medical treatment abroad, if necessary. As of October 23, there were no replies from Syrian authorities about this case.

As in past years, political prisoners were held beyond the expiry of their sentences. Some of them, arrested in the early 1980s, had been detained without charge for many years and then prosecuted and convicted in the security court for membership in unauthorized political parties, in legal proceedings that concluded in 1993 and 1994. In April, Human Rights Watch received information from Syria that nine political prisonerswho had completed prison sentences ranging from eight to fifteen yearswere being held in Tadmor beyond the expiry of their terms. Eight of themMustafa al-Hussein, Usama Ashour, Abdel Karim Issa, Al-Harith al-Nebhan, Adib al-Jani, Hussein Seibarani, Taysir Hassoun, and Bassam Bedour -- were the subject of a letter that Human Rights Watch sent to President Asad in February 1996 but which went unanswered. They and thirteen other prisoners, most of whom at that time had completed or were close to completing their sentences, had been transferred to Tadmor because of their refusal to sign written statements of support for the government and repudiate their past political activities. It appeared that these eight prisoners continued to be detained because they refused to sign loyalty oaths as a condition for release.

Released political prisoners also faced formidable obstacles to resuming normal lives. Syrias penal code strips of their civil rights ( huquq madaniyya ) persons convicted of criminal offenses and sentenced to imprisonment with temporary hard labor, from the day of sentencing to ten years after the expiration of their sentences. This provision bars these individuals from voting, running for office, serving in councils of syndicates or sects, and working in government jobs. This sanction has also reportedly been used to prevent former prisoners from continuing studies at universities they were attending at the time of their arrest.

Syria maintained its troops, security forces, and pervasive influence in Lebanon, a role that was formally cemented by two bilateral pacts: the May 1991 Treaty of Brotherhood, Cooperation and Coordination, and the September 1991 Defense and Security Agreement. On September 12, the director-general of the state-controlled Syrian daily newspaper al-Thawra lambasted Ghassan Tueni, editor of the independent Lebanese daily al-Nahar , in a front-page article for editorials critical of the Syrian role in Lebanon. In such an intimidating atmosphere, it remained difficult for most Lebanese to criticize directly and publicly Syrias ubiquitous, dominating presence, and the Lebanese media either did not address the issue or only did so occasionally in the most circumspect or indirect manner. Syrian officials also publicly equated anti-Syrian sentiments in Lebanon with support for Israel. On June 22, for example, Syrian vice president Abdel Halim Khaddam commented ominously on Syrian state television that: All Lebanese politicians, whether in power or in the opposition, are allies of Syria. He added: All the Lebanese are our friends, except those who collaborate with Israel.

But with respect to the issue of disappearances in Lebanon, a problem directly linked to the Syrian role, Lebanese courageously came forward in 1998 in public events in Paris and Beirut to demand accountability from the Syrian government. In France, Lebanese activists, with support from the Paris-based nongovernmental Franco-Lebanese organization SOLIDA ( Soutien aux Libanais Dtenus Arbitrairement ) as well as international organizations, organized a Week of Action and Support for Lebanese Detainees in Syrian Prisons, from January 26 to February 1. Highly visible events included a press conference, public testimony by relatives of the disappeared, and meetings with French and European government officials.

In the aftermath of this public advocacy, March brought the welcome release of 121 Lebanese who had been imprisoned in Syria without official acknowledgment of their detention or whereabouts. But an unknown number of Lebanese, stateless Palestinians, and other foreign nationals remained disappeared, outside the protection of the law. Among them were two Lebanese priests, Suleiman Abi Khalil and Albert Sharfane, both of whom disappeared in Lebanon in October 1990. Another was Boutros Khawand, a well-known and influential member of the political bureau of the Phalange party, who was abducted near his home in the Sin al-Fil neighborhood of Beirut by a group of men in civilian clothes on September 15, 1992. On April 2, Lebanese human rights organizations held a press conference in Beirut, releasing the names of 228 Lebanese they said were imprisoned in Syria, some of them since 1978. But Syrian authorities were deaf to appeals from Lebanese and international organizations to provide the names of all those held and disclose publicly their whereabouts and the full details of their cases.

Human Rights Watch was unaware of government actions to remedy the problem of Syria-born Kurds it has rendered stateless, a population that numbered 142,465 by the states own count in 1996, or to address systematic discrimination against the Kurdish minority, whether citizens or stateless. Kurds comprise the largest non-Arab ethnic group, numbering about 8.5 to 10 percent of Syrias population of almost 14 million.
Tunisia
Human Rights Developments
As Zine el-Abidine Ben Alis presidency entered its second decade, there were no indications that his firm grip on power, the absence of political violence, and a stable economy were tempting him to allow Tunisians greater freedom to express themselves. Open political debate and opposition activity continued to be almost nonexistent, thanks to laws that criminalized various forms of speech and unlicensed political activities, intensive police surveillance and harassment of citizens, and a press and judiciary that lacked independence.

Authorities exploited concern over the strife in neighboring Algeria and recalled sporadic incidents of Islamist violence several years ago at home in cracking down hardest on Islamists. Among those imprisoned for politically motivated offensesthought to exceed 2,000most had been convicted of membership in an unlicensed organization, namely the Islamist Nahdha movement, or related nonviolent offenses such as distributing tracts or attending meetings.

There were also a small number of suspected members of proscribed leftwing parties who were convicted for the same offenses, as well as persons whose modest assistance to prisoners families earned them sentences for the unauthorized collection of money or donations.

The remnants of the Nahdha movement were active mainly abroad and conducted no visible activities inside Tunisia. Its leader-in-exile, Rashid al-Ghannoushi, continued to characterize the movement as moderate, democratic, and opposed to all forms of violence while the government continued to assail it as extremist and terrorist.

Prison conditions were poor, according to reports from lawyers and ex-prisoners. Overcrowding was severe, a situation not dictated by economic constraints: Tunisia had one of the highest per capita incomes on the continent. Beatings by guards were frequent and disciplinary measures cruel and degrading. Political prisoners were shuttled incessantly among institutions, forcing families to travel great distances for visits. Several leaders of the Nahdha movement were held in isolation for months or years at a time.

During the 1992 military court mass trial of an-Nahdhas suspected leaders and members, the Tunisian press reported the defendants allegations of torture during interrogation. Torture persisted in 1998 but had become a taboo topic for the media. For example, there was no coverage when security forces reportedly tortured some of the sixteen students arrested between February and April on suspicion of membership in an unlicensed leftwing terrorist organization, holding unauthorized meetings, defamation against the authorities, and other charges. According to affidavits taken by their lawyers, Imen Derouiche was badly beaten by guards at Mannouba prison for women, while injuries inflicted to Lotfi Hammamis genitals reportedly put him in need of surgery that he had not received by October. He and the other fifteen were still in pretrial detention as this report went to press.

In its December 1997 report to the U.N. Committee against Torture, the government claimed that physical abuse of detainees occurred only rarely and was penalized. The report detailed an impressive array of laws that could safeguard against tortureif enforced. In practice, complaints of torture rarely resulted in a confession being discarded as evidence, and if the complaints were ever investigated, the plaintiffs and their lawyers were not informed of the results.

Released political prisoners were harassed intensively. They were often ordered to sign in one or more times daily with police, sometimes at stations quite far from their homes. During 1998, however, this requirement seemed to be enforced less abusively. Former political prisoners were almost always refused passports. They were generally excluded from public sector jobs and private sector employers were pressured not to hire them.

Authorities harassed and even imprisoned family members as a way of intimidating and punishing critics. This seemed to be the case with ex-prisoner Mohamed Ali Bedoui, the brother of outspoken human rights activist Moncef Marzouki. Bedoui in January received a six-month sentence for failing to report daily to the local police station even though the police had reportedly earlier told him he was no longer required to do so.

Families of activists were subjected to police surveillance and house searches at all hours, and their passports were sometimes confiscated for no apparent reason other than blood kinship. Radhia Aouididi, who is engaged to a Tunisian political refugee living in France, was given a prison term in 1998 for attempting to leave Tunisia illegally after she was arbitrarily denied a passport. Rachida Ben Salem, the wife of an exiled activist, was arrestedand sentenced in 1997 in a similar case. A young man in western Tunisia told Human Rights Watch that his past imprisonment for Nahdha activities was the reason given when his brother was dismissed from a factory job and when his sisters fianc, a member of the security forces, broke off the engagement. His testimony was consistent with others collected around the country.

Persons who denounced repression were sometimes imprisoned after conviction on trumped-up criminal charges. In July, Tarek Soussi, a physically disabled ex-prisoner in Bizerte, announced he would no longer sign in with the police, after six years of being ordered extrajudicially to do so. The police promptly threatened him with imprisonment and five days later arrested and charged him with assaulting a vendor, a highly implausible scenario given his disability. The judge presiding over his trial refused a defense motion to have Soussis alleged victim appear in court and on September 3 Soussi received a five-month sentence.

Two better-known individuals who had formerly been imprisoned on spurious criminal charges were opposition politician Mohamed Mouada and lawyer Nejib Hosni. Hosni, who had been outspoken at home and abroad on Tunisias human rights abuses, was deprived of his passport and telephone, and forbidden to resume his law practice. The pressure on Mouada intensified after he traveled in late 1997 to Europe and met with European parliamentarians and human rights organizations. Upon his return, prosecutors questioned him about his contacts abroad and investigated him on subversion charges. He was placed under a de facto partial house arrest, prevented from meeting people freely, and barred from leaving the greater Tunis area.

Tunisian law permits the prosecution of citizens for their conduct outside the country. This is the case even when their alleged actions are legal in the country in which they take place and protected under international human rights law to which Tunisia is a party. Scores of students returning home from Europe for visits have been arrested and interrogated about their contacts and meetings with Tunisians abroad. Many of these were convicted and jailed for exercising their rights to free speech and association. Nizar Chari, vacationing at home after obtaining a doctorate at University of Toulouse, was arrested on May 29. On June 16nineteen days after his arrest and nine days longer than Tunisian law allows for pre-arraignment detentionChari was brought before an investigating magistrate, accused of belonging to an illegal organization and associating with criminal elements, and placed in pre-trial detention.

In 1997, the government announced a bill that would put under judicial authority all decisions regarding the issuance of passports and the imposition of travel restrictions. In an October 12 statement, the Tunisian Human Rights League and four other Tunisian organizations urged withdrawal of the draft bill. They argued that the reasons for which a judge could bar travel under the bill were excessively broad and violated the presumption of innocence. Privately, activists said judicial oversight would make no difference until judges showed more independence.

In two cases that cast a shadow on judges potential roles in defending the constitutional right to freedom of movement, authorities explained that it was judges investigating criminal charges who had imposed the travel bans on human rights activists Sihem Ben Sedrine and Mustapha Ben Jaafar. This information, which was divulged in late 1997 in a letter to European parliamentarians, was the first that either Ben Jaafar or Ben Sedrine had heard about their being under formal investigation since their passports were seized in 1994 and 1995 respectively. Neither was formally charged with any offense.

A new postal law, decreed June 2, stated that its objectives included assuring the confidentiality of correspondence. But the law also provided that postal materials that ... could harm public order or security are not acceptable. If [such] mail is found...it will be confiscated in conformity with the laws in effect.

In a major address in November 1997, President Ben Ali exhorted Tunisian journalists to shun self-censorship and ensure pluralism in the press. But during the next year, the press continued unanimously and uncritically to support major government policies and ignore domestic human rights problems. When Taoufik Ben Brik, who writes for foreign publications, described the heavy-handed police surveillance of dissidents in the June 12 issue of the French daily La Croix , he was brought before a Ministry of Interior official who pressured him to change professions. Ben Brik continued his work but remained under surveillance. On a more positive note, laws regulating the use of satellite dishes were not vigorously enforced, permitting an increasing number of Tunisians to watch foreign newscasts in addition to state-controlled local television.

President Ben Ali, in November 1997, announced measures to guarantee opposition parties a minimum of 20 percent of seats in the Chamber of Deputies in the next elections, scheduled for 1999. But there were no signs that this pluralist initiative would extend to parties that openly challenge the essential elements of the governments program. All such groupings remain illegal or excluded from parliament and marginalized.

Small indications of increasing political assertiveness included student strikes for better conditions at the universities, some bold declarations on human rights conditions signed by independent activists, and election results within the national bar association and the Association of Young Lawyers that were seen as a rebuff to the ruling party, the Constitutional Democratic Rally.

Tunisian officials emphasized the many governmental agencies set up to monitor and address human rights issues. Individual problems were sometimes resolved when citizens filed complaints with units set up at various ministries, including the Ministry of Interior. But, according to many human rights activists, prominent cases or entrenched abuses could only be resolved by high-level political decisions.

Academic Freedom

Academics in dozens of countries in 1998 were harassed, censored, dismissed, beaten, or imprisoned for peacefully expressing their ideas. Although governments increasingly recognized the importance of universities in promoting technological and economic progress, many continued to take aggressive measures to restrict the scope of expression and inquiry on campus. Respect for academic freedom and the basic civil and political rights of academics thus continued to be a sensitive barometer of free expression worldwide.

International human rights standards offer academics a principled basis for resisting authoritarian political pressures and defending the institutional autonomy necessary for academic excellence. Freedom of expression, defined in international treaties as freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, is a precondition of academic freedom. A university fulfills its mission when academics are not forced to support an official line, an economic agenda, or a political ideology, but rather are free to use their talents to advance human knowledge and understanding. Although international attention to the right to free expression understandably has emphasized artistic freedom and freedom of the press, essential attributes of an open, democratic society, institutions of higher education have played a critical role in preserving and giving meaning to the right. Abuses tracked by Human Rights Watch in 1998 illustrated the often fragile status of the right to free expression on university campuses. Academics were most often targeted when they publicly criticized government authorities, were active in opposition movements or citizens groups, or investigated subjects deemed politically sensitive by the authorities. Reprisals against such professors, researchers, and students included harassment, censorship, arbitrary dismissal and expulsion, and, in the worst cases, imprisonment and torture. Although such reprisals most obviously violated the civil and political rights of the academics concerned, they also directly undermined academic freedom. Academics do not exist in a social or political vacuum, and participation in public affairs and contributions to public debate are important aspects of the academic mission.

The most dramatic campus developments took place in Serbia, where universities were subjected to de facto takeover by the ruling parties, and in Indonesia, where students and faculty, defying decades-old restrictions on the campus community, emerged at the forefront of a nationwide movement for political reform. Developments in Belarus, Burma, China, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, Jordan, Malaysia, and Uzbekistan further demonstrated the range and continued prevalence of government efforts to rein in critical inquiry and expression by academics in 1998.

Serbia
On May 26, 1998, under pressure from Yugoslav President Milosevic, the Serbian parliament passed a law that deprived faculty members throughout Serbia of their longstanding right to participate in the selection of rectors, faculty deans, and governing boards, and that effectively canceledsubject to renegotiationthe contracts of all professors and other teaching staff. Because the assault on the universities coincided with a crackdown on the independent media, coalitions of faculty that formed to protest the law had difficulty getting their message to the Serbian public. Demonstrations opposing the new law were violently suppressed. As the conflict in Kosovo intensified and Serbian nationalist rhetoric grew more strident, the pressures on critics of the new university law mounted.

The most dramatic changes under the new law took place at the University of Belgrade, which had long been a center of student protest and continued to be home to a number of prominent faculty critics of the government. At least sixteen faculty deans there were replaced shortly after the law took effect. Twelve were forcibly removed and four resigned in protest. Fifteen of the sixteen newly appointed deans were members of the ruling parties. None of the replaced deans were members of political parties.

At least thirteen influential politicians in Serbias ruling coalitioncomprised of Milosevics Socialist Party of Serbia (SPS), the Yugoslav Left (JUL, a party led by Mira Markovic, Milosevics wife), and the Serbian Radical Party (SRS, led by Serbian Deputy Prime Minister and ultranationalist Vojislav Seselj)were named to the governing and supervisory boards of the University of Belgrade and its component faculties. Another high-ranking member of JUL, Jagos Puric, was appointed rector.

The first professor to be fired under the new law was Dr. Vladimir Vodinelic, a law professor and one of Yugoslavias leading civil law theorists and one of sixteen professors in the Faculty of Law who had signed a declaration opposing the new law. Two weeks later, twelve law professors who had protested Vodinelics firing were suspended. In the Faculty of Philology, the new dean, Radmilo Marojevic (a member of the SRS), declared that his faculty was not doing useful work, announced his intention to close the World Literature Department, and moved to transfer thirty academics who had refused to sign new contracts to lower paying positions. Professors in other faculties, including philosophy and electrical engineering, also came under assault from the politically appointed deans.

One of the stated aims of the drafters of the law was the depoliticization of the universities. At the time the new law was enacted, officials emphasized that higher education in Serbia had become inefficient because faculty were spending too much of their time engaging in opposition political activities. A more ominous rationale for the new law was articulated by new philology dean Marojevic: Sadly, our country and our culture are somehow under occupation from within. We have a fifth column in scholarship, in culture, everywhere. Marojevic praised the law as a good attempt to return to Serbian character, [to bring] a national, cultural,and authentic character to this university.

Academic excellence requires that decisions affecting teaching, scholarship, and research be made on the basis of academic merit, not political favoritism or ideological litmus tests. The danger of the new law was that such decisions were put into the hands of government-appointed officials, with no participation by independent faculty members. The new law removed existing safeguards for academic autonomy, opening the door to political meddling in academic affairs by both present and future governments of Serbia. In principle, the university should be an institution open to all on the basis of merit, an important intellectual resource not only to governments and industry, but also to individuals and interests independent of the state. The University Act, however, appeared to be turning universities in Serbia into institutions that exclusively served the interests of Serbian state authorities.

Indonesia
Developments in Indonesia in 1998 contrasted sharply with those in Serbia. In Indonesia, a nationwide student protest movement played an instrumental role in forcing the resignation of President Soeharto and in opening the door to democratic reform. Students and faculty emerged at the forefront of the reform movement in large measure because they publicly spoke their minds, courageously and consistently ignoring regulations banning campus political expression and activity, as well as other laws, regulations, decrees, and abusive practices that had long limited political and intellectual freedom on Indonesias campuses and in Indonesian society.

The transformation began in January 1998, when the collapse of Indonesias currency was greeted by an outpouring of demands for an end to Soehartos thirty-two-year rule. In early March, when opposition leaders failed to mount any significant challenge to Soeharto and Indonesias compliant and largely hand-picked parliament unanimously elected Soeharto for a seventh five-year term, the student protest movement became the nationwide focus of opposition to Soeharto.

The movement was not confined to campus radicals, but involved literally hundreds of thousands of students from hundreds of institutions, including private universities, academies, and institutes as well as leading public universities and state teacher training and Islamic institutes. The students were actively supported by many faculty, alumni, and university administrators. At a rally held during the last week in April at Dr. Soetomo University in Surabaya, for example, Poncol Marjada, the university rector, read a statement formally calling on students to participate in the demonstrations to express their concerns. At a rally at Gadjah Mada University in Yogyakarta the same week, senior professor Dr. Loekman Soetrisno declared to the crowd of students: If Martin Luther King could trigger the birth of a new America, you, too, the young people, can create a new Indonesia. The protests reached a climax in May, when students increasingly were joined by non-academics at rallies. Soeharto resigned on May 21 after security forces shot and killed four student protesters at Trisakti University in Jakarta on May 12, and in the wake of mass rioting in several cities which followed the killings and left more than 1,000 people dead.

President Soehartos New Order government had not been uniformly hostile to the academic community. Many academics and students backed Soeharto when he first assumed power, and the governments emphasis on rapid economic growth created opportunities for a range of academic specialists. As Soeharto consolidated his power, however, he eventually turned his attention on the universities, which were emerging as a leading source of opposition to the policies of the new government. By the early 1980s, political controls over academic life in Indonesia were among the most intrusive in the world. Incoming academics were subjected to mandatory political background checks, students were subjected to compulsory on-campus ideological indoctrination sessions, students and academics who directly challenged the government were prominent among Indonesian dissidents imprisoned for exercising their basic rights, and political expression and activity were expressly outlawed on campus through a policy that the government called Normalization of Campus Life. In addition, a wide range of publications was censored, speakers were barred from campus by police and military authorities, seminars were monitored and subject to cancellation at the discretion of the authorities, and academic research was stymied by labyrinthine state research permit issuance procedures.

In the last years of Soehartos rule, mounting pressures for greater political openness and respect for citizens rights in Indonesia led to a number of concessions by the government. The governments relaxation of controls, where it occurred, however, was not accompanied by formal repeal of regulations legitimating the governments intrusive policies or by the implementation of institutional protections for basic rights. The result was continuing uncertainty about the boundaries of the permissible. This uncertainty, together with periodic government crackdowns on dissent and intimidation of those who delved into matters that the government viewed as sensitive, created a climate hostile to intellectual innovation and vigorous debate. The lack of clear boundaries also created a black market in ideas, a continued gap between what people said in private and what they were willing to say in public, depriving the society of the intellectual dynamism that results from open expression of competing viewpoints.

Although significant institutional and legal barriers to freedom of expression remained in place in Indonesia after Soehartos resignation, the reform movement opened the door to more wide-ranging public debate in Indonesia. The changed climate was evident as early as April 1998 when Soehartos minister of education, Wiranto Arismunandar, invoked the twenty-year-old Normalization of Campus Life regulations in an effort to quell the mounting campus protest movement. Arismunandars remarks immediately became the subject of heated media debate. His invocation of the repressive campus regulations was roundly criticized in the press and his warning was completely ignored in practice by students and their faculty supporters. Subsequent efforts to control the protestsincluding attempts to portray the student movement as infiltrated by communist agitators, the abduction and forced disappearance of more than two dozen political organizers by groups within the military, and a nationwide ban on public protest marches by studentsdid nothing to stop the protests and indeed sparked an indignant counterresponse.

After Soehartos ouster, the country continued to face daunting challenges, including government corruption and nepotism, social unrest fueled by a steadily worsening economic crisis, an entrenched military with a prominent role in politics, a history of militaryatrocities in such places as East Timor, Aceh, and Irian Jaya, and deep-rooted ethnic hostility directed against Indonesians of Chinese ancestry. For the first time, however, these issues were being discussed openly. Scholars and students, well-situated to explore the social and political realities that underlie such problems and help in the search for solutions, were prominent among those participating in the discussions.
Reprisals against Dissenting Academics

Although developments in Serbia and Indonesia provided the most dramatic illustrations of the intimate connection between academic freedom and protections for basic rights, activist professors, researchers, and students were targets of government repression in a wide range of countries. Due to the high public profile of universities and of the academics who were involved, such attacks often played an exemplary role, serving as a warning to individuals throughout society that dissent and political opposition would not be tolerated.

In Cuba, professor Felix A. Bonne Carcasses, economists Marta B. Roque Cabello and Vladimiro Roca Antunez, and attorney Rene Gomez Manzano were imprisoned throughout 1998 for their membership in an opposition group and for publicly insisting that greater democratization was a prerequisite to effective economic liberalization. In Ethiopia, the government continued to imprison Dr. Taye Wolde Semayet, a former professor and president of the Ethiopian Teachers Association (ETA), which had emerged as a leading critic of the governments policies. From July to September, Dr. Taye was shackled twenty-four hours a day. Although the government initially had alleged that Dr. Taye was involved with terrorist attacks on the government, the most serious charges against him were dropped for lack of evidence and the remaining charges related solely to Dr. Tayes alleged association with a proscribed organization, charges which he vehemently denies.

In Malaysia, students at a number of universities were harassed and some were suspended in September 1998 for joining peaceful rallies in support of deposed Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim. The Malaysian University Act forbids students from participating in opposition politics. In September, Education Minister Datuk Seri NajibTun Razak announced that the ministry was monitoring students involved in Anwars reformasi or reform movement, the general objective of which was to reduce corruption in government. Student supporters from the Mara Institute of Technology (IT) were threatened with expulsion and blacklisting from government educational institutions for being involved in Anwars campaigns. Six students of Universiti Utara Malaysia were arrested and subsequently suspended for involvement in political activity related to a September parliamentary by-election.

In Uzbekistan, dozens of students were expelled from state institutions of higher education for wearing Islamic attire. In May, the government adopted a repressive law on religious organizations that, among its provisions, prohibited the wearing of ritual dress in public. Under the law, viewed by critics as an attempt to marginalize religious groups perceived as a potential source of political opposition to President Islam Karimov, female students who wore the hijab (Muslim clothing usually including a head scarf and a long robe) were expelled and male students with beards were subjected to pressure to shave or else were expelled. The National Security Service (SNB) followed several expelled university students who had met with Human Rights Watch and warned them not to speak with foreigners. The expulsion of students for religious dress in Uzbekistan was the mirror image of policies pursued in Iran after the 1979 revolution and in Sudan in the early 1990s, where students and professors have been expelled or dismissed for failing to demonstrate proper religious comportment.

In Belarus, Human Rights Watch documented seven cases of politically motivated dismissals, warnings, and expulsions of academics that formed part of a broader government crackdown on independent political expression. One case was that of Liubov Lunyova, a human rights activist who prior to her dismissal had worked as a lecturer on a fixed-term contract in the history department at the Belarusian State University (BGU) in Minsk. Although Lunyova was told by university officials that she was let go because of lack of funds, she was fired shortly after Belarussian President Lukashenka had publicly berated the university rector for keeping activist teachers on staff. Lunyova told Human Rights Watch, moreover, that despite the alleged lack of funds, new lecturers had been hired after her dismissal. When Lunyova sought a job at another school, the director of the school told her that he would be fired within half an hour if he gave her a job.
Censorship and Ideological Controls

In China, continuing Communist Party control of the universities was strengthened with new legislation in August 1998 giving campus-based party officers the power to override administrative decisions made by university presidents. Scheduled to take effect in January 1999, the law also gave campus-based party committees responsibility for enforcing the policies and guidelines of the Communist Party and...work related to political, ideological and moral education.

In Malaysia, after reports began circulating in late 1997 of the adverse public health consequences of the dense haze that was then enveloping much of the country from uncontrolled forest fires in Indonesia, the government issued a decree requiring that all researchers investigating the subject have their work screened and preapproved by higher authorities. In Egypt, the government successfully pressured officials at the American University (AU) in Cairo to censor the book Muhammad , a classic text by the internationally renowned scholar, Maxime Rodinson. The book had been available in Egypt since the 1970s and was included on a course syllabus in 1998. After a prominent Cairo journalist published an article alleging that the book contained passages that insulted Islamic beliefs, President Mubarek, through the minister of education, ordered AU to ban the book. In response to the presidents order AU administrators informed professors that they could no longer include the book in their reading lists and ordered it removed from the library and the campus bookstore.

In Jordan, the government enacted a broad new press and publications law giving government authorities broad powers of censorship. Among the requirements of the law was that universities and scientific research centers obtain prior permission from the Ministry of Information before importing potentially controversial books and writings. The new law also imposed onerousrequirements on independent research centers, including a provision forbidding such institutes and their employees from receiving any financial assistance or support from any non-Jordanian party and providing for steep fines and closure for up to six months of any institute that violated the policy.
Crackdowns on Student Protest

In many countries, governments responded to student protests with violent crackdowns and at times the indiscriminate use of force against protesters. In Indonesia, the Soeharto governments nationwide ban on public marches by students early in the year backfired when violent clashes between students and hundreds of police and troops massed at campus gates added fuel to an already developing, nationwide political crisis. In countries including Kenya, Zimbabwe, and Nigeria, governments used school closures as a weapon to stop demonstrations and penalize students for expression of their political views.

Government suppression of student protest continued to be extreme in Burma, where most universities remained closed throughout 1998, the countrys intellectual resources and institutions paralyzed. Universities in Burma had been closed for seven of the ten years since the 1988 pro-democracy uprising was crushed by the army. The closures in 1998 dated from December 1996, when the government shut down the universities following major campus rallies protesting police violence against students.

Relevant Human Rights Watch reports:
Academic Freedom in Indonesia: Dismantling Soeharto Era Barriers , 8/98
Republic of Belarus; Turning Back the Clock , 7/98
Republic of Uzbekistan; Crackdown in the Farghona Valley: Arbitrary Arrests and Religious Discrimination, 5/98
 Prohibited Persons, Abuse of Undocumented Migrants, Asylum Seekers, and Refugees in South Africa, 3/98
Ethiopia: The Curtailment of Rights , 12/97

    Child Soldiers

    A new international campaign emerged in 1998 to stop the global use of children as soldiers, whose numbers grew to more than 300,000. The campaign sought to overcome the diplomatic deadlock that had stymied efforts to establish adequate standards prohibiting the recruitment and use of children in armed conflict.

    Existing international law allowed children as young as fifteen to be legally recruited and sent into combat. While the existing standard was nearly universally recognized as inadequate, efforts through the United Nations to raise this age to eighteen remained unsuccessful. Despite four years of negotiations, a working group established by the Commission on Human Rights failed to reach agreement in 1998 on a text, largely due to a small number of states which resisted any measure that exceeded their existing national standards. The United States mounted the strongest opposition, despite the fact that as one of only two countries that has failed to ratify the Convention on the Rights of the Child, it would not even be eligible to join the optional protocol.

    Growing frustration with this diplomatic stalemate led Human Rights Watch and other international non-governmental organizations to form the Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers. Believing that public pressure and nongovernmental action could generate the political will for change, the coalition began to organize a major international campaign to highlight the urgency of stronger protection for children against military recruitment. Reflecting the straight-eighteen position adopted by virtually every nongovernmental and international agency actively involved in work on children and armed conflict, the coalition began an intensive educational and lobbying effort to establish eighteen as the minimum age for any form of military recruitment or participation in armed conflict. The goal was for this standard, to be adopted through an optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and to be recognized and enforced by all armed forces and groups, governmental and non-governmental.

    The coalition was formally launched through press conferences in New York and Geneva on June 30, with the participation of UNICEF, UNHCR, and the special representative to the secretary-general on children and armed conflict. The preceding day, the Security Council engaged in a landmark special debate on children and armed conflict, where the speeches of several ambassadors supported the emerging campaign.

    The coalition, which was chaired by Human Rights Watch, quickly established an international secretariat near Geneva and generated publications in five languages which were broadly disseminated among governments, nongovernmental organizations, and the press. Within six months, contact was established with national networks or coalitions in more than twenty countries. These networks worked to lobby their own governments on behalf of an international standard restricting military service to those aged eighteen or over, and where necessary, to push for national legislation to raise their countrys domestic recruitment age to eighteen. Denmark announced a change to this effect in its own domestic policy in June, and by years end, several other governments were actively considering such a move. [In October, Secretary-General Kofi Annan announced that the United Nations Peacekeeping forces would adopt a new policy consistent with the straight-eighteen position, setting a minimum age for U.N. peacekeepers of eighteen, and recommending that they be at least twenty-one.]

    In addition to its public education and media effort, the coalition met with key governments, and began preparations for a series of regional conferences in 1999, intended to bring together governments and nongovernmental organizations in Africa, Latin America, and Asia, to discuss stronger prohibitions against the recruitment of children and their participation in armed conflict.

    In the United States, Human Rights Watch gave leadership to efforts to shift the U.S. position on international standards relatedto child soldiers. Despite the small number of under-eighteens in the U.S. armed forcesless than one-half of 1 percentthe U.S. vigorously opposed an optional protocol setting eighteen as the minimum age for either recruitment or participation in armed conflict. U.S. officials stated that recruitment of seventeen-year-olds represented an edge that the Defense Department was not willing to give up, and argued that given the lack of compliance with existing standards prohibiting the use of under-fifteens, emphasis should be placed on enforcing current prohibitions rather than raising the relevant age. However, given a powerful opportunity to strengthen enforcement mechanisms by including the recruitment and use of under-fifteens as a war crime under the statute of the International Criminal Court, the U.S. chose to oppose this measure as well. Human Rights Watch advocated strongly for the provision, which was ultimately included in the final statute, despite U.S. opposition.

    Human Rights Watch met with Defense Department, State Department, and National Security Council officials regarding the U.S. position on the optional protocol, participated in a series of congressional briefings on child soldiers, and helped influence the introduction of House of Representatives and Senate resolutions on child soldiers. A sign-on letter addressed to President Clinton initiated by Human Rights Watch garnered the signatures of over sixty members of the House of Representatives.

    An advocacy visit to the United States in March by Angelina Acheng Atyam, mother of a fourteen-year-old girl abducted by rebels in northern Uganda, further raised the profile of child recruitment in the U.S. media, and led U.S. First Lady Hillary Clinton to strongly condemn the practice during a trip to Africa with President Clinton.

    Seeking to broaden the effort to shift the U.S. position, a U.S. Campaign to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers was established with the goals of securing U.S. support of an international straight-eighteen ban, raising the U.S. recruitment age to eighteen, and eliminating U.S. military aid which facilitates the use of child soldiers by other governments or armed groups. Human Rights Watch joined religious, peace, youth advocacy and other human rights groups as part of the campaigns steering committee.



Human Rights WatchWorld Report 	ContentsDownloadPrintOrderHRW Homepage

World map 	Special Initiatives
	




Corporations and Human Rights

In 1998, the debate on the relationship between corporate conduct and human rights evolved from questioning whether corporations should respect human rights to a recognition that corporations must implement credible human rights policies and practices and ensure compliance to these standards. At the center of this debate were the apparel and extractive industries. Both industries faced severe economic pressures due to the global economic crisis and increased scrutiny of their human rights records. Some transnational corporations attempted to address human rights; others chose to ignore the issue. However, events in 1998 strongly suggested that without an explicit and programmatic commitment to respect and promote human rights companies risked complicity and, in some cases, jeopardized their projects altogether.
The Apparel Industry

The effort to improve labor rights practices by corporations in the apparel and textile industries focused on programs to ensure respect for workers. Corporations such as Gap Incorporated and Nike, earlier criticized for labor rights violations in overseas plants, retreated in 1998 from previous hostility to rights-oriented criticism and worked to improve global practices through programs in partnership with nongovernmental organizations and trade unions. Among other initiatives in the United States, President Clintons Apparel Industry Partnership (AIP) and the Council on Economic Priorities Social Accountability 8000 (SA-8000) program, were two that promoted global codes of conduct on fair labor practices and credible independent monitoring with those codes.

In part, the shift was a response to economic considerations. Apparel companies had expected that Asian markets would be the source of new revenue and growth as demand flattened in the United States. But the Asian economic crisisparticularly due to mismanagement by corrupt and abusive governmentsstifled the new demand. Reliant on image, faced with shrinking revenues and public scrutiny of their treatment of workers, companies could ill-afford to drive consumers away because of poor human rights records. However, most corporate initiatives on human rights were not independently assessed, and their effectiveness could not be measured.
The Oil and Gas Industry

The programs to address labor rights in the apparel industry coincided with a recognition that the oil and gas industryalso faced with severe financial pressureswas at the center of controversy in many operations throughout the world. Because of these companies importance to national, regional, and international economies; their contracts with abusive governments; their ties to state and private security forces; their effect on local communities; their influence on governments, and a reputation of complicity in human rights violations, the oil industry needed to improve its human rights record throughout the world. In 1998, Human Rights Watch documented human rights violations related to oil and gas projects in Colombia and closely monitored developments in Burma, Cameroon, China, Chad, Thailand, and Turkmenistan.

Colombia
In two open letters released in April, Human Rights Watch criticized the contractual relationship between Colombian security forces and two international consortia of oil companies operating the principal oil fields and pipelines in the nation. The letters detailedterms of the multimillion-dollar security contracts and reports of killings, beatings, and arrests committed by those forces responsible for protecting the companies installations. Human Rights Watch called on the companies to implement contractual and procedural structures to ensure respect for human rights as a result of their security arrangements.

A consortium composed of Occidental Petroleum, Royal Dutch/Shell, and the national oil company, ECOPETROL, which operates the Cao-Limn oil field in Arauca department, took no action to address reports of extrajudicial executions and a massacre committed by the state forces assigned to protect the consortiums facilities. The companies response was that human rights violations were the responsibility of governments, and they did not announce any programs to ensure that their security providers do not commit human rights violations. Royal Dutch/Shell, the only member of the consortium with human rights policies, announced its intent to sell its share of this project as part of an overall divestiture of its Colombian holdings.

In Casanare department, the location of the Cusiana-Cupiagua oil fields developed by British Petroleum, ECOPETROL, Total, and Triton, contracts came up for renewal in June, as military, paramilitary, guerrilla, and criminal activity increased in the area. The renegotiated contracts between the companies and the Ministry of Defense restructured the flow of funds to avoid direct company payments to state security forces. Payments for security were to be made to the state-owned ECOPETROL as a conduit to the Defense Ministry instead of directly from the companies to the army. At the time of this writing, the oil companies still made direct payments to the National Police.

There were also some substantive changes in the contracts. BP, the only consortium member with a human rights policy, reported that human rights clauses were included in the new contract; an auditing mechanism was implemented to monitor the flow of funds; and a committee was established to monitor the performance of the military units providing security for the companies. Human Rights Watch could not assess the effectiveness of these programs because the contract was still not available to third parties. There was apparently no mechanism to ensure that the personnel guarding these installations would be screened for human rights violations.

The conduct of private security providers for the BP-led consortium continued to be a problem in 1998. Following allegations in 1997 that the consortiums private security firm, Defense Systems Colombia (DSC), a subsidiary of the U.K.-based Defense Systems Limited (DSL), had imported arms into the country and trained Colombian National Police (PONAL) in counterinsurgency techniques, a government inquiry was launched to determine the role of this company and the police. DSC refused to cooperate with the investigation. In September 1998, BP reported that it had formed an oversight committee to monitor its private security providers, was developing a code of conduct for DSC, and had urged the company to cooperate fully with the government. At this writing, DSC remained uncooperative. Despite the allegations against DSC and its refusal to cooperate with the government investigation, BP renewed its contract with DSC for one more year.

In October, new allegations that DSC and a Israeli private security firm, Silver Shadow, had contemplated providing arms and intelligence services for the Colombian military while they were security contractors for the Ocensa pipeline. Reports alleged that DSC had set up intelligence networks to monitor individuals opposed to the company. BP steadfastly denied these claims and suspended a senior security official while investigating these allegations. The day after these allegations were published, the ELN reportedly blew up the Ocensa pipeline, killing sixty civilians and injuring dozens more. The act of targeting pipelines has been condemned by Human Rights Watch as a violation of the Geneva Conventions and causing unacceptable hardships on civilian populations caught in the middle of Colombias decades-old internal conflict.

Burma-Thailand
The $1.2 billion Yadana gas pipeline from Burma to Thailand, developed by the United States-based Unocal, the French company Total, the state-owned Petroleum Authority of Thailand (PTT), and the Burmese governments Myanmar Oil and Gas Enterprise (MOGE), continued to generate human rights controversy. Press accounts reported that the Burmese forces providing security for the project continued to commit violations against villagers along the pipeline route, including killings, torture, rape, displacement of entire villages, and forced labor.

In Thailand, environmentalists opposition to the pipeline grew as construction crossed the border from Burma, and the Thai governments response was to suppress protest. In one extreme incident, the Thai government dispatched approximately 200 army troops to the site of an environmental protest in Kanchanaburi and arbitrarily arrested approximately one hundred peaceful demonstrators in April.

Despite severe international criticism of the project and decisions by other oil majors such as Texaco and Atlantic Richfield to leave Burma, Unocal and Total defended their presence and argued that the pipeline would result in sustainable, long-term economic and social benefits to the 35,000 villagers living near the pipeline and lasting benefits to Burmese generally.

But international economic experts believed otherwise. For example, according to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), revenues from the pipeline were supposed to bolster and support the weak Burmese economy by mid-1998. In a later review the IMF, commenting on the project, reported that the junta has already mortgaged its projected revenues of $200 million a year to repay new loans and finance its 15 percent stake in the project, which would delay any profits to the government until 2002. The Thai government attempted to renegotiate its contract with Burma because, given a lack of demand and funding shortfalls due to the economic crisis, it could not pay for the natural gas.

Unocals financial situation was precarious as well. On April 30, Standard & Poor, the international investment rating service, downgraded Unocals corporate outlook from stable to negative. The decision was based on low oil prices, a somewhat weak financial profile, and the companys exposure to political risk due to controversies surrounding its operations in Burma and Afghanistan, as well as political and economic turmoil in Thailand and Indonesia.

Chad-Cameroon
The joint venture of the United States-based Exxon, the French Elf Aquitaine, and Netherlands-based Royal Dutch/Shell which is constructing the $4 billion Chad-Cameroon oil pipeline was criticized throughout the year because of allegations of corruption and its detrimental effects on the environment and human rights.

On April 24, a coalition of European and African environmental groups and members of the German parliament announced fears of the displacement of inhabitants along the pipeline route and potential environmental damage. They also cited noticeable increase in human rights violations in the area surrounding the pipeline, in particular a massacre of twenty civilians in the oil-producing area. Reports of increased conflict and killings of civilians by government forces persisted through the first eight months of the year.

The pipeline also emerged as an internal issue in debates about corruption. For example, in a May interview with the Ndjamena-based newspaper LObservateur , Yorongar Ngarljy, an opposition party member of the Chadian National Assembly, accused presidential candidate Wadal Abdelkader Kamougu of accepting bribes from Elf Aquitaine to finance his campaign. In June, Ngarljy accused Chadian President Idriss Dby of nepotism because of senior appointments in the countrys oil industry. His accusations led to the National Assemblys rescinding his parliamentary immunity; and he was arrested on June 3 for defamation, then convicted and sentenced to three years imprisonment, one year more than the maximum sentence stipulated by law. In addition, Mme. Sy Koumbo Singa Gali, the director of LObservateur , and Polycarpe Togamissi, the journalist who conducted the interview of Ngarljy, were arrested and convicted as accessories to the defamation. They received two-year suspended sentences and were fined 1 million Communaut Financire Africaine francs (CFA) each, twice the legal maximum.

In late August, eighty-six Northern and Southern environmental organizations called on the World Bank, which had extended a $340 million loan for the pipeline project, to suspend its funding on grounds of widespread human rights violations in oil-producing regions and the lack of adequate environmental safeguards. On September 1, the World Banks spokesperson, George Minang, said, If security problems prevent adequate information gathering, the project is probably not ready to be implemented...This is not a good sign.

Although Royal Dutch/Shell has a global human rights policy, at the time of this writing none of the consortium members had articulated a policy to ensure respect for human rights in the course of this operation.
Corporate Initiatives to Address Human Rights

Three companies responded to broad-based criticism of their operations: Norways state-owned Statoil, Royal Dutch/Shell, and British Petroleum.

In December 1997, the Norwegian government announced that oil revenues generated by Statoil would be invested in an ethical manner consistent with human rights. The government awarded the assignment to the United States-based Chase Manhattan Bank. On July 7, Statoil signed a global collective bargaining agreement with the International Federation of Chemical, Energy, Mine and General Workers Unions (ICEM), in part, to affirm their support for fundamental human rights in the community and in the place of work. After ratifying the agreement, Statoils Jostein Gaasemyr said, This is an important step for Statoil, because we see the implementation of human rights as a crucial challenge in some of the environments in which we do business.

The agreement contained several concrete provisions to respect human rights, including adherence to International Labour Organisation (ILO) standards by recognizing the rights to freedom of association and collective bargaining; prohibitions on forced, bonded, and child labor; and nondiscrimination policies.

Royal Dutch/Shell responded to criticism by unveiling programs to highlight its performance on human rights. To further enhance its new corporate image, the company reportedly planned to spend $200 million on a public relations campaign designed by the transnational advertising agency M&C Saatchi, which led to scathing criticism by the press and NGOs. After presenting its first social audit highlighting its social policies, including an emphasis on human rights, Shell continued its dialogue with NGOs and spread the message that it had embraced the concept of human rights. However, the company was enmeshed in controversies in Chad, Colombia, Nigeria, and Peru while conducting feasibility studies for projects in Turkmenistan.

British Petroleum adopted an approach similar to Shells: the company revamped its business principles to include explicit references to human rights and released a social audit to highlight its human rights policies. The long-term implications of the new policy were still unclear at this writing. A well-implemented policy could have far-reaching effects, since BP merged with the U.S. oil major, Amoco, to form the third-largest oil company in the world (behind Shell and Exxon), with operations in countries with poor human rights records such as Algeria and Colombia, and operating in alliance with Statoilwhich also has a human rights policy in Angola and Azerbaijan.
The Role of Governments

Governments that discounted human rights in favor of promoting commercial and strategic interests remained another focus of the effort to promote corporate responsibility. Actions of the Dutch government towards China and the U.S.s policy towards Turkmenistan illustrated the problem.

In 1998, the Dutch government, long a critic of Chinas human rights record, followed the European Unions lead and refused to sponsor a human rights resolution on China at the United Nations Human Rights Commission. Apparently linked to this silence on human rights, in February the Chinese government awarded Royal Dutch/Shell the largest single foreign investment in Chinese historya $U.S.4.5 billion contract to build an ethylene plant with the governments China National Offshore Oil Corporation. Thedeal was supposed to have been signed in early 1997 but had been canceled when the Dutch broke ranks with other E.U. members and sponsored an April 1997 human rights resolution against China at the United Nations Human Rights Commission.

U.S. dealings with Turkmenistan from March through July involved paying lip service to human rights while securing lucrative energy contracts from President Saparmurat Niyazov. Human Rights Watch has called Niyazovs government one of the most repressive and abusive governments in the world and throughout 1998 urged the U.S. government not to ignore human rights in favor of oil and gas interests.

On March 10, preceding Niyazovs visit to the United States, the Export-Import Bank awarded U.S.$96 million to Bateman Engineering, Dresser Rand, Corning, and General Electric to sell natural gas compression equipment and other services to Turkmenistan. During his April visit, government officials reported having raised human rights issues privately with Niyazov while awarding U.S. companies public funds for coveted oil and gas projects in Turkmenistan. The U.S. and Turkmen governments played the game of hostage politikwhere repressive governments release political prisoners to gain political and commercial favor with Washingtonduring Niyazovs visit to the U.S. The Department of State lobbied for and secured the release of ten political prisoners which the U.S. government then cited an example of improvement in human rights, in justification of its commercial interests.

At the same time, the U.S. awarded companies grantsusing public fundsto get a foothold in Turkmenistan. During a meeting between Presidents Clinton and Niyazov on April 23, the U.S. governments Trade and Development Administration (U.S.T.D.A.) awarded Exxon a $750,000 grant to conduct a pipeline feasibility study for a proposed $2.8 billion pipeline in Turkmenistan. After the deal was signed, the White House issued a press release stating, Turkmenistan is committed to strengthening the rule of law and political pluralism, including free and fair elections for parliament and the presidency in accordance with international standards.... But when reporters asked Niyazov about the governments attitude toward opposition parties, he said, We do not have any opposition partiesyou are ill-informed. We have none.

Mobil Oil became the first U.S.-based energy company to sign a production-sharing agreement with the Turkmen government on July 10. On July 31, the State Department spokesperson James P. Rubin congratulated the Turkmen government for awarding the Enron Corporation a contract for another $750,000 pipeline feasibility studypaid for with a grant by the U.S.T.D.A. During the same month, the U.S. government announced its intention to triple U.S. aid to Turkmenistan without placing any conditionality on funding to ensure respect for human rights.

In August and September three more domestic critics of the Turkmen government were beaten and detained. Widespread abuses such as torture, arbitrary detention, and press censorship continued.
Drugs And Human Rights

Efforts to curtail the trafficking, sale and consumption of illegal drugs continued to rely on excessive punishment, exacerbate prison overcrowding, distort criminal justice systems, and weaken protection of civil liberties. In countries with vastly different political, social and economic systems and traditions, anti-narcotic strategies included tactics inconsistent with human rights principles.

Drug offenders continued to face the death penalty. According to Amnesty International, China sentenced 662 people to death in 1997 for drug offenses and executed at least 437. The quantities of drugs triggering the death penalty can be small: in June, a Malaysian court sentenced a man to death for trafficking in a pound and a half of marijuana. In Vietnam, possession with intent to sell a mere 3.6 ounces of heroin is punishable by death. More than thirty drug traffickers were sentenced to death in Vietnam during 1998. In Singapore, two men were executed in September for offenses involving cannabis and morphine. Singapore imposes the death penalty on adults trafficking in as little as one-half ounce of heroin, one ounce of morphine or eighteen ounces of marijuana. Since 1975, it has executed more than 300 people, mostly for drug-related offenses. In July, two drug offenders were hanged in Kuwait, the first to be executed under a new law extending the death penalty to traffickers, repeat drug offenders and offences involving minors. In Singapore, a new law made death mandatory for trafficking in 250 grams (8.8 ounces) of methamphetamine. In Iran, a new law imposed the death sentence on individuals possessing as little as 1.05 ounces of heroin and criminalized addiction.

Egregious punishments short of the death penalty were also meted out to drug offenders. In Thailand, couriers transporting small quantities of drugs faced life or fifty-year sentences (often following commutation of a death sentence). In the state of New York in the U.S., a single sale of two ounces of cocaine was punishable with a maximum sentence of life imprisonment. Working with an array of public interest groups and activists, Human Rights Watch continued to press the New York governor and legislature to reform the states mandatory minimum sentencing drug laws to bring them into conformity with international requirements of fairness and proportionality. Partisan politics prevailed, however, and the 1998 legislative session ended without any drug law reform. During 1997, 11,614 people were sentenced to prison under the states draconian drug laws, most of them low-level offenders. Almost 80 percent of them had no prior convictions for violent felonies, and over 50 percent had no prior drug convictions.

Prison conditions deteriorated markedly as hundreds of thousands of drug offenders pushed prison populations far beyond capacity. In Ecuador, nearly 50 percent of those incarcerated were being held for drug offenses. The proportion of drug offenders in Malaysias prison population was 40 percent, 47 percent in Singapore and more than 50 percent in Taiwan. In many countries, drug laws offenses accounted for the preponderance of incarcerated women. In Ecuador, 72 percent of incarcerated women werecharged with drug offenses; in Peru, 60 percent and in Venezuela, 73.4 percent. Most had been jailed for selling or carrying small quantities of drugs. In the United States, nearly 28,000 women were incarcerated in state prisons for drug offenses, more than for any other category of crime.

The adverse human rights effects of current drug control strategies, including excessively aggressive criminal drug law enforcement, were most starkly displayed in the United States, the worlds capital of drug consumption. Privacy rights in the U.S. continued to be eroded: the use of undercover agents and wiretapping was routine and widespread; growing numbers of school districts required students involved in extracurricular activities to submit to random drug testing. In South Carolina, the state Supreme Court upheld a law that allows pregnant drug users to be arrested for potential harm to their fetuses. Helicopters with heat detection capabilities explored the interiors of peoples homes in Indiana. In Louisiana a new law required all residents receiving state funds to pass a urine test, including elected officials, welfare recipients, state contractors and students on financial aid; elected officials were to be selected at random for drug testing. In June, African-American drivers in Maryland filed an anti-discrimination lawsuit claiming that state troopers pulled them over and searched them because they fit drug courier profiles that included racial characteristics. Using numbers from the state troopers own records, the plaintiffs in the case asserted that although only 17 percent of the drivers on the major interstate highway were black, they constituted 70 percent of the drivers the police pulled over.

In New York City, aggressive drug law enforcement included searches undertaken by busting into homes with battering rams. In May, acting on a tip from a confidential informant, officers with drawn guns broke down the door of an apartment at 6:15 a.m., tossed a stun grenade inside and then handcuffed the terrified family, including a mentally retarded eighteen-year-old girl who had been taking a shower. No drugs or guns were found. In March, police without a search warrant, battered their way into a home with their guns drawn seeking drug dealers. They found a grandmother, her daughter, a six-year-old watching television, and no drugs. The police had gone to the wrong apartment. In another botched raid, a woman eight months pregnant and her fifteen-year-old sister were handcuffed while a dozen police turned their apartment upside down in a futile search for marijuana. According to press reports, the pregnant woman urinated from fear and was forced to sit in her wet underwear for two hours because the police refused her plea to be allowed to put on dry clothes.

The arrest and conviction of drug offenders continued to swell the U.S. prison population: the number of people incarcerated for nonviolent drug offenses increased tenfold between 1980 and 1996 and continued to grow in 1998. Twenty-three percent of all state inmates and 60 percent of all federal inmates held in prisons in 1997 were sentenced for drug offenses. Drug offenders accounted for 25 percent of the total growth in state prison populations between 1990 and 1996. Drug control policies that emphasize law enforcement and the arrest of street-level dealers in low-income urban areas contributed significantly to the growing number of black Americans in U.S. prisons.

The international community continued to ignore the conflict between respect for human rights and certain drug control tactics. In June, the member states of the United Nations gathered at a special session of the General Assembly to consider measures to strengthen drug control efforts. Human Rights Watch urged the General Assembly to acknowledge the human rights violations that occur in many countries in the context of anti-drug efforts and to affirm unequivocally that human rights must not be sacrificed in the pursuit of counternarcotic goals. Unfortunately, the special session concluded without any action addressing human rights. The 1997 annual report of the International Narcotics Control Board endorsed and encouraged efforts to suppress and punish speech deemed favorable to the use of illicit drugs. In a letter to INCB members, Human Rights Watch criticized this view as demonstrating a troubling disregard for the internationally recognized right of free speech.

In Bolivia, 1998 saw a new hard-line approach to the cultivation of drug crops by the new administration of Banzer with the support of the U.S. resistance by coca growers to crop eradication has led to greater levels of violence. Bolivian human rights groups reported fifteen deaths, dozens of injuries from bullets and a couple of hundred people detained in confrontations between coca growers and the police and army. The government placed several thousand members of the army in the coca-producing Chapare region to support the police in anti-drug activities. Increased militarization of drug control activities in the Chapare was not accompanied by any strengthening of efforts to prevent human rights abuses or to hold accountable those who engaged in them.
Freedom Of Expression On The Internet

Despite growing acknowledgment during 1998 among governments around the world that the Internet promotes participation in civil and political life within countries and beyond, legislative proposals continued to threaten free speech on the Internet. While dissidents in authoritarian countries continued to take risks using the Internet to seek help and information, regulators in these parts of the world were quick to refine screening and other controlling technologies. As a result, in a half-dozen countries, Internet access providers (including public libraries) were implementing filtering technologies and other voluntary measures to make prior censorship of on-line communications a reality. The trend is towards extending these technologies more broadly, with global implications for free expression. On-line content providers may soon be forced to start rating their content; those failing to rate their content may find their material blocked from public access. As local rating criteria are used to define ratings, the danger is that these restrictive criteria will limit the diversity of expression on the Internet, where content is as diverse as human thought.

In October 1997 the European Parliament had consented, in principle, to the use of filtering and screening devices. Subsequently the European Commission requested to the European Parliament to foster research into technical issues, in particular filtering, rating, and tracing techniques, taking into account Europes cultural and linguistic diversity. Ironically, authoritarian regimes around theworld were soon to implement these techniques and principles to restrict free expression on the Internet.

For example, Singapores National Internet Advisory Committee (NIAC) in its September 1998 report recommended that the local industry be required to label Web sites using PICS (Platform for Internet Content Selection)- compliant content rating classification systems, such as that developed by the Recreational Software Advisory Council (RSAC). Implementing this would mean that unrated sites would be automatically blocked. Even if this system were only adopted in Singapore, all unrated Web sites around the world would be blocked when the system was used.

Saudis expected to get local access to the Internet by the end of 1998. But the King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology (KACST), which was to act as the kingdoms gateway to the Internet, set up firewalls that would block access to sites considered sensitive. In anticipation of the new service, Council of Ministers Decision 163 required parties using the Internet to refrain from any activities violating the social, cultural, political, media, economic, and religious values of the Kingdom and prohibited sending or receiving coded information without prior authorization.

Bahraini authorities apparently continued to block access to some Web sites, including that of the London-based Bahrain Freedom Movement, and to seek ways to improve the governments capacity to monitor political speech on the Internet. Jalal Alawi Sharif, a Batelco engineer who was arrested in March 1997 reportedly on the grounds that he was transmitting information to the BFM via the Internet, remained in detention without charge or trial as of September 1998.

In mid-January, public hearings were held on a draft Thai Internet Law. Its submission to Cabinet was then delayed due to a lack of public acceptance arising out of its potential impact on freedom of expression. During August the Royal Thai Police departments Internet Police proposal demanded that the Telephone Organization of Thailand (TOT) implement caller-ID features for all local Internet Service Providers. Caller-ID would be used to gather information about each user logging onto the network, including the telephone numbers they used, their login names and the times of the day they connected and disconnected.

During 1998 China encouraged Internet use while restricting the flow of overseas information. The new Internet regulations (adopted on December 30, 1997) replaced interim regulations restricting the free flow of information. The regulations spelled out in greater detail the responsibilities, procedures and penalties for various players involved in Internet communication. During July, China arrested and charged a software engineer with subversion for supplying e-mail addresses to a U.S.-based pro-democracy magazine and Web site known as "Big Reference". According to the Information Center of Human Rights and Democratic Movement in China, Shanghais cyber-police force was reinforced with 150 additional computer experts. An example of the activism that would be affected by such controls was the Septermber 28 issuance, by a small group of dissidents, of a challenge to the government in the form of two manifestos on freedom and social justice. The two declarations in English translation were posted on the sites of a group in New York, Human Rights in China and an international group, the Digital Freedom Network and in faxed copies.

On August 11, Malaysian police arrested a man and a woman and accused them of false reporting about riots in the capital, spread by an Internet newsgroup. They were tracked down with the help of Malaysian Institute of Microelectronic Systems (MIMOS), which provides sole access to the Internet in that country. On August 13 Malaysian police detained a third suspect. All three were held under the Internal Security Act (ISA), which allows detention without trial for sixty days. On September 24, the suspects were charged in the magistrates court under Section 505 (b) of the penal code, which carries face a maximum sentence of two years in prison. On September 28 Tengku Azzman, chairman and chief executive officer of MIMOS, was quoted by the government news agency Bernama saying that the government had no intention of practicing Internet censorship.

In October 1997 the South Korean government blocked access to the GeoCities on-line community (based in the U.S.) because of a site that espouses North Korean beliefs.

In June 1998 a Turkish court sentenced a teenager, Emre Ersoz, to ten months suspended jail time for making comments about the police while participating in a daily on-line forum, hosted on local Internet provider Turknet. He reportedly had criticized rough police treatment of a group of blind people who were protesting against potholes in pavement in the nations capital, Ankara.

Even G-7 governments were found rushing to regulate the Internet before people understand its full potential as a tool of citizen participation.

For example, during 1998 Britain continued its attempts to persuade the other E.U. countries to adopt an e-mail interception system providing unconditional government access to e-mails, arguing that this was essential to fight cross-border crime. A September 1998 report by the U.K. Department of Trade and Industry acknowledged the need for radical rethinking while developing regulation for the information age. Despite such announcements, however, the government continued working on plans to allow the police to tap electronic communications to combat on-line crime. British law enforcement agencies continued to demand that Internet Service Providers (ISPs) reveal all sorts of information about users. Such disclosure had the potential to include interception of e-mail messages without legal due process, a serious violation of privacy.

The Russian state police proposed a plan to monitor every piece of data sent over the Internet within Russias boundaries. Proposed amendments to the mass media law which were discussed in the Russian Duma in March 1998 included a clause suggesting that any publisher of electronic information should register with and obtain a license from the government.

A Bavarian court convicted Felix Somm, former head of the German division of the U.S. on-line service provider Compuserve, in May 1998, of spreading child pornography and other illegal material by providing access to such information on the Internet. Germanys new multimedia law stipulated that access providers are not generally liable for Internet content, although they are required to take reasonable measures to block access to banned material. In June, a twenty-five-year-old university student in Berlin was charged for maintaining an Internet home page that provided an electronic link the left-wing newspaper Radikal.

In the United States, Australia, France, Spain and the U.K, legislative proposals contemplated establishing controls on access to and use of cryptography, or data-scrambling technology, which is used to protect the privacy of communications on-line. The insistence of Britain and France forced the European Commission, in September 1998, to water down its plan to protectInternet privacy using the encryption software.

Countries like Australia and the U.S. led an international push to restrict access and use of encryption software. Human Rights Watch, along with other members of the Global Internet Liberty Campaign (GILC), attempted to counter this effort through defining standards for on-line privacy protection and cryptography based on international human rights law. The current push for restricted access to cryptography may make the use of freely available software like PGP illegal or impossible for human rights groups from developing countries and in the long term even by nongovernmental groups in the most developed countries.

Recognizing that the Internet can be a democratizing force and a useful tool for the advocacy of human rights, during 1998 Human Rights Watch extensively used its World Wide Web site for campaigns on human rights violations in several regions and promoted other global issues including campaigns to end recruitment of child soldiers, to establish the International Criminal Court, and for ratification of the 1997 treaty banning landmines. While continuing to document and protest attempts to silence the Internet, we expanded our on-line advocacy and campaigning work in coalition with civil liberties, womens, labor, journalists and other groups internationally to promote participation in civil and political life.

A website which contains a host of important and relevant information on the subject of freedom of expression on the internet is the Global Internet Liberty Campaign (GILC) website
Human Rights Watch International Film Festival

The Human Rights Watch International Film Festival was created in 1988 to advance public education on human rights issues and concerns using the unique medium of film. Each year, the festival exhibits the finest human rights films and videos in theaters and on cable television throughout the United States and elsewherea reflection of both the scope of the festival and the increasingly global appeal that the project has generated. The 1998 festival featured thirty-three films ( twenty-four of which were premieres), from nineteen countries.

In 1998, selections of the festival were presented in four countries in addition to the U.S., where selected films showcased in nine cities. Time Out magazine remains the principal sponsor of the festival in New York and London. New initiatives with television partners led to cable and public television airings of selected documentary films to a projected audience of more than seven million in the United States.

In selecting films for the festival, Human Rights Watch concentrates equally on artistic merit and human rights content. The festival encourages filmmakers around the world to address human rights subject matter in their work and presents films and videos from both new and established international filmmakers. Each year, the festivals programming committee screens more than 600 films and videos to create a program that represents a range of countries and issues. Once a film is nominated for a place in the program, staff of the relevant division of Human Rights Watch also view the work to confirm its accuracy in the portrayal of human rights concerns. Though the festival rules out films that contain unacceptable inaccuracies of fact, we do not rule out any films on the basis of a particular point of view.

The 1998 festival was first presented over a two-week period in New York, as a collaborative venture with the Film Society of Lincoln Center, and then a selection of the festival was presented in Los Angeles at the Museum of Tolerance. A majority of the screenings were followed by discussions with the filmmakers and Human Rights Watch staff on the issues represented in each work. The festival included feature-length fiction films, documentaries and animated and experimental works. The 1998 festival further broadened its outreach and co-presented selected films with three important New York festivals: the African Film Festival, the Margaret Mead Film Festival, and The New Festival/New York Lesbian and Gay Film Festival.

The festivals opening night centerpiece for 1998 was Blind Faith, by American cinematographer and director Ernest Dickerson. Set in New York in the 1950s, the film shows the disintegration of a thriving middle-class African-American family after a promising son is accused of murdering an Irish boy. In Blind Faith, Ernest Dickerson explores various kinds of bigotry, challenging assumptions about race, sexual identity and social injustice.

In conjunction with the opening night, the festival annually awards a prize in the name of the late cinematographer and director Nestor Almendros, who was a cherished friend of the festival. The award, which includes a cash prize of $5,000, goes to a deserving and courageous filmmaker in recognition of his or her contributions to human rights through film. The 1998 recipient of the Nestor Almendros Award was filmmaker Yuri Khashchevatsky from Belarus, for his daring satire An Ordinary President. Khashchevatsky shot this witty political pamphlet to document the dictatorship that President Alexander Lukaschenka, an admirer of Hitler, has imposed on his country. Immediately after this program aired on French television in 1997 Khashchevatsky was beaten unconscious by a group of unidentified men. To date the perpetrators have not been found. Despite this intimidating setback, the film has gone on to be screened around the world to much acclaim and Yuri Khashchevatsky continues toproduce films.

In 1995, in honor of Irene Diamond, a longtime board member and supporter of Human Rights Watch, the festival launched the Irene Diamond Lifetime Achievement Award, which is presented annually to a director whose lifes work illuminates an outstanding commitment to human rights and film. The 1998 award went to two-time Oscar-winning American director Barbara Kopple, for her leadership in introducing mainstream audiences to controversial human rights issues through film. Harlan County U.S.A. and American Dream, two outstanding documentaries on labor organizing struggles in the United States, are among the films through which Kopple has demonstrated her lifelong dedication to the cause of human rights.

Highlights of the 1998 festival included a retrospective of the work of one of Irans most acclaimed directors, Darius Mehrjui. Mehrjuis groundbreaking film The Cow signaled the emergence of the New Iranian Cinema in the late 1960s. Leila, Mehrjuis most recent film, exposes the contradictions faced by a happily married woman who cannot bear a child in contemporary Iran. Each year the festival holds a series of special film screenings for high school students and their teachers in an effort to encourage dialogue about human rights in the classroom. Daytime screenings are followed by discussions among the students, their teachers, visiting filmmakers, and Human Rights Watch staff. In 1998 the program included collaborative screenings with the New York African Film Festival, the Margaret Mead Film Festival, and the Center for Children and Technology.

In conjunction with the worldwide celebration of the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the festival co-curated an eighteen-hour documentary television series, Just Solutions: Campaigning for Human Rights, with Free Speech Television, a Colorado-based progressive cable network. Free Speech Television, which reaches seven million homes in the U.S., planned to air the series in December 1998 and January 1999. Four of the selected documentaries were to be highlighted and aired on Public Broadcasting System affiliates as well.

In an effort to reach the broadest possible constituency the festival expanded, in its entirety, to London in 1996 and also offers the Global Showcase, a touring program of selected films and videos to cities throughout the U.S. and abroad. The London festival will next run in February 1999 in a new partnership with the Ritzy Theater. Screenings will be held at both the Ritzy Theater in Brixton and the Phoenix Theater in North London with a gala opening night on February 25.

The Global Showcase package of film and video programs is presented annually in a growing number of sites and cities around the world. In 1998 the showcase traveled internationally to Minsk, Belarus; Moscow, Russia; and Buenos Aires, Argentina. The Global Showcase was also featured as part of the second annual Human Rights Film Festival held in Seoul, South Korea. The showcase was also presented in nine U.S. cities: Los Angeles, Columbus, Wilkes-Barre, Huntington, St. Louis, Portland, Baltimore, Austin, and Columbia. In previous years, the showcase has been featured in festivals in Bogot, Colombia; San Jos, Costa Rica; and Gent, Belgium.

Human Rights Watch/Film Watch, an association of the film festival and a group of internationally known filmmakers, was created to monitor and protect the human rights of filmmakers who are threatened or censored or otherwise abused for their expression through film. This year Film Watch focused on securing the release of Korean film festival organizer and human rights activist Suh Joon-sik, who was arrested in Seoul for publicly screening the documentary Red Hunt as part of the Korean Human Rights Film Festival. Red Hunt details government collusion in a 1948 massacre of suspected pro-communist sympathizers on Cheju island, off South Korea. Mr. Suh was arrested under the National Security Law, which penalizes anyone who benefits North Korea by allegedly praising, encouraging, propagandizing for, or siding with the activities of an anti-state organization, or importing or disseminating materials in support of such an organization. Film Watch spearheaded an extensive letter-writing campaign on Suh Jooh-siks behalf to the South Korean government and secured the support of three major world film festivalsSundance, Rotterdam and Berlinto come together and publicly demand his release. This effort was part of a letter-writing campaign from the filmmaking and festival communities worldwide. On February 5, 1998, Mr. Suh was released on bail, rarely an option for political prisoners. However, as of this writing the charges against him had not been dropped.
International Criminal Court

The treaty agreed upon in Rome on July 17 establishing a permanent International Criminal Court (ICC) marked an historic development in the enforcement of international humanitarian law and the advancement of human rights. The court was to be set up when sixty states ratified the treaty, with enormous potential to limit impunity for the most serious international crimes, provide justice for victims, and deter future atrocities. A coalition of more than sixty like-minded states from Africa, North and South America, Asia, western and eastern Europe, and Oceania drove the ICC negotiating process to its successful conclusion. The negotiators rejected a consent regime (additional approval by a state for prosecutions after it had ratified the treaty); they limited the possibilities for political interference by a permanent member of the Security Council; they established a prosecutor empowered to initiate investigations on his or her own; and they gave the court future authority over war crimes committed in both international and internal armed conflicts to reflect the reality of contemporary armed conflict. The coalitions efforts, reinforced by a unique partnership with nongovernmental organizations, represented a major achievement for the international human rights movement asa whole.

The Months Before the Rome Conference

The Rome Conference culminated a four-year high-stakes negotiation characterized by sharp polarization between the United States and a handful of other states on the one side and the diverse group of like-minded states committed to a court with an ex officio prosecutor and the competence to decide, without additional state consent, its jurisdiction over a case. The U.S. government publicly supported the establishment of an ICC and on procedural issues the U.S. delegation made important contributions. However, the Clinton Administration categorically opposed a court that could indict U.S. citizens without prior U.S. approval and its representatives insisted on ironclad guarantees to preclude that possibility regardless of the impact on the ICCs effectiveness and credibility.

Delegates met in New York for the years third and final Preparatory Committee session in early December, 1997. This negotiation was marked by sharp disagreement over the range of war crimes the court would be empowered to prosecute in internal armed conflicts. A determined group of delegates from smaller states successfully resisted efforts to approve a draft that omitted serious violations of the laws of war in these conflicts. The proposed agreement would have sealed the deletion of these crimes from the final text. Given the prevalence of noninternational warfare in the world, the courts relevance hinged on its ability to prosecute these war crimes. Similarly, there were sharp differences over the nature of a state partys obligation to comply with a court request for arrest and transfer of those accused or to provide other forms of cooperation with the court, such as surrendering documents. Progress was made in codifying the general obligation to comply fully and without delay. The like-minded, with strong urging from nongovernmental organizations, formulated six broad principles of unity and organized working groups on particularly contentious issues. The political highpoint of the December session, and an important overall turning point, was the announcement by the United Kingdoms delegation that London was breaking ranks with the other four permanent members of the Security Council to oppose a single permanent members ability to veto the investigation of any situation by the court. This break created new strategic possibilities that bore fruit at the Rome Diplomatic Conference.

There was an intense effort to generate a manageable draft text for the Diplomatic Conference in early 1998. Members of the Preparatory Committee Bureau met for two weeks in the Netherlands at the end of January to prepare an accessible draft text and facilitate the work of the March Preparatory Committee session. The meeting in Zutphen produced a greatly streamlined document which formed the basis of the March Preparatory Committees negotiations.

Nongovernmental organizations, intergovernmental organizations, and governments sponsored a series of regional conferences that became valuable training sessions on the substantive issues raised by the draft text. In early February, over sixty Senegalese lawyers, human rights activists, academics, and civil servants met for a two day conference in Dakar, Senegal. The session was convened by the African Network for the Defense of Human Rights (RADDHO) in conjunction with the Inter-African Union for Human Rights (UIDH). The participants discussed the need for and the essential features of the proposed ICC. They adopted a strong resolution calling for the establishment of an effective and independent court. The following day Senegals President Diop opened a conference in Dakar, cosponsored with the Brussels-based No Peace Without Justice, for representatives of twenty African governments. Ministers of justice, legal advisors, ambassadors, and representatives of domestic, regional, and international nongovernmental organizations attended. This discussion and the accompanying excitement about the court spurred awareness and commitment in the ICC negotiations among governments across Africa and in West Africa especially. The growing African interest in the ICC was reflected in the high level and quality of participation of African delegations at the March 1998 Preparatory Commission the following month.

Two weeks after the Dakar conference, in mid-February, representatives from twenty Latin American states and a number of domestic, regional, and international nongovernmental organizations met in Guatemala City to discuss the draft text. This meeting was convened jointly by the Human Rights Ombudsman of Guatemala and the Inter-American Institute for Human Rights (IIDH). The discussion generated sharp questions over the effect of a court that is unable to examine crimes committed in the past and the possibility of establishing a court independent of United States domination. This meeting, together with the imminence of the Diplomatic Conference spurred awareness and interest on the part of governments throughout the Americas.

Many delegates hoped the March-April Preparatory Committee, as the final session before the Rome conference, would significantly reduce the number of disputed provisions in the text. Unfortunately, however, rather than reducing options and consolidating text, delegates added new proposals and brackets. The session ended with heightened apprehension over the difficulties of completing the statute in the five weeks allotted in Rome.

The pace of regional meetings further intensified in the period between the end of the final Preparatory Committee session and the start of the conference. In early May, the Australian government convened a meeting in Canberra for states from throughout Asia. The German Foreign Ministry sponsored a session with representatives of twelve eastern and central European states. Simultaneously, Bonn had made demarches through its embassies in virtually every capital in the world. Representatives from a number of former Soviet Republics met for two days at the Central European University in Budapest. Nongovernmental organizations worked to reinforce the commitment and strengthen the organization of the like-minded states for the challenges in Rome.
The Rome Diplomatic Conference

The Diplomatic Conference began on June 15 amid great uncertainty. Given the large number of disputed provisions throughout the consolidated draft text, there was widespread concern that the delegates would be unable to finish the work in the five weeks allocated. It was clear that a court worth having would depend on the firm commitment of the like-minded states to a court withthe competence to decide its own cases, independence from Security Council control, an independent prosecutor, and authority over a list of relevant war crimes. It was also clear that commitment would be tested to the maximum by strong opposition from a few large powerful states seeking to reduce the effectiveness of the ICC and another small group wanting to derail the process entirely.

While they never functioned as a coherent group unified by a common plan, the like-minded group had a decisive impact at the conference. By announcing new additions to their ranks from Africa and eastern Europe during the first few weeks of the conference, they projected a sense of growth and initiative. The diverse nature of the group made clear that support for and opposition to an effective ICC could not be depicted as a North-South dispute. Most important, the like-minded groups existence served to generate and legitimize support for a strong ICC. The group was a rallying point for previously undecided states whose delegates were drawn to the need for an effective ICC. This magnet effect on a crucial bloc of swing states tilted the balance of forces at the crucial moments.

While the U.S. delegation played a constructive role on a number of issues, specifically relating to the rights of the defendants, criminal procedure, and the definition of crimes, the extent of U.S. inflexibility and heavy-handedness on the key political issues surprised many delegates and ultimately backfired. In the run-up to the conference, Washington had made clear its abhorrence of universal jurisdiction (the right of any state, regardless of a direct nexus to the crime, to prosecute accused perpetrators), which it identified with a proposal circulated by the German delegation at the March 1998 Preparatory Committee meeting. The depth of U.S. opposition was underscored in a key speech to the Diplomatic Conference threatening active opposition by the U.S. if any variant of universal jurisdiction was codified in the statute.

Washington engaged in tactics to exert maximum pressure. In early April officials from the Pentagon convened a meeting with military attaches from embassies in Washington to sound an alarm about the ICC. This had the dual effect of angering and raising concern among delegates. The fact that meetings occurred with the military representatives of governments that had made recent transitions to civilian rule, whose militaries were responsible for widespread violations in the past, was particularly galling. During the Rome Conference, Reuter reported that Secretary of Defense William Cohen had linked the codification of any aspect of universal jurisdiction, by then identified by the U.S. delegation as any jurisdictional proposal but its own, with the viability of U.S. troop deployment in Germany during a meeting with the German minister of defense. Similar linkages were reportedly made in meetings with South Korean officials.

Despite the resentment engendered by its tactics, the U.S. delegation succeeded in securing many concessions to its positions, including a very high degree of deference to national prosecutions, the reformulation of the definition of certain crimes, national security as a ground for refusal to cooperate with the court, superior orders as a defense, diminished powers of the independent prosecutor, and two opportunities for states to challenge and appeal the courts jurisdiction. In the final hours of the conference, the U.S. delegation sought a special exemption for nationals of non-state parties who were carrying out official duties. This was a proposal that even those states most concerned with mollifying United States hostility could not accept because it would have gutted the ICCs credibility. It was impossible to accommodate Washingtons demand that a government retain the option to block prosecution of its citizens at will and maintain the appearance of an effective court. In an effort to placate the United States, aspects of the proposal advanced by South Korea, which would have allowed a state with custody of a suspect or whose nationals were victims to empower ICC jurisdiction, were deleted to the detriment of the ultimate effectiveness of the court.

The U.S. delegation was not the only force playing an obstructive role during the conference. At the outset, the member states of the Arab League adopted a coordinated position that sought to limit the courts ability to prosecute war crimes and crimes against humanity committed in internal armed conflicts, opposed the inclusion of provisions concerning gender-related crimes and their effective prosecution, and insisted on the inclusion of the death penalty. Over the course of the conference their opposition diminished, in line with a global swing toward support for an effective ICC.

The member states of the European Union, with all but France a member of the like-minded group, played an essential role in the face of concerted pressure by the U.S. to compromise on basic principles. A number of eastern European states similarly joined the like-minded forces and provided solid, if less vocal, support. At the start of the Diplomatic Conference France announced its support for an ex officio prosecutor and a position similar to that of the United Kingdom on the Security Councils ability to control the courts docket. With the approval of a non-renewable seven-year period during which states could opt out of ICC jurisdiction over war crimes, France felt that its concerns were sufficiently addressed and decided to join the overwhelming majority of states supporting the treaty. This, coupled with the Russian Federations vote in support of the Statute of the ICC, created a three-two split among the five permanent members of the Security Council. Latin American states emerged more strongly as supporters of the court, and the Southern African Development Community countries remained true to the commitment they had expressed in the pre-Rome phase. Despite wavering under intense pressure to reverse their progressive stand by the end of the conference, west African states had also played a positive role.
The Treaty

The final treaty fell short of what many supporters of a strong court had hoped, but provided a solid basis for a court that could make a real and lasting difference. The ICC was to be able to investigate and prosecute genocide, crimes against humanity, and war crimes (whether committed in international or noninternational conflicts) where national authorities fail to do so. The prosecutor was, despite much controversy, to be able to take the initiative to investigate allegations ex officio upon receiving information from victims and other reliable sources, without requiring state or Security Council referral. Proposals to require the consent of state parties or of theSecurity Council before the ICC could proceed with an investigation, which would have crippled the court, were ultimately rejected. Similarly, proposals to give the five Security Council permanent members a veto over the courts docket did not prevail. The rights of suspects and accused persons were unequivocally guaranteed and appropriate provision made for the protection of witnesses and their role in ICC proceedings.

The treatys principal weakness lay in the jurisdictional regime which required, in the absence of a Security Council referral, that either the state of territory (in which the crime occurred) or nationality (of the accused) be a party or consent to its jurisdiction. While this requirement was not fatal to the court, it limited its potential effectiveness. A myriad of other provisions, which checked the exercise of prosecutorial discretion, restricted the prosecutors powers, and qualified the obligations of states were sufficient to appease states concerned about an all-powerful or overreaching prosecutor. The final balance, while not perfect, managed to garner almost universal support from states and the NGO community alike.

The closing moments of the Committee of the Whole and the subsequent Conference Plenary provided an intense and highly emotional conclusion. Hundreds of delegates were on their feet, clapping rhythmically when first the Indian and then the U.S. amendments, which would have reopened the approved package and jeopardized the possibility of concluding the conference, were voted down in no action motions in the Committee of the Whole. In the plenary a little later pandemonium erupted when the tally in the final vote, called for by the U.S., was tabulated: 120 in favor, seven against and twenty-one abstaining. Delegates who had poured themselves into this effort for nearly four years were hugging, crying, and applauding, relieved that the court they believed in was to become a reality.

The Role of NGOs
The nongovernmental Coalition for the International Criminal court (CICC) played an extraordinary role, coordinating the 200 plus nongovernmental organizations that attended the conference. Thematic caucuses, such the womens and childrens caucuses, played a vital role, among other things in ensuring that gender crimes and crimes against children were appropriately addressed in the treaty and that adequate provision was made for victim and witness protection. Every region was represented and regional caucuses, in particular the Three Continents Alliance of Latin American, African, and Asian NGO representatives, developed and had a positive influence.

Prior to and throughout the conference, NGOs developed substantive positions and strategic assessments that they shared with delegations. Position papers were well received and quoted in open debate. NGOs also had a great deal of access to delegations during the conference; while not allowed into the closed informal negotiating sessions, it was possible to do a tremendous amount of advocacy around these sessions. This positive role was noted and reinforced by numerous speakersfrom Kofi Annan to foreign ministers. The press likened NGO influence to that of a major government and, in general, the NGOs were seen as an important contributing force in the negotiations. The extent of partnering with governments and the degree of consultation with the U.N. Secretariat provided a model for future multilateral negotiations. In the critical moments, the major international human rights organizations met almost as one, enabling the human rights community to analyze developments and maximize impact with key delegations. The Statute was in part a reflection of the growing strength of an international human rights movement which conducted itself with coordination and skill.

The Road Ahead
The overwhelming support for the treaty demonstrated in the final conference vote was greatly encouraging. Special efforts were, however, necessary to maintain the momentum generated by the conferences dramatic conclusion and to ensure that the treaty led to the establishment of an effective ICC with the most universal support possible, as quickly as possible. The 1998 session of the General Assembly debated a resolution to convene the Preparatory Commission to deal with matters such as the courts Rules of Evidence and Procedure. As this work would influence ratification in certain states, it was critically important to begin and schedule the completion of the Preparatory Commission. The struggle continued over the mandate of the Preparatory Commission enumerated by the treatys Final Act. At the General Assemblys Sixth Committee session in October the U.S. delegation circulated language calling for a much broader mandate that would reopen discussion on the most contentious issues settled in the final moments of the Rome Conference. Washington pressed hard for reconsideration of its concerns. This agenda could have a seriously weakening and delaying effect on the ratification effort.

While it was appropriate that Washington participate in the ongoing work of the Preparatory Commission, the United States effort to revise the treaty outside of its amendment procedures, or to pressure others states not to sign or ratify the treaty, required firm opposition. A coordinated, multilateral effort in support of the courtinvolving an expanded like-minded group, regional coordination, and NGO activismwas essential to ensure early and widespread ratification and the treatys entry into force. A regional approach would not only enhance ratification but also defuse potential pressure on any one government.

The experience leading up to and during the Rome conference indicated that reaching the threshold of sixty ratifications and going beyond was an achievable objective. The diverse range of states which, within three months of the conclusion of the treaty conference, had already expressed their intention to ratify through signatureincluding Angola, Chile, France, Georgia, Honduras, the Netherlands, Uganda, Zimbabweprovided a positive launching point for a successful campaign for urgent global ratification. The people at greatest risk from the crimes, whose fate Human Rights Watch had documented in all too many countries, needed this court to be operational and effective without further delay.

Relevant Human Rights Watch report:
Justice in the Balance: Recommendations for an Independent and Effective International Criminal Court, 6/98
Lesbian And Gay Rights


Discrimination against gays and lesbians continued in countries throughout the world in 1998, often resulting in the arrest and imprisonment of homosexuals on charges relating directly or indirectly to their sexual orientation. In several cases, charges of sodomy were employed to discredit a political figure or organization. It is irrelevant whether such charges are real or fabricated: to persecute or discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation is a violation of human rights.

In a positive development, the 1996 South African constitution specifically outlawed discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation, the only constitution in the world to do so, according to South African jurists. On October 8, 1998, the Constitutional Court confirmed a May High Court ruling that criminalization of sodomy was unconstitutional and ordered the removal of such provisions from the statute books. Although discrimination against gays and lesbians continued in practice, and many discriminatory laws remained, activists in South Africa successfully challenged discriminatory laws in the courts. The Department of Home Affairs continued to deny rights of residence to foreign same-sex partners of South African couples, but this was challenged in court, and the government was reported to be planning legislation to legalize same-sex marriages, which would give gay couples the same legal rights as heterosexual ones, including equal rights under immigration law.

International human rights bodies have also declared discrimination and violence based on sexual orientation or identity to violate human rights. The European Court on Human Rights has repeatedly cited the right to privacy in condemning laws criminalizing same-sex acts between consenting adults. The U.N. Human Rights Committee considers sexual orientation to be protected from discrimination under international law.

According to the International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission (IGLHRC), in 1998 more than eighty-five countries maintained laws that criminalize sexual activity between consenting adults of the same sex. In some countries the statutes regulated specific sexual acts regardless of the gender of the people involved, whereas other countries maintained laws that prohibit a wide range of same-sex practices. Many laws are broad in scope, dealing with unnatural acts, immoral acts, or acts causing public scandal. In some countries general laws against loitering or hooliganism are used to arrest or persecute homosexuals. In some countries, laws discriminating against homosexuals are not enforced: some of the former Soviet republics, for example, which had provisions in their penal codes outlawing homosexual activity, removed these provisions without debate when the penal codes were revised.

In Romania, the only country in Western Europe that actively punishes homosexuality, Article 200 of the penal code, though hotly debated, remained on the books: paragraphs 1 and 5 of the article each provide for punishment of one to five years of imprisonment: under paragraph 1, for behavior that causes public scandal; under paragraph 5, for any action that might be construed as encouraging or inciting homosexual behavior.

In 1998 Human Rights Watch worked to improve the situation of gays and lesbians in Romania. A report on sexual orientation and criminal law in Romania, published jointly by Human Right Watch and IGLHRC, was released in January at a press conference in Bucharest by representatives of both organizations. The representatives met with many nongovernmental organizations and with government officials, including President Constantinescu, who promised to release three or four homosexuals currently serving time for nonviolent activities. In May Mariana Cetiner, a lesbian who was sentenced to three years in prison for propositioning another woman, was released, but no further releases were confirmed. The president also expressed his opposition to Article 200 of the penal code, but his attitude, and pressure from the Council of Europe, of which Romania is now a member, were not enough to convince the Romanian parliament to repeal Article 200. Indeed, in June 1998, almost immediately after the Council of Europe voted to stop monitoring human rights abuses in Romania, the Romanian parliament voted against any amendments to Article 200.

Gays and lesbians can be legally dismissed from their jobs because of their sexual orientation in forty states of the United States. The Employment Non-Discrimination Act, a bill that would protect workers in every state from discrimination based on sexual orientation, had not been acted on by the U.S. Congress at the time of this writing. In May 1998, however, President Clinton signed an executive order uniformly protecting federal workers from discrimination based on sexual orientation, and the House of Representatives voted to uphold the order in August. The Clinton administration also called for an expansion of the definition of hate crimes in the federal hate-crime statute to include violence based on sexual orientation. Forty states in the U.S. have passed hate-crime laws, but only eleven specifically cover anti-gay hate crimes. Wyoming is one of ten states that do not have hate-crime laws. In October, twenty-one-year-old Matthew Shepard, an openly gay freshman at the University of Wyoming, was tortured and murdered by two men who picked him up in a bar; despite the extreme brutality of the crime, police initially claimed the motive was robbery.

Gays and lesbians serving in the U.S. military continued to face discrimination under the dont ask, dont tell policy whichwas violated hundreds of times in 1998 by military personnel who continued to question servicemembers and then to discharge them for their sexual orientation. According to the New York Times , a Defense Department draft report revealed that the number of homosexuals being forced out of the military was 67 percent higher than when the policy was adopted in 1993. The Times claimed that the Defense Department was resistant to examining the ... obvious possibility, which is that base and unit commanders are subverting a policy that was intended to stop witch hunts....

Gay educators in the United States faced discrimination and job dismissals if school officials, parents, or students learned that a teacher was gay. In Salt Lake City, Utah, a high-school student asked a teacher whether she was a lesbian, and the teacher answered affirmatively. She was instructed not to speak about her personal life in school or elsewhere and was dismissed from her volleyball coaching job. She filed a federal lawsuit alleging an infringement upon her free speech rights, and the suit was still pending at the time of this writing. In San Leandro, California, a heterosexual high-school teacher spoke out in favor of the students gay-straight alliance group. In response to his support for the group, parents tried to have him dismissed, and an official reprimand was placed in his file. The teacher explained that his main goal in supporting the group was to create a safe environment for gay and lesbian students who suffered from harassment in school.

Gay male inmates in U.S. prisons gave testimonies to Human Rights Watch indicating that they were frequently targeted for rape by other prisoners and that prison officials were indifferent to such abuse or in some instances actually encouraged it. Gay male prisoners reported verbal harassment by openly homophobic guards.

Gay and transsexual prisoners in Brazil faced particularly degrading and discriminatory treatment in the hierarchical society of the mens prisons, according to a Human Rights Watch report. Many were confined in Sao Paulos Casa de Detencao, most of them in a group of cells in Pavilion Five. A despised minority, they were forced by other inmates to remain in their cells on visiting days and to do womens work for the other prisoners, such as washing their clothes and serving as sex slaves. Prison officials did nothing to intervene.

Police violence against and detention of gay and lesbians in Argentina continued in 1998, and Human Rights Watch representatives met with Argentinian government officials in October to discuss such abuses. According to a Human Rights Watch report, released in Buenos Aires in October, homosexuals were subjected to frequent arbitrary detentions, followed by police abuses that included extortion, verbal and physical violence, torture, inhuman and degrading detention conditions, robbery, compulsory HIV testing, sexual harassment and rape, false criminal accusations and death threats. Police in Argentina conducted razzias (raids) against members of homosexual communities, raiding bars, discos, and other meetings places and often detaining large groups at a time. Individuals were searched and detained for no apparent reason, according to the discretion of the police conducting the raid. Some transgender women in Mendoza, Argentina, were arrested and assaulted by police in 1998 and kept in basement cells with inadequate ventilation where they were sexually assaulted and denied access to medical treatment.

In Malaysia, the arrest in September of the former deputy prime minister, Anwar Ibrahim, caused an international outcry, especially when evidence and testimony indicated that he had been beaten by police, denied sleep, and subjected to threats and psychological abuse. Authorities planned to try Mr. Anwar for sodomy, which is illegal under Malaysian law. Although sodomy is a bailable offense, at the time of this writing he was being detained under the Internal Security Act which allows a person to be held indefinitely without charges or trial. Human Rights Watch called for an independent investigation into the treatment of Mr. Anwar, and, among other things, protested that laws criminalizing consensual private sexual acts between adults are a flagrant violation of human rights protections. Observers believed that Mr. Anwar was being punished for his increasingly critical comments about official corruption, cronyism, and Prime Minister Mahathirs management of the national economy. Human Rights Watch planned to send observers to his trial.

In Tunisia, similar tactics were used against the pre-eminent independent womens organization, the Tunisian Association of Democratic Women (ATFD). The organization was attacked in the government-influenced al-Hadath on March 11 in an article hinting that it was a vehicle for promoting lesbian sex.

President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe had been especially outspoken in recent years in vilifying homosexuals and blaming them for his countrys ills. According to Mugabe, Homosexuals have no rights whatsoever. He was quoted as having said, If pigs and dogs dont do it, why must human beings? At this writing, Mugabe was trying to block a local gay organization from joining a human rights session at the World Council of Churches meeting scheduled for December 1998 in Harare.

Keith Goddard, a Zimbabwean gay activist, was arraigned in June 1998 on sodomy charges after he complained to police about an attempt to blackmail him. At this writing, he was free, pending trial. Activists believed his arrest was part of Mugabes campaign against the organization, Gays and Lesbians of Zimbabwe (GALZ), of which Goddard was the programs manager. As of this writing, judgment was indefinitely postponed by the judge in the trial of Zimbabwes former president, Canaan Banana, on eleven charges of sodomy, attempted sodomy, and illegal assault. Banana, who was president from 1980 to 1987, had pleaded not guilty to all charges.

In neighboring Zambia, the Zambia Independent Monitoring Team (ZIMT), a nongovernmental human rights organization, began campaigning for gay and lesbian rights and gave its support to a new gay and lesbian association, despite hostile press coverage and threats from the government. The new group, which calls itself the Lesbians, Gays and Transgender Persons Association, appliedfor registration, which provoked Zambias Vice-President Christon Tembo to declare that anyone who promotes homosexual practices after today will be arrested. In October, President Frederick Chiluba denounced ZIMT for supporting homosexuality, which he called unbiblical and against human nature. Former president Kenneth Kaunda, however, suggested that homosexuality was here to stay and that we need time to examine it carefully.

Relevant Human Rights Watch report:
Romania -- Public Scandals: Sexual Orientation & Criminal Law, 1/98
Prisons

The number of people incarcerated in prisons, jails, and other places of detention around the world continued to rise during 1998, with few countries reporting decreases in their inmate populations. The resulting high levels of overcrowdingsince rarely did new construction keep pace with the growth in inmate numbersencouraged a range of chronic abuses. In some countries, mass killings, large-scale prisoner protests, or scathing official reports on prison deficiencies drew media attention to these abuses. More commonly, however, human rights violations against prisoners drew little public notice. Particularly in countries plagued by high rates of violent crime, too often reports of violence against prisoners, inhuman prison conditions, and egregious levels of overcrowding met with apathy and indifference. With the public primarily concerned about keeping prisoners locked up rather than about the conditions in which prisoners were confined, little progress was made toward remedying these problems.

In many countries, the publics tendency to ignore prison abuses was reinforced by high levels of official secrecy. By barring human rights groups, journalists, and other outside observers nearly all access to their penal facilities, prison officials sought to keep even egregious abuses hidden from public view. In Brazil, for example, prison authorities in the northeast barred researchers from both Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International from interviewing prisoners who had witnessed a mass killing. Several countries, moreover, refused to disclose the most basic facts about their prisonsto the extent of keeping inmate numbers secretwhile prohibiting all outside scrutiny. In the most extreme cases, including China and Cuba, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) was barred from providing basic humanitarian relief to prisoners. In September, the ICRC reported difficulties in obtaining access to detainees held by the Taliban in Afghanistan.
Conditions of Confinement

Unchecked outbursts of violence continued to violate prisoners right to life. In Colombia, an April riot at La Picota prison left fifteen inmates dead. The following month, at least twenty-two inmates were killed in a gang clash at the Professor Barreto Campelo prison in Pernambuco, Brazil. The failure of prison authorities to take reasonable measures to prevent or control such outbreaks violated international human rights norms.

Inadequate supervision by guards, easy access to weapons and drugs, failure to separate different categories of prisoners, and fierce competition for basic necessities encouraged inmate-on-inmate abuses in many penal facilities. Inmates at the bottom of the prison hierarchy frequently fell victim to extortion, intimidation, rape, and other forms of violence. In extreme casesas in certain Venezuelan prisons, with one guard for every 150 prisoners and an underground trade in dangerous weaponsprisoners killed other prisoners with impunity. Among the weapons discovered in a late September series of searches of Caracas prisons, for example, were 115 firearms, three fragmentation grenades, and six molotov cocktails. Murders, sometimes of more than one inmate, occurred with almost motonous regularity in the prisons of Venezuela. Six inmates were killed in a February incident there; four were killed in a March incident; another four were killed in an April incident; seven were killed in a May incident, and five were killed in a July incident.

Prison death rates were often far higher than corresponding numbers from outside the prison context, and in some instances were shockingly high. A human rights organization in Burundi reported in May, for example, that some 10 percent of inmates in Muyinga and Ngozi prisons had died during the first four months of the year. While violence was a factor in some penal facilities, diseaseoften the predictable result of severe overcrowding, malnutrition, unhygienic conditions, and lack of medical careremained the most common cause of death in prison. Food shortages in Zambian prisons in July, for example, combined with terrible overcrowding, created ideal conditions for the spread of communicable diseases such as tuberculosis.

Tuberculosis, in particular, continued to ravage prison populations around the world. According to Indias National Human Rights Commission, 70 percent of the countrys inmate deaths were attributable to the disease. The spread of TB was especially worrisome in Russia, in light of the countrys enormous prison population and the increasing prevalence of multi-drug resistant (MDR) strains of the disease. One of out every hundred inmates was reported to have active tuberculosis, with some 12 percent of sick inmates being affected by MDR strains, constituting a serious threat to public health. The epidemic of MDR strains was not confined to Russia but instead swept through prisons all over the former Soviet Union. In March, the ICRC announced that among the prisons of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) the incidence of this serious infectious disease was five to fifty times greater than their national averages.

The HIV/AIDS epidemic also struck prison populations with particular severity, with penal facilities around the world reporting grossly disproportionate rates of HIV infection and of confirmed AIDS cases. In Brazil, for example, a late 1997 study concluded that some 20 percent of the countrys inmate population was HIV-positive. Because the onset of AIDS left prisoners more vulnerableto tuberculosis, the two diseases often occurred together. To raise awareness of the epidemic and of how to respond to it in an effective way, the first-ever International Conference on HIV/AIDS in African Prisons was held in Senegal in February; prison authorities and nongovernmental organizations from around the continent attended.

Physical abuse by guards remained another chronic problem. Some countries continued to permit corporal punishment and the routine use of leg irons, fetters, shackles, and chains. The heavy bar fetters used in Pakistani prisons, for example, turned simple movements such as walking into painful ordeals. In many prison systems, unwarranted beatings were so common as to be an integral part of prison life. Women prisoners were particularly vulnerable to custodial sexual abuse ( see section on Women's Human Rights.) In the aftermath of prison riots or escapes, physical abuse was especially predictable, and typically much more severe. After a December 1997 rebellion in a northeastern Brazilian prison, for example, seven of twenty-three escaping prisoners were killed by military police, at least two of them having been deliberately executed.

Extortion by prison staff, or its less aggressive corollary, guard corruption, was common in prisons around the world. Given the substantial power that guards exercised over inmates, these problems were predictable, but the low salaries that guards were generally paid severely aggravated the situation. Frequently, therefore, inmates resorted to bribes in exchange for contraband or special treatment. Powerful inmates in some facilities in Colombia, India, and Mexico, among others, enjoyed cellular phones, rich diets, and comfortable lodgings. Such advantages were often matched by the disadvantages accruing to their less fortunate brethren, who were, for example, provided poorer quality food and more cramped living conditions than they would otherwise have received.

Overcrowdingprevalent in almost every country for which information was availablewas at the root of many of the worst abuses. In Honduras, for example, some 10,000 inmates were squeezed into prisons whose total capacity was reported to be 3,800. The problem was often most severe in smaller pretrial detention facilities, where, in many countries, inmates were packed together with no space to stretch or move around. In some of Rwandas cachots (local lockups), where a large proportion of the countrys approximately 130,000 detainees were held, overcrowding was so acute as to be life-threatening. In Rwanda, as in many other countries, inmates suffered long stays in these dreadful conditions. Human Rights Watch visited jammed police lockups in So Paulo, Brazil, designed for extremely short periods of detention, where inmates had been held for up to six years.

Another common problem was governments continued reliance on old, antiquated, and physically decaying prison facilities. Nineteenth-century prisons needing constant upkeep remained in use in a number of countries, including the United States, Mexico, Russia, and the United Kingdom, although even many modern facilities were in severe disrepair due to lack of maintenance. Notably, some prisons lacked a functional system of plumbing, leaving prisoners to slop out their cells, that is, to defecate in buckets that they periodically emptied.

A different set of concerns was raised by the spread of ultra-modern super-maximum security prisons. Originally prevalent in the United States, where politicians and state corrections authorities persisted in their politically popular quest for more austere prison conditions, the supermax model was increasingly copied in other countries in 1998. Prisoners confined in such facilities spent an average of twenty-three hours a day in their cells, enduring extreme social isolation, enforced idleness, and extraordinarily limited recreational and educational opportunities. While prison authorities defended the use of super-maximum security facilities by asserting that they held only the most dangerous, disruptive, or escape-prone inmates, few safeguards existed to prevent other prisoners from being arbitrarily or discriminatorily transferred to such facilities. In Britain, recognizing these concerns, the High Court agreed to hear a legal challenge to the selection procedures employed in sending prisoners to these high-security units. In South Africa, similarly, the harsh conditions and malleable transfer criteria of the notorious C-Max prison received critical scrutiny from human rights advocates.

Fiscal constraints and competing budget priorities were to blame for prison deficiencies in some countries, but, as the supermax example suggests, harsh prison conditions were sometimes purposefully imposed. In Peru, notably, confinement at the recently constructed Challapalca prison, located at more than 14,000 feet above sea level, needlessly endangered inmates health.

Conditions in many prisons were, in short, so deficient as to constitute cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment, violating Article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Their specific failings could also be enumerated under the more detailed provisions of the U.N. Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. A widely known set of prison standards, the Standard Minimum Rules describe the minimum conditions which are accepted as suitable by the United Nations. Although the Standard Minimum Rules have been integrated into the prison laws and regulations of many countries, few if any prison systems observed all of their prescriptions in practice.

Aging penal facilities were, in some countries, matched by old and outdated prison laws. In India as well as Trinidad and Tobago, for example, the prisons continued to be administered under nineteenth-century legal rules originally established by colonial governments. Such antiquated prison rules frequently embodied obsolete notions of the way in which prisoners ought to be treated. Japans prison law exemplified this problem. Adopted in 1908, the law contained little acknowledgment of prisoners claim to rights.
Unsentenced Prisoners

Even those unsympathetic to convicted criminals and entirely skeptical of the idea of rehabilitation had reason to be concerned about the inhumane treatment of prisoners. Although comprehensive figures were impossible to obtain, the available statistics showed that an impressive numbers of the worlds prisoners had not been convicted of any crime, but were instead being preventively detained at some stage of the trial process. In countries as varied as Bangladesh, Burundi, Chad, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, India, Mali, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Rwanda, Uganda, and Venezuela, unsentenced prisoners made up the majority of the prison population. Indeed, some 90 percent of Honduran, Paraguayan, and Uruguayan inmates were unsentenced.

Worse, such detainees were in many instances held for years before being judged not guilty of the crime with which they werecharged. In Venezuela, for example, the Ministry of Justice reported in May that the prison system held 1,531 unsentenced inmates who had each spent more than three years in confinement. In March, the Ugandan Human Rights Commission documented the cases of three prisoners preventively detained since 1991 without trial. Such prisoners were, in some countries, even incarcerated for periods longer than the sentences they would have served had they been found guilty of the crime for which they were held. In August, for example, an Indian newspaper ran a story tracing the case histories of several such inmates, including one who had spent eight years detained on charges of forging bail applications, an offense punishable by a maximum seven-year sentence.

With few means to draw public attention to violations of their rights, prisoners around the world frequently resorted to hunger strikes, self-mutilation, rioting, and other forms of protest. In Ecuador, a number of prisoners sewed their lips together in September to call attention to the inefficiency of the countrys justice system, claiming that they had spent more than a year in prison awaiting trial. A similar protest broke out in Kenyas Shimo la Tewa prison in April as prisoners, some of whom had been held from two to five years awaiting trial, called a hunger strike to denounce the courts chronic delays. That same month, hundreds of inmates in Roumieh prison in Lebanon rioted, protesting what they claimed were terrible conditions, torture by guardsincluding the intentional burning of one inmateand a stalled justice system that left some prisoners detained for up to five years without trial. Other outbreaks of prison unrest were reported in Albania, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Honduras, Hong Kong, Mexico, New Zealand, Pakistan, Peru, Turkey, and Venezuela.
Defending Prisoners Human Rights

By struggling against the natural tendency toward secrecy and silence on prison abuses, the efforts of numerous local human rights groups around the worldwho fought to obtain access to prisons, monitored prison conditions, and publicized the abuses they foundwere critical in 1998, as in the past. In Egypt, both the Human Rights Center for the Assistance of Prisoners and the Egyptian Organization of Human Rights released reports describing inmate deaths resulting from mistreatment and the denial of medical care. Exemplifying the dangers inherent in such vigorous advocacy, Abbas Amir-Entezam, Irans former deputy prime minister who was once himself incarcerated, faced defamation charges in September for his statements exposing that countrys harsh prison conditions.

In some countries, moreover, government human rights ombudspersons, parliamentary commissions, and other official monitors helped call attention to abuses. In the United Kingdom, notably, the chief inspector of prisons continued his vigorous investigations of the countrys penal facilities, despite reported pressure from prison authorities to tone down his criticisms. Similarly, Argentinas prison ombudsman monitored and reported on prison abuses in the countrys federal prisons, visiting numerous facilities. In May, the Inspectorate of Prisons in Malawi released a forceful report on prison abuses, revealing the prisons high death rate, shocking levels of overcrowding, and appalling lack of medical care.

At the regional level as well, prison monitoring mechanisms were active. The European Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) continued its important work, inspecting the penal institutions of some eleven countries in 1998, including those of Andorra, Finland, Iceland, Ireland, Sweden, Macedonia, and the Ukraine. In May, Russia, which confined one of the worlds largest prisoner populations, ratified the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the treaty authorizing the CPTs monitoring. As of September 1998, a total of forty countries were party to the convention.

In Africa, the special rapporteur on prisons and conditions of detention, an adjunct to the African Commission on Human and Peoples Rights, completed his second year. In November 1997, he delivered a report on prison conditions in Mali, the fruit of an August mission to the country. Among his most notable findings, the special rapporteur documented long terms of pretrial detentionlasting up to six years in some caseswidespread mixing of juvenile and adult prisoners, the use of chains and leg irons, severe beatings of prisoners, dilapidated prison facilities, and custodial sexual misconduct. His 1998 visits included prisons in Mozambique and Madagascar.
U.N. Monitoring Efforts

The vast scale and chronic nature of the human rights violations in the worlds prisons have long been of concern to the United Nations, as demonstrated by the 1955 promulgation of the U.N. Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. Indeed, the international communitys failure to adopt these standards in practice, even while it has embraced them in theory, has inspired the United Nations most recent prisons effort.

For the past several years, a U.N. working group has been hammering out a draft treaty that would establish a U.N. subcommittee authorized to make regular and ad hoc visits to places of detention in states party to the treaty, including prisons, jails, and police lockups. As described in the draft treatyconceived as an optional protocol to the Convention Against Torturethe basic goal of the subcommittee would be to prevent torture and other ill-treatment. Accordingly, based on the information obtained during its periodic and ad hoc visits, the subcommittee would make detailed recommendations to state authorities regarding necessary improvements to their detention facilities, and the authorities would be expected to implement these recommendations.

Although the proposed monitoring mechanism had great promise, it also had serious potential flaws. Notable among them was the possibility that the subcommittee could be entirely barred from reporting publicly on abuses it discovers, pursuant to a strict rule of confidentiality that some countries have advocated. Although the draft treaty favored cooperation between governments and the subcommittee as a means of instituting remedial measures, it must, if it is to create an effective mechanism, leave open the possibility of public reporting, at least in situations where governments stubbornly refuse to cooperate with the subcommittee or to implement its recommendations.

In what turned out to be the least productive set of meetings of a nearly decade-long drafting process, the working group openedits seventh two-week session in September 1998. Although most countries active in the deliberationsincluding Costa Rica, South Africa, Switzerland, Chile, the Netherlands, Sweden, Denmark, and Australiaclearly favored establishing a strong and workable mechanism, a few recalcitrant states such as the United States and Cuba succeeded in hindering the working groups progress toward this goal. Because the proceedings were conducted on a consensus basis, rather than by simple majority vote, a small minority of countries were able to have an exaggerated impact on the negotiations. At the end of the session, not only had little progress been made toward finalizing the draft text, but the state representatives in attendance were unable even to agree upon a final report of their deliberations.

Other U.N. bodies aggressively pressed countries to improve their prison conditions. During its sixty-third session, the U.N. Human Rights Committee expressed concern over deficient prison conditions in Italy and Tanzania, two countries whose implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights was under periodic review. With regard to Ecuador, the committee was troubled by the long periods of pretrial detention endured by many criminal suspects, caused by the justice systems chronic delays.

For its part, the U.N. Commission on Human Rights adopted a resolution on Nigeria in April, citing the countrys life-threatening prison conditions and calling on the government to ensure that the treatment of prisoners and their conditions of detention are in accordance with recognized international standards.

Relevant Human Rights Watch reports:
Castigados sin condena: condiciones en las prisiones de Venezuela , 5/98 (updated Spanish-language edition, Punishment without Trial: Prison Conditions in Venezuela , 3/97)
Nowhere to Hide: Retaliation Against Women in Michigan State Prisons , 9/98
Losing the Vote: The Impact of Felony Disenfranchisement Laws in the United States , 10/98
Behind Bars in Brazil , 12/98
Refugees, Displaced Persons, And Asylum Seekers

The link between forced displacement and human rights is a crucial one. Human rights violations are a principal root cause of forcible displacement; the human rights of the displacedasylum seekers, refugees and internally displaced persons alikeare frequently violated and threatened while they are displaced; and respect for fundamental human rights is a key factor in the search for a durable solution to any situation of displacement.

By the end of 1997 there were an estimated 13.6 million refugees and asylum seekers worldwide and an estimated seventeen million internally displaced persons. While the number of refugees and asylum seekers had dropped from 14.5 million in 1996, the number of internally displaced persons had grown significantly.

This illustrated several inter-connected global trends which continued in 1998. Violent internal conflicts in countries such as Colombia, Sierra Leone, and Kosovo, in which civilians were targeted and forced displacement was a deliberate tactic of warfare, led to an ever-growing number of internally displaced persons. At the same time, countries of asylum throughout the world were becoming increasingly reluctant to host refugee populations. Policies of containment and deterrence had become the norm, and refugees were increasingly barred entry and returned to countries where their lives and liberty were at risk, in clear violation of the international principle of non-refoulement. In western Europe and North America, a barrage of restrictive measures made it ever more difficult for asylum seekers to find refuge, while from Malaysia, Tanzania, and a score of other countries, refugees were forcibly returned to countries where their lives were in danger and their human rights could not be guaranteed. Across the globe, states were more preoccupied with protecting themselves against refugees than providing protection to them.
Furthermore, 1998 witnessed the continuation of an alarming trend away from an equitable and global sharing of responsibility for the world refugee crisis. Through increasingly elaborate strategies the wealthy, industrialized states of the north were shifting the burden back onto those states least able to bear the brunt, and failing to take equal responsibility for what remained a global problem. The desire of west European states to contain potential refugee flows from Kosovo, Turkey, and northern Iraq through in-country and regional strategies, and the very slow international response to the major refugee crises in west Africa (Guinea, Liberia, and Guinea Bissau), were but a few examples of failures in international responsibility sharing in 1998. As a result of these trends, people were less likely to be able to find lasting refuge from violence, persecution and discrimination. In the year of the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, many states appeared to have forgotten that the right to seek and enjoy in other countries asylum from persecution is a fundamental and universal human right and one which cannot be bargained away.

Although both the human rights and humanitarian sectors in the past have tended to work in parallel, without often acting on the fundamental connection between refugee protection and human rights, there has been a growing awareness in recent years of the critical role that human rights monitoring can play in promoting the rights of refugees, asylum seekers, and the displacedespecially with regard to refugee protection, which has come under increasing threat in countries across the world.
Human Rights Watch monitors the entire spectrum of the refugee experience: from the human rights violations that cause refugee flows; to conditions during flight and reception in the country of asylum; to protection of refugees human rights in countries of asylum; to the search for a durable solution and conditions of return; and finally, to post-return human rights monitoring, rehabilitation, and reintegration.
Responsibility Sharing

The vast majority of the worlds refugees continued in 1998 to seek haven in the poorest states. Countries in the developing world have long offered refuge to thousands of people who flee en masse from persecution, civil conflict, violence, discrimination, and social and economic hardships. Sadly, this tradition of generosity has been changing over recent years, as countries in the developed and developing world alike close their doors to those seeking asylum. This trend has been led largely by the industrialized states of the north, which in proportional terms host very few of the worlds refugees.

Western Europe
Throughout 1998 western European states demonstrated a growing reluctance to provide refuge to asylum seekers. Governments favored in-country strategies such as safe havens, preventive protection and internal flight alternatives as methods to contain and stem refugee flows from the Balkans, the Middle East and elsewhere. Safe third country and safe country of origin policies designed to limit states obligations to asylum seekers continued to be applied. Carrier sanctions, visa restrictions, and widespread use of often lengthy detention were used as deterrent strategies and served to criminalize the act of seeking asylum. Accelerated procedures, limited rights of appeal, and restrictive interpretations of the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol continued to deprive asylum seekers of international protection.

Moreover, the trends in European asylum policy throughout 1998 suggested states growing unwillingness to adhere to their obligations under the 1951 convention. A demonstration of this attitude was the response of E.U. states to the arrival of several thousand Turkish and Iraqi Kurds in Italy in January. Panic at what was perceived as a mass influx prompted the E.U. to adopt an E.U. Action Plan on the Influx of Migrants from Iraq and the Neighboring Region of which Human Rights Watch was heavily critical ( see section on Asylum Policy in Western Europe).
Human Rights Watch has also been very concerned at the trend away from providing full refugee status towards variants of temporary protection. Temporary protection was always intended to be an exceptional measure to deal with mass influxes of refugees, as occurred during the crisis in the former Yugoslavia from 1992 onwards. Government practice and policy debates in 1998 suggested, however, that temporary protection was becoming the norm. In its role as presidency of the E.U., the Austrian government proposed introducing a new temporary protection regime and solidarity scheme for the reception of refugees in Europe which would supplement, amend, or replace the existing 1951convention, arguing that the convention was no longer applicable to most asylum seekers coming to Europe. This shift towards temporary protection may ultimately result in fewer rights for refugees, absolve governments of many of their international obligations, and shift the burden back to poorer developing countries which are least equipped to deal with large population influxes.

Africa
Countries in Africa continued to offer asylum to some three million refugees in 1998. In west Africa the states of Guinea and Liberia provided refuge to over a quarter-million new refugees fleeing the atrocities committed following a resurgence of violence in Sierra Leone starting in February. In 1998 Guinea proved a generous host to the largest number of refugees in Africaa total of 430,000. In some parts of Guinea the refugee population actually outnumbered the host areas inhabitants. Despite the enormous burden borne by these countries, however, the international communitywith the exception of the U.S. and the E.U.was slow to respond. By the end of 1998 urgently needed funds and logistical support were still not forthcoming. Some camps in Guinea had been cut off from assistance for several months, and malnutrition and mortality rates remained high. Lack of funds and resources to move camps away from precarious positions on the border with Sierra Leone meant that the security and protection of the refugees was jeopardized.

Elsewhere, countries with a generous record of providing asylum started to shut their doors. Tanzania, for example, which has offered generous and extended asylum to several million refugees over the past thirty years, started to tighten its asylum policies. Concerned about the heavy burden that large refugee populations placed on already over-taxed resources, the severe environmental degradation caused by refugee camps, and the effects of criminal and military elements amongst the refugees on local and national security, Tanzania closed its borders and engaged in roundups and expulsions of refugees living in its territory. At the beginning of 1997 Tanzania forcibly returned 126 Burundian refugees following the outbreak of violence at a refugee camp. Of these refugees, 124 were killed by the Burundian army on arrival. In late 1997, again on grounds of security, the Tanzanian government rounded up close to one hundred thousand Burundian and Congolese migrants and long-term refugees (including an estimated 50,000 children), some of whom had been in the country since the 1972 massacre in Burundi, and forced them into refugee camps.

Kosovo
The international communitys failure to take equitable responsibility for the problem of mass population displacements was vividly demonstrated in the emerging crisis in Kosovo. As of September, conservative estimates suggested that the conflict had created more than 260,000 internally displaced persons and more than 30,000 refugees. At the beginning of the crisis European states made it clear that they favored in-country or regional strategies to deal with population displacements resulting from the conflict and providedfunds for this purpose to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Despite calls from UNHCR to halt deportations, Germany and Switzerland expelled more than a thousand rejected asylum seekers to Kosovo during the first five months of the conflict under the terms of readmission agreements with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Human Rights Watch was able to interview some of these people, who described being handed over to Serb police at the airports in Switzerland and Germany and being detained, interrogated and beaten on return to Kosovo. Switzerland imposed a temporary ban on deportations of non-criminals in June 1998, while Germany maintained a de facto ban due to its inability to carry out deportations on the sanctioned Yugoslav national airline. Human Rights Watch remained concerned about the precarious status of Kosovar Albanians and met with German and Swiss authorities in September 1998 to raise its concerns.

In a further twist to the tragic circumstances in Kosovo, Montenegro closed its border to fleeing Kosovar Albanians in September 1998 and a few days later expelled more than three thousand people to Albania. With Albania in a state of internal turmoil and instability, with no refuge in Montenegro and with west European states unwilling to accept them, it was difficult to know where those fleeing the conflict in Kosovo could go. Human Rights Watch called on Montenegro to provide refuge to those displaced by the conflict and urged the international community to both ensure safe asylum to those fleeing the crisis and to further its relief efforts in Kosovo and neighboring countries.
Detention of Asylum Seekers

In industrialized and developing countries alike, the detention of asylum seekers has become a common practice often used as a deterrent strategy to stem refugee flows. Asylum seekers are frequently detained, sometimes arbitrarily and indefinitely and without the right to judicial review. The detention of asylum seekers frequently obstructs their access to legal assistance and information and thus the right to a full and fair hearing of their asylum applications. Furthermore, detaining asylum seekersmany of whom may have escaped from countries where they have been imprisoned, tortured, and ill-treated, have fled in fear and are severely disorientedcan have a serious impact on mental health. Incarceration in often inhumane conditions alongside prisoners who are criminally convicted or accused, prolonged confinement in prisons or prison-like conditions, and severe restrictions on freedom of movement is entirely inappropriate treatment for asylum seekers who are not criminally convicted or accused and violates international standards on humane treatment in detention.

United States
In 1998 Human Rights Watch published the findings of research conducted over eighteen months into detention of immigrants and asylum seekers in jails across the U.S. The U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) housed more than half of its 16,000 detainees in local jails throughout the country in 1998. In visits to the jails and interviews with detainees Human Rights Watch found that the INS had failed to ensure that basic national and international standards requiring humane treatment and adequate conditions had been met. INS detainees were treated the same as local inmates, and jail staff were not trained to deal with the special problems of asylum seekers and immigrants. Many INS detainees had been physically abused by jail staff. Medical and dental care was found to be substandard at many of the jails, and access for families, friends, and legal representatives was severely curtailed due to strict jail rules that were inappropriate for immigration detainees. Lack of access to legal representation, information, and assistance often had serious implications for the cases of asylum seekers and immigrants and obstructed their right to a full and fair hearing.

Human Rights Watch recommended that detention conditions reflect the non-accused, non-criminal status of all INS detainees. Immigrant detainees should therefore not be held in local jails, prisons, or any other facility intended to house criminal populations. Asylum seekers should not, as a general rule, be detained. The right to seek and enjoy asylum is a basic human right, and individuals must never be punished for seeking asylum in the United States. Furthermore, the decision to detain an asylum seeker can be justified only when proven to be strictly necessary on a case-by-case basis. In all cases, Human Rights Watch urged that meaningful alternatives to detention should be utilized first before any decision to detain is made. Such alternatives include unsupervised and supervised parole, bail, and reporting systems. In cases where detention of asylum seekers is required, they should never be held in local jails where necessary access to legal counsel and other resources is severely hindered.
Repatriation or Refoulement?

As countries continued to favor voluntary repatriation as the preferred solution to refugee situations, debate about the conditions under which refugees return became one of the most controversial issues in refugee policy. The standard of voluntariness had been held up as the cornerstone of international refugee protection and the most important safeguard against the imposed return of refugees to countries where they could face persecution. In 1996 UNHCR published a handbook on voluntary repatriation which reiterated this principle. In practice, however, there were a series of incidents wherein refugees were forced to return to conditions of extreme insecurity where respect for their fundamental rights could not be guaranteed. Unfortunately UNHCR was party to the involuntary return of refugees to unsafe countries such as Burma and Rwanda and failed to provide refugees with adequate protection according to its own principles and guidelines.

As states and UNHCR adhere less and less frequently to the principle of voluntariness, there is an urgent need to re-examine standards to ensure that refugees are not forcibly returned to conditions where their basic rights and security are at risk and to ensure that the fundamental principle of non-refoulement is always upheld . Human Rights Watch is concerned that return should take placeonly to rights-respecting environments, within a clear human rights framework and according to clearly defined international human rights standards.

Thailand
Even though it was not a party to the 1951 refugee Convention, Thailand was still bound by the principle of non-refoulement, which has a well-established status under international customary law. Nevertheless, as an October 1998 Human Rights Watch report documenting ten years of Thai policy towards Burmese refugees demonstrated, Thailand had repeatedly violated the principle of non-refoulement. During this period Thailand had on numerous occasions barred entry to refugees coming from Burma, pushed people back at the border, and expelled large numbers of refugees. Refugees were returned to border areas of Burma where their security could not be guaranteed, where serious human rights violations continued to occur, and where their safety and liberty were severely compromised. During 1998, it was reported that Thailand had effectively closed entry to the refugee camps for all new arrivals since June, thereby denying access to safe and secure asylum. Furthermore, in efforts to expel undocumented migrants from Thailand and in the absence of effective refugee status determination procedures, there was a serious fear that many people with a well-founded fear of persecution would be forcibly returned to Burma. Human Rights Watch called on the Thai government to ensure access to asylum to those fleeing Burma, cease rejection at the border, and cease the forced return of those with a well-founded fear of persecution.
Protection and Security

Unfortunately, when large numbers of people flee situations of conflict and grave human rights violations, their security and protection often remain at risk even when they reach places of refuge. The problem of security in refugee camps has received a great deal of international attention in recent years, largely, but not only, prompted by the ongoing refugee crisis in the Great Lakes region of Africa. The militarization and non-civilian character of refugee camps, the use of camps as military training grounds, cross-border attacks and incursions, the forced conscription and abduction of children into armed forces, and sexual and domestic violence against women are all problems that Human Rights Watch has reported on in the course of monitoring refugee situations in the Great Lakes region, Tanzania, Guinea, Liberia, Thailand and Pakistan.

Guinea and Liberia
In both Guinea and Liberia the proximity of the refugee camps to the border with Sierra Leone and the presence of former combatants amongst the civilian refugee population in the Liberian camps posed serious security problems in 1998. Plans to relocate the Guinean refugee camps to a safer distance away from the border were hampered by very poor infrastructure, serious logistical problems, and a lack of funds. Cross-border attacks and shooting posed a constant threat for refugees. One camp, Toumandou, located less than ten kilometers from the Sierra Leone border, was attacked in September, and seven refugees were killed.

In Liberia, many former combatants identified themselves in hope of being demobilized and reintegrated into civilian society. Vahun camp, situated several kilometers away from the border, was infiltrated by rebel AFRC/RUF soldiers, some of whom used the camp as a base for recruitment, to sell looted goods from Sierra Leone, and to re-stock on food, supplies, and clothing. The camps proximity to the border also made it vulnerable to cross-border attacks and looting. In June 1998 plans were underway to relocate the refugees to Kolahun camp, located fifty kilometers from the border. By September, 18,000 refugees had been relocated to Kolahun, while 15,000 remained in Vahun. Unfortunately, ex-combatants remained mixed with the refugee population, and no attempt appeared to have been made to screen or separate civilians from combatants.

The Guinean government, on the other hand, screened out and detained suspected AFRC/ RUF soldiers trying to enter Guinea. Neither UNHCR or the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) were given access to the detainees, and the procedures and criteria used to screen out former combatants were not made public. Concerns were raised that some of those detained may have had a valid claim to international refugee protection and should have been screened according to international standards. In some cases soldiers were returned to the authorities in Freetown and there was little information about their whereabouts and safety. Human Rights Watch voiced concerns that individuals suspected of having committed war crimes should be held accountable for the violations they had committed in accordance with international standards. On October 19 1998, twenty-four AFRC/RUF soldiers were executed in Freetown following hearings in a military court that did not conform with international human rights standards.

Not only did proximity to the border and the presence of former combatants undermine security and protection in the camps, but it also seriously hampered the delivery of humanitarian assistance. In June 1998, the Guinean government closed access to some fifty refugee camps along the borderhousing more than 150,000 refugeesdue to the escalation of fighting on the Sierra Leone side of the border and cross-border shooting. Although access was resumed a month later, delivery of humanitarian assistance remained sporadic, and many refugees still did not receive adequate food and other supplies. Due to poor coordination among humanitarian agencies, precarious road conditions, and an uncertain security situation, refugees in Vahun camp only received one fourteen-day ration from UNHCR between February and June 1998.

Thailand
Burmese refugee camps along the Thai-Burmese border housing refugees from different ethnic minority groups were also the target of frequent cross-border attacks and military incursions from 1994 to 1998. Close proximity to the border and the association of the refugees with ethnic minority rebel armies made the camps especially susceptible to cross-border attacks, abductions, and killingsby both the Burmese army and splinter groups operating with the tacit consent of the Burmese government. In March 1998, the Democratic Karen Buddhist Army (DKBA) attacked three refugee camps, killing five people and leaving 300 homeless. In one camp, Huay Kaloke, over 85 percent of the dwellings were destroyed. Eight months later, refugees from these camps had still not been relocated or rehoused.

Women refugees
Women refugees often faced particular protection and security risks in refugee camps. In many situations women made up a high proportion of the refugee population and there were a large number of women-headed households. This could be because male family members were away fighting, farming, working or trading, or because many men had been killed in conflict. Refugee women were subjected to rape, sexual exploitation, sexual abuse, and sexual violence in refugee camps. Levels of domestic violence could also be very high in refugee settings. To respond to some of these very serious protection problems, UNHCR compiled and disseminated guidelines on the protection of refugee women and on sexual violence against refugees.

In a mission to the Burundian refugee camps along the border between Burundi and Tanzania in May 1998, Human Rights Watch identified high rates of sexual and domestic violence against women refugees, perpetrated for the most part by other refugees. In most cases rape occurred either in the camps or outside while the women and girls were collecting firewood. Although the problem had been acknowledged by UNHCR and was beginning to be addressed in some camps through the hiring of a UNHCR consultant and through a sexual and gender violence project run by an implementing partner, the International Rescue Committee (IRC), Human Rights Watch noted a reluctance by UNHCR protection officers and the Tanzanian government to address the matter of sexual violence as a serious protection problem. UNHCR staff were not taking active measures to implement their own guidelines on the protection of refugee women and on the prevention of such violence in order to prevent further sexual violence from occurring in the camps, were not seeking to investigate incidents of sexual violence, and had taken almost no measures to bring the perpetrators to justice. The problem of domestic violence remained largely unrecognized, and the perpetrators enjoyed free movement in the camps.

Preventive measures
In all the above cases, Human Rights Watch supported various measures to improve protection and security. These included moving camps to a safe distance away from borders to prevent cross-border attacks; thoroughly screening refugee populations to ensure the civilian nature of camps; applying more rigorously the exclusion clauses of the 1951 convention, which exclude certain categories of individuals (such as war criminals) from international protection; strengthening UNHCRs protection mandate; and improving the quality of protection provided in the field through better training of UNHCR field staff, including training in human rights and humanitarian standards. In response to the high incidence of sexual and domestic violence, Human Rights Watch has called for a more proactive implementation of existing guidelines on refugee women and sexual violence and for these matters to be dealt with as serious protection concerns by UNHCR and government staff. There is also an urgent need for UNHCR to more proactively address the problem of domestic violence in refugee camps, through the creation and implementation of guidelines and appropriate training of UNHCR and NGO staff. Greater community education is needed within refugee camps to provide education and awareness-raising around issues of gender-based violence. At the same time, the physical security of women in refugee camps must be enhanced and strong action taken to bring the perpetrators of sexual and domestic violence to justice.

In all these efforts, Human Rights Watch has advocated that protection and security must be provided within a rights-respecting environment. Security interests should not mean that fundamental rights such as freedom of movement are jeopardized. International protection must continue to be provided to all those deserving of it, and camps should not be arbitrarily closed. Concerns about security should not mean that refugee settlements are managed in a non-participatory, authoritarian manner.

Relevant Human Rights Watch reports:
"Prohibited Persons":Abuse of Undocumented Migrants, Asylum Seekers, and Refugees, 3/98
Sowing Terror: Atrocities against Civilians in Sierra Leone , 7/98
Locked Away: Immigration Detainees in Jails in the United States , 9/98
Unwanted and Unprotected: Burmese Refugees in Thailand, 10/98
United States
Human Rights Developments
The United States has long regarded itself as a beacon of human rights, as evidenced by an enlightened constitution, judicial independence, and a civil society grounded in strong traditions of free speech and press freedom. But the reality is more complex; for decades, civil rights and civil liberties groups have exposed constitutional violations and challenged abusive policies and practices. In recent years, as well, international human rights monitors have documented serious gaps in U.S. protections of the human rights of vulnerable groups. Both federal and state governments have nonetheless resisted applying to the U.S. the standards that, rightly, the U.S. applies elsewhere.

In the Clinton administration Americans have a leadership willing to recognize some core inequitiesracial, gender and other types of discrimination, for examplebut nonetheless unwilling to incorporate key international human rights principles fully into U.S. domestic policies and practices, as described below. At the same time, senior figures of the congressionally dominant Republican Party and many state-level governmentswhich are bound by U.S. obligations under human rights treatieshave denounced international standards as intrusive while advocating policies that effectively infringe upon the human rights of citizens and new arrivals.

In 1998, as in previous years, the U.S. failed to address human rights criticism absent sustained national and international attentionand sometimes even then. Conservative politicians and their allies, often using ugly rhetoric, led successful efforts to craft or maintain policies that excluded unpopular or controversial groupsconvicted criminals, immigrants, and members of certain minorities, among othersfrom full protection of their human rights, despite the protests of U.S.-based rights groups and liberal members of Congress. Get tough anti-crime policies, which enjoyed significant public support, became the vehicle for many of the most serious abuses.

As a result, abusive police officers or prison guards too often enjoyed impunity; the internationally recognized rights of asylum seekers continued to be drastically curtailed; discrimination persisted in policies regarding gay men and lesbians; minority racial groups continued to be overrepresented among those sentenced to death; state-sponsored executions continued, even of juvenile offenders and the mentally incompetent; and many of the nations prisons and jails increasingly populated by nonviolent offenders, due to the war on drugscontinued to be overcrowded, violent places where sexual abuse by male inmates and, in womens prisons, by male guards, was insufficiently controlled or prosecuted.

Three visits by special U.N. rapporteurs on various aspects of human rights took place during 1997 and 1998. The U.S. governments poor treatment of the first visiting rapporteuran expert on the death penalty and arbitrary killings by police, who issued a critical report in 1998led to an outcry by human rights groups and others, prompting greater cooperation with the two rapporteurs who came subsequently to study religious intolerance and womens rights, respectively. Among the problems highlighted by the rapporteurs visits was a pervasive official ignorance of the U.S.s international human rights obligations. This was evident at the federal level, where even responsible and committed civil rights staff at the Justice Department were unaware of international human rights norms. But it was especially severe at the state and local levels, where the rapporteurs encountered varying degrees of hostility. The federal government has an obligation to remedy this enormous gap in knowledge, which translates into practical failures of enforcement. A concerted effort must be made to educate officials at all levels on the standards that enhance existing human rights protections in the U.S. under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and international conventions banning racial discrimination and torture or ill-treatment. The federal government should also set a better example to state and local governments, by changing federal policies of U.S. exceptionalism with regard to international human rights treatiesboth those the U.S. has ratified and those that, alone among Western developed nations, it has failed to ratify.

In 1998, the United States continued to exempt itself from its international human rights obligations, particularly where international human rights law grants protections or redress not available under U.S. law. In ratifying international human rights treaties it has typically carved away added protections for those in the United States by adding reservations, declarations, and understandings. Even years after ratifying key human rights treaties, the U.S. still fails to acknowledge human rights law as U.S. law. Moreover, the U.S. is behind the rest of the developed world in failing to ratify the key international instrument on womens rights and virtually alone in the world in failing to ratify the international childrens rights convention.

The United Statess disregard for international human rights standards has not been limited to domestic matters. During the year, it has also opposed human rights initiatives on issues of broad international interest, including landmines, child soldiers, and the creation of the International Criminal Court. In the case of landmines, the United States refused to join the 133 nations, including nearly every major U.S. ally, that had already signed the treaty by October 1998. It blocked international efforts to end the use of child soldiers, arguing against a proposed optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child that would raise the minimum age for military recruitment and participation in armed conflict to eighteen. And the United States was one of only seven states voting against the statute creating the ICC at the Rome Diplomatic Conference in July; 120 states voted for the treaty.

Police Abuse  
Mistreatment by law enforcement officers in the United States continued in 1998, remaining one of the most serious and divisive human rights violations in the country. The violations persisted nationwide, in rural, suburban, and urban areas of the country, committed by various law enforcement personnel including local and state police, sheriffs departments, and federal agents. Police have engaged in unjustified shootings, severe beatings, fatal chokings, and unnecessarily rough treatment. While the proportion of repeatedly abusive officers on any force is generally small, responsible authoritiesincluding law enforcement supervisors, as wellas local and federal government leadershipoften failed to act decisively to restrain or penalize such acts.

Police abuse continued, in part, because accountability systems to restrain abusive behavior were inadequate. Weak civilian review, flawed internal investigations, and rare criminal prosecutions by federal or local prosecutors virtually guaranteed that officers who engaged in brutality would avoid punishment of any kind. Meanwhile, civil lawsuits filed against cities and their police departments for alleged civil rights violations by officers continued to cost taxpayers millions of dollars. Measuring the extent of the problem of police abuse was made more difficult by the Justice Departments failure to compile annual statistics on the use of excessive force by police officers, as Congress instructed it to do in 1994. On the positive side, the Justice Department did begin to utilize its civil powers to identify police departments exhibiting a pattern or practice of abuse and requiring reforms.

Race and ethnicity continued to play a central role in police brutality in the United States. In places where data were available, members of minority groups had alleged human rights violations by police more frequently than non-minority residents and far out of proportion to their representation in those places. Police have subjected minorities to apparently discriminatory treatment and in some cases have physically abused people of color while using racial epithets.

Official responses to a July 1998 Human Rights Watch report on police abuse and accountability in fourteen cities differed greatly from city to city. Some cities officials acknowledged the problems identified in the report, while other officials resorted to name-calling and denial. Human Rights Watch continued to work with the departments that expressed an interest in our findings and recommendations regarding common failings in accountability systems and to urge conditionality on federal aid to police departments that allowed impunity for officers responsible for serious abuses.

Conditions in Custody  
In many jails, prisons, immigration detention centers and juvenile detention facilities, confined individuals suffered from physical mistreatment, excessive disciplinary sanctions, barely tolerable physical conditions, and inadequate medical and mental health care. Unfortunately, there was little support from politicians or the public for reform.

Fifty-three percent of all state inmates were incarcerated for nonviolent crimes, while criminal justice policies increased the length of prison sentences and diminished the availability of parole. The U.S. incarcerated a greater proportion of its population than any country except Russia: more than 1.7 million people were either in prison or in jail in 1998, reflecting an incarceration rate of more than 645 per 100,000 residents, double the rate of a decade before. Approximately one in every 117 adult males was in prison.

Surging prison populations and public reluctance to fund new construction produced dangerously overcrowded prisons. Violence continued to be pervasive: in 1997 (the most recent year for which data were available), sixty-nine inmates were killed by other inmates, and thousands were injured seriously enough to require medical attention. Extortion and intimidation were commonplace. Most inmates had scant opportunities for work, training, education, treatment or counseling. Mentally ill inmatesestimated to constitute between 6 and 14 percent of the incarcerated populationrarely received adequate monitoring or treatment.

Many local jails were dirty, unsafe, vermin-infested, and lacked areas in which inmates could exercise or get fresh air. Some jail authorities placed inmates in restraining devices for long periods far in excess of legitimate safety considerations. Severe overcrowding coupled with inadequate staffing in many jails created dangerous conditions reflected in the numbers of inmates injured in fights, who experienced seizures and other medical emergencies without proper attention, and who managed to escape.

Authorities relied increasingly on administrative segregation in super-maximum security prisons to maintain control. Prisoners deemed particularly disruptive or dangerous were isolated in small, often windowless cells for twenty-three hours a day; more than 24,000 prisoners were kept in this modern form of solitary confinement at any given time.

At the end of 1997, Human Rights Watch released a report documenting conditions in two super-maximum security prisons in the state of Indiana. Although excessive use of physical force in these facilities had diminished in recent years, we still found excessive isolation, controls, and restrictions that were not penologically justified, and mentally ill inmates whose conditions were exacerbated by the regime of isolation and restricted activities, as well as by the lack of appropriate mental health treatment. The Indiana Department of Corrections instituted a number of reforms that were responsive to our concerns. Most significant was the development of a special housing unit for the treatment of disruptive or dangerous mentally ill inmates that opened in June 1998.

Abusive conduct by guards was reported in many prisons. The threat of such abuse was particularly acute in supermax prisons. Since Corcoran State Prison in California opened in 1988, fifty inmates, most of them unarmed, were shot by prison guards and seven were killed. In February 1998, federal authorities indicted eight Corcoran officers for deliberately pitting unarmed inmates against each other in gladiator-style fights which the guards would then break up by firing on them with rifles. In July, the state announced a new investigation into at least thirty-six serious and fatal shootings of Corcoran inmates.

Guard abuse was by no means confined to California prisons. Across the country, inmates complained of instances of excessive and even clearly lawless use of force. In Pennsylvania, dozens of guards from one facility, SCI Greene, were under investigation for beatings, slamming inmates into walls, racial taunting and other mistreatment of inmates. The state Department of Corrections fired four guards, and twenty-one others were demoted, suspended or reprimanded. In many other facilities across the country, however, abuses went unaddressed.

Overcrowded public prisons and the tight budgets of corrections agencies fueled the growth of private corrections companies: approximately 100,000 adults were confined in 142 privately operated prisons and jails nationwide. Many of these facilities operated with insufficient control and oversight from the public correctional authorities. States failed to enact laws setting appropriate standards and regulatory mechanisms for private prisons, signed weak contracts, undertook insufficient monitoring and toleratedprolonged substandard conditions. In less than a year, there were two murders and thirteen stabbings at one privately operated prison in the state of Ohio.

Sexual and other abuses continued to be serious problems for women incarcerated in local jails, state and federal prisons, and INS detention centers. Women in custody faced abuses at the hands of prison guards, most of whom are men, who subjected the women to verbal harassment, unwarranted visual surveillance, abusive pat frisks and sexual assault. Fifteen states did not have criminal laws prohibiting custodial sexual misconduct by guards, and Human Rights Watch found that in most states, guards were not properly trained about their duty to refrain from sexual abuse of prisoners. The problem of abuse was compounded by the continued rapid growth of the female inmate population. As a result women were warehoused in overcrowded prisons and were often unable to access basic services such as medical care and substance abuse treatment.

In Michigan, where women were plaintiffs in a civil rights suit jointly litigated by private lawyers and the Department of Justice, these women reported retaliatory behavior by guards, as described in more detail below. The retaliation ranged from verbal abuse, intimidation, and excessive and abusive pat frisks, to loss of visitation privileges and good time accrued toward early release.

Men in prison also suffered from prisoner-on-prisoner sexual abuse, committed by fellow inmates. Prison staff often allowed or even tacitly encouraged sexual attacks by male prisoners. Despite the devastating psychological impact of such abuse, there were few if any preventative measures taken in most jurisdictions, while perpetrators were rarely punished adequately by prison officials.

As in previous years, increasing numbers of children were incarcerated nationwide, even as the number of violent juvenile offenders fell. Research by the Department of Justices Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention (OJJDP) found that only 6 percent of juvenile arrests in 1992 and 1994 were for violent crimes. Between 1994 and 1995, according to OJJDP, violent crime arrests of juveniles between the ages of fifteen and seventeen fell by 2 percent; arrests of younger juveniles for violent crimes dropped by 5 percent for the same period. Despite this declining percentage of violent juvenile offenders, and in spite of the costs associated with incarceration, most states continued to incarcerate high numbers of children for nonviolent offenses. Between 1992 and 1998, at least forty states adopted legislation making it easier for children to be tried as adults, and forty-two states detained juveniles in adult jails while they awaited trial.

Prompted by a 1996 Human Rights Watch report on human rights abuses in the state of Georgia, the Department of Justice (DOJ) concluded a year-long investigation of the states juvenile detention facilities in February 1998. The DOJ identified a pattern of egregious conditions that violated childrens rights, including overcrowded and unsafe conditions, physical abuse by staff and excessive use of disciplinary measures, inadequate educational, medical and mental health services. In March 1998, the state and the DOJ signed an agreement that required the state to make extensive improvements. The DOJ concluded at least two other investigations of juvenile facilities in 1998, finding violations in the county detention centers in Owensboro, Kentucky, and Greenville, South Carolina. In each of these facilities, the DOJ found evidence that staff employed excessive force against juvenile inmates.

Asylum Seekers and Immigrants  
Implementation of the 1996 Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigration Responsibility Act (IIRIRA) continued to violate international human rights standards that apply specifically to asylum seekers, as well as the human rights of other immigrants, through detention in often inhumane conditions. The IIRIRAs expedited removal proceedings, intended to process and deport individuals who enter the United States without valid documents as quickly as possible, imperiled bona fide refugees and resulted in immigrants being detained in increasing numbers. If an asylum seeker prevails in initial summary procedures at ports of entry, he or she is detained pending a credible fear interview, i.e. an interview to determine whether there is a credible fear of endangerment in the country of origin: grounds for granting asylum. Asylum seekers who have proven credible fear may be released at the discretion of district directors of the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS), but usually they are detained throughout the process and until asylum hearings are completedsometimes for years.

More than half of the immigrants held in INS custody during 1998, some 9,000 people, were sent to local jails to await immigration proceedings. Faced with an overwhelming, immediate demand for detention space, the agency handed over control of its detainees to local sheriffs and other jail officials without ensuring that basic international and national standards requiring humane treatment and adequate conditions were met. INS detaineesincluding asylum seekerswere being held in jails entirely inappropriate to their non-criminal status, where they were often mixed with accused and convicted criminal inmates and where they were sometimes subjected to physical mistreatment and inadequate conditions of confinement. Though not serving a criminal sentence or awaiting trial on criminal charges, an INS detainees experience in a local jail was no different from that of a local inmate.

During an eighteen-month investigation into conditions and treatment at the jails used by the INS, Human Rights Watch found that INS detainees in jails were subjected to physical mistreatment, were not provided with basic medical care, were often unable to communicate with jail staff due to language barriers, and were subjected to severe restrictions on contact with families, friends, and legal representativeswhen, in the minority of cases, detainees were able to obtain legal counsel.

In a September report, Human Rights Watch called on the INS to end its use of jails to house immigration detainees; the jails punitive and rehabilitative nature are never appropriate for INS detainees who are simply awaiting immigration hearings and who are not accused or convicted of committing a crime. Asylum seekers should be detained only in exceptional circumstances and should never be sent to jails. Until the INS ends its use of jails to hold its detainees, all INS detainees should be held in separate sections in jails. Human Rights Watch also called for INS detention guidelines for jails and a humane release policy for detainees held indefinitely.

The treatment of children held by the INS was also disturbing. Investigations by Human Rights Watch in three states foundthat nearly all children received little or no information about their right to be represented by an attorney in their immigration proceedings, in violation of international standards and in breach of a consent decree which binds the INS. Some unaccompanied minors were housed with juvenile offenders, locked up and made to wear prison uniforms even though they were held for administrative reasons only. Human Rights Watch continued to work with INS officials and concerned members of Congress to seek reforms.

Until a series of mid-year shootings by the U.S. Border Patrol (a part of the INS), along the U.S.-Mexico border, border-crossers complaints of abuse continued but reports of serious physical abuses, such as shootings, beatings, and kickings, seemed to decline. Beginning in June 1998, after a Border Patrol agent in southern Arizona was shot dead, Arizona agents opened fire at border-crossers at least a half-dozen times over a three-month period, leading to one fatality in September. And along the southern California border with Mexico, Border Patrol agents shot two men fatally during shooting incidents in September. All three of the men killed by agents were reportedly holding rocks in a threatening way when agents shot them; investigations were underway at the time of this writing.

Congress ordered the creation of a Citizens Advisory Panel (CAP) in response to reports of abuse along the border; the CAP first met in 1995. In December 1997, it made recommendations for reforms in the way the INS and other agencies receive and investigate abuse complaints, but few had been implemented as of October 1998. The CAPs mandate has now expired.

The mistreatment of migrant workers in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI), a U.S. territory in the North Pacific Ocean, received heightened scrutiny by Congress, the administration, and human rights organizations. Companies operating in the islands mistreated thousands of laborers, primarily from China, the Philippines, and Bangladesh, who had become essentially indentured workers in garment manufacturing plants; these abuses had been allowed because the CNMI authorities were exempt from normal federal immigration, trade, and worker protection statutes. During the year, legislation to address human rights violations in the CNMI was introduced in Congress and actively supported by the Clinton administration. The Department of the Interior prepared a report that documented the trafficking of Russian and Chinese women for prostitution as well as an overall worsening of conditions for foreign workers.

Death Penalty  
The United States continued to rely on the death penalty despite the international trend away from its use. Forty-five individuals were executed in 1998 as of September; the U.S. had broken its previous record in 1997, by executing a total of seventy-four persons. Among those executed were two women (the first women executed since 1984), individuals who may have been mentally ill or retarded, juvenile offenders, and foreign nationals.

In April 1998, the United Nations special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary, or arbitrary executions released his report on the death penalty in the U.S. The special rapporteur found that the death penalty was applied in an unfair, arbitrary, and discriminatory manner. The report called for a suspension of executions until significant reforms were implemented to bring the U.S. into compliance with international human rights standards. The special rapporteurs plea for a moratorium echoed the American Bar Associations similar call in 1997. The special rapporteur criticized the U.S. practice of imposing the death penalty on juvenile offenders and on mentally retarded or mentally ill persons as a step backwards in the promotion and protection of the right to life and in contravention of international human rights standards. From 1976 to 1997, seventy-four people were released from death row due to evidence of their innocence, according to the Death Penalty Information Center (DPIC).

As in the past, race played a role in the application of the death penalty. Two 1998 studies by the DPIC illustrated this. One focused on the city of Philadelphia and found that an African-American was four times more likely to be sentenced to the death penalty than a white defendant on similarly severe murder charges and with a similar criminal background. The other examined the race of district attorneys (who make the decisions on whether to seek the death penalty) and found that nearly 98 percent of the district attorneys in states with the death penalty were white while 1 percent were African-American.

The U.S. continued to be one of only six countries to execute persons who were younger than eighteen when they committed their crime. The imposition of the death penalty on persons who were under eighteen years of age at the time of their offense violates the provisions of several international and regional human rights instruments. Despite nearly unanimous international condemnation of the use of the death penalty for juvenile offenders, six countries in the worldIran, Nigeria, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, the United States, and Yemenwere known to have executed juvenile offenders in the 1990s. The United States led the list with nine executions between 1990 and 1998, one-half of the known worldwide total for the period. Two such executions took place in 1998 in the state of Texasthe first of juvenile offenders anywhere in the U.S. in five years. A third took place in Virginia, where Dwayne Allen Wright was executed in October. Wright was a juvenile offender and was mentally ill and may have suffered from brain damage.

The U.S. continued to ignore its obligations under the Vienna Convention to notify non-national defendants of their right to contact their embassies. In April 1998, the International Court of Justice called on the U.S. to delay the execution in Virginia of a Paraguayan national, Angel Francisco Breard, until it could examine his case and decide whether the U.S.s failure to notify the defendant of his consular rights had made a difference in his case. The U.S. decided that, with or without consular notification, Breard would have been convicted of a capital crime; the execution went ahead.

Discrimination  
The International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (CERD), which the U.S. has ratified under the Clinton Administration, defines discrimination more broadly than under U.S. law as any practice or policy that is discriminatoryin purpose or effect. Under this standard, policies that are race-neutral on their face but have a persistently adverse impact on a racial group may rise to the level of discrimination. In the U.S., areas of concern in this regard include, among others, the impact of criminal justice policies, such as the war on drugs, application of the death penalty, and the widespread disenfranchisement of felons.

The onus of harsh criminal justice policies continued to fall disproportionately on black Americans, fueling persistent complaints of racial discrimination. According to the most recent figures from the Department of Justice, one in twelve (8.3 percent) black men aged twenty-five to twenty-nine were in prison in 1996, compared to 2.6 percent of Hispanics men and 0.8 percent of white men in the same age group. Black Americans constituted a disproportionate share of the prison population: 48 percent of state prisoners, 30 percent of federal prisoners, and 42 percent of jail inmates, according to 1997 statistics, the most recent data available. The rate of imprisonment for black men was 8.5 times that of white men. According to a U.S. Department of Justice analysis, if current rates of incarceration continued, one in three of the next generation of black men would spend time in prison at some point in his life.

The nations war on drugs, for example, continued to have a well-documented disparate impact on African-Americans. Drug control policies emphasized law enforcement in low-income urban areas, contributing significantly to the number and proportion of blacks and Hispanics who were arrested, convicted and imprisoned. The arrest rate for drug offenses was six times higher for blacks than for whites. ( See Drugs and Human Rights section.) More than one-quarter of all black inmates in state prisons were convicted of drug offenses, compared to 13 percent of white prisoners.

For many African-Americans, the most egregious example of disparate treatment at the hands of the criminal justice system was the much harsher sentencing for crack than for powder cocaine offenses under federal law. Compliance with CERD would require revision of the federal sentencing laws to ensure that blacks (convicted more frequently of crack offenses) and whites (convicted more frequently of powder cocaine offenses) receive equivalent sentences for equivalent crimes.

The scale of felony disenfranchisement in the U.S.the denial of the vote to persons convicted of felonieswas unparalleled: in 1998, an estimated 3.9 million U.S. citizens were denied the right to vote, including over one million who had fully completed their sentences. No other democratic country in the world denies as many peoplein absolute or proportional termsthe right to vote because of felony convictions. The racial impact of disenfranchisement laws was particularly egregious. Thirteen percent of African-American men1.4 millionwere disenfranchised, representing over one-third (36 percent) of the total disenfranchised population. In two states, data published by Human Rights Watch and The Sentencing Project showed almost one in three black men to be disenfranchised. In seven states, one in four black men is permanently disenfranchised. These rates of disenfranchisement are an unintended but nonetheless foreseeable consequence of harsh criminal justice policies that have markedly increased the number of people sent to prison and the length of their sentences as well as of drug law enforcement that has put hundreds of thousands of adults behind bars, a preponderance of whom are members of minority groups.

In June 1997, President Clinton called for a national debate on race relations and appointed an advisory panel (the Advisory Board to the Presidents Initiative on Race) to compile a report of its recommendations to address the problem of racism. The panels report was submitted to the president in September 1998, and it disappointed civil rights leaders and others by failing to make bold proposals. Meanwhile, a long-overdue U.S. compliance report on CERD remained pending.

Expanding the federal statute outlawing hate crimes received strong public support from the Clinton administration, and the importance of such support was underscored by proof that racist sentiment can turn deadlyas in the brutal and degrading June 1998 murder of James Byrd, a black man in Texas, whose killers dragged his beaten body behind their pickup truck until he died.

National debate on the rights of gay men and lesbians contained some ugly rhetoric in 1998, including from senior politicians of the Republican Party. The legal rights of homosexuals received greater protection at the federal than at the state level, though federal policy on the treatment of gay men and lesbians in the militarydont ask, dont tell, dont pursuecontinued to have a discriminatory impact. In some areas, bias crimes against homosexuals increased, while groups espousing family values sought to cure homosexuality. The brutal murder of a young gay man, Matthew Shepard, in Wyoming in October galvanized nationwide concern over hate crimes.

In May 1998, President Clinton signed an executive order protecting federal civil workers from discrimination based on sexual orientation, and the House of Representatives voted to uphold the order in August. Employment discrimination remained a problem, however, since only ten states had laws prohibiting discrimination based on sexual orientation. Seven states had executive orders barring discrimination in public employment based on sexual orientation, and two had state civil service rules prohibiting discrimination based on sexual orientation. As a result, in the forty states without comprehensive laws, it remained legal for any private employer to fire, deny promotion, unfairly compensate or decline to hire people because of theiractual or perceivedsexual orientation. The Employment Non-Discrimination Act, a bill that would protect workers in every state from discrimination based on sexual orientation, was not acted on as the congressional session ended. (For further discussion, see section on Gay and Lesbian Rights.)

Discrimination against women continued in many areas, including employment, education, and judicial and law enforcement bias in domestic violence cases. The failure to ratify the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) left women in the U.S. without enhanced human rights protections against sex discrimination.

International Human Rights Scrutiny  
The low priority that the U.S. government gives to international human rights treaty compliance became increasingly apparent duringthe year. For example, the U.S. became a party to the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and CERD in 1994. Both treaties require reports to the United Nations, describing the nations treaty compliance. The U.S. compliance reports on both treaties were due in November 1995, but as of October 1998, neither had been submitted. Other important human rights treaties, including the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), and the Convention on the Rights of the Child, remained unratified. (Only two countries in the world have not ratified the childrens rights convention: Somalia, which has no internationally recognized government, and the United States.) In addition, the administration did not move toward signing or ratifying core International Labour Organisation conventions intended to protect basic labor rights.

United Nations special rapporteurs monitor countries compliance with international human rights standards. During late 1997 and 1998, three special rapporteurs visited the United States. When Bacre Waly Ndiaye, the U.N. special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary, or arbitrary executions, conducted a mission at the end of 1997, officials at the State and Justice departments made almost no effort to facilitate his meetings with local officials or his access to prisons death rows. There were improvements in the way the U.N. special rapporteur on violence against women, Radhika Coomaraswamy, was treated by federal officials during her June 1998 investigation of human rights abuses of women in custody, including prisons and INS detention centers, but Michigan officials would not allow her to visit prisons in that state. (The other special rapporteur visited the United States in February and examined religious intolerance.) The federal government, by authorizing the special rapporteurs visits, showed an increased openness, but there was far less acceptance of such international monitors at the state level.

After Special Rapporteur Ndiaye released a report in April 1998 that was highly critical of the application of the death penalty in the U.S.and called for a moratorium on its use, echoing a similar call by the American Bar AssociationU.S. officials dismissed the report as unnecessary and inaccurate. U.S. officials were forced to defend the use of the death penalty before the U.N. Human Rights Commission in Geneva. At that time, U.S. officials argued that the nation had such strict due process standards that the rights of all capital defendants were being protected. Meanwhile, the U.S. acknowledged it had not adhered to the Vienna Conventions consular notification procedures in the case of a Paraguayan national, but the man was executed anyway, despite international and World Court protests.

Arms
Human Rights Developments

The year 1998 saw the coalescing of a new force in international politics, an alliance of nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and what became known as the like-minded governments around a focused human rights and humanitarian agenda. This alliance, whose members varied according to the issue addressed, originated with the Ottawa process to develop a comprehensive international ban on antipersonnel landmines in the fall of 1996, and gathered momentum with the signing of the Mine Ban Treaty in December 1997. It then turned to new issues of pressing humanitarian concern in 1998, including the international criminal court (treaty signed in July 1998), the use of child soldiers, and the proliferation and misuse of small arms and light weapons.

The initial success of the landmines campaign and the new attention paid to the trade in conventional weapons brought hope that the international community would, for the first time since World War II and the promulgation of the foundations of modern human rights and humanitarian lawthe Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948), the Genocide Convention (1948), and the Geneva Conventions (1949)act to stem the proliferation and use of the instruments that have played a primary role in the massive humanitarian crises this half-century has witnessed. While the worlds overriding concern over weapons of mass destruction during the past fifty years was understandable given the nature of those weapons and the security imperatives driving the cold war, it could not justify the utter neglect of the other proliferationof small arms and light weapons, weapons that were the real killers, especially of civilians, in armed conflicts the world over during those years. It was apt testimony to the vast changes since the end of the cold war that the prospect of an end to the landmines plague and effective curbs on the arms trade, unthinkable even ten years ago, at last began to appear realistic at centurys end.

Yet it was clear that much work remained to be done. Adoption of a new landmines treaty did not translate automatically into its active implementation, let alone significant headway in the enormous tasks of landmine removal and victim rehabilitation. Likewise, discussions on the need to tackle the proliferation of small arms and light weapons were at an early stage, with the various actors involved in the emerging campaign divided on goals and tactics. They were not helped by the complexity of the issue, the privatization of the arms trade, the problem of vested interests associated with the huge profits the arms industry rakes in, and the continuing high demand for weapons, as armed conflicts continued to be prosecuted or break out anew in Africa and elsewhere.
The Landmine Ban Treaty and Beyond

The signing of the treaty banning antipersonnel landmines by 122 governments in Ottawa, Canada on December 3-4, 1997 and the receipt of the 1997 Nobel Peace Prize the following week were tremendous achievements for the International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL), the global network of over 1,000 nongovernmental organizations active in over seventy-five countries. Human Rights Watch was a cofounder of the ICBL and one of its most active members. The historic Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction (the Mine Ban Treaty) marked the first time that states outlawed a weapon that was in widespread use. It was a comprehensive ban on antipersonnel mines in all circumstances. The treaty also required that stockpiles be destroyed within four years of the treatys entry into force, and that mines already in the ground be removed and destroyed within ten years.

This treaty was only the beginning of the end for these indiscriminate weapons, which were estimated to kill or maim thousands of civilians every year. The ICBL, acutely aware that the work to truly eradicate this insidious weapon had just begun, laid out an ambitious agenda for 1998, encompassing a variety of activities related to the treaty including rapid ratification, universalization, and effective monitoring, as well as expanded activities related to humanitarian mine clearance and victim assistance.

Quick ratification was a top priority so that the clock would start ticking on various treaty obligations, notably the deadlines for destruction of stockpiles and mines already in the ground, as well as for reporting requirements. On September 16, Burkina Faso became the fortieth nation to ratify, triggering an entry into force date of March 1, 1999. Thus, the Mine Ban Treaty was set to become binding international law faster than any major international treaty in history. The ICBL declared its intention to keep up the ratification effort, though, until all signatories were on board. At the time of writing, forty-seven nations had ratified the treaty.

Progress was also made in universalizing the treaty, that is, getting all nations to sign. The number of signatories and accessions rose from 122 to 133 by October with the addition of Albania, Bangladesh, Belize, Chad, Equatorial Guinea, Jordan, Macedonia, Maldives, So Tome and Principe, Sierra Leone, and Zambia. The United States stated its intention to sign by the year 2006, and Russia indicated it would sign in the foreseeable future.

In order to monitor implementation of and compliance with the treaty, as well as global progress in dealing with the landmine crisis, an unprecedented major new initiative was launched in June by lead members of the ICBL. Called Landmine Monitor, its key elements included the establishment of a civil society-based global reporting network, a database, and production of an annual report.
	
Human Rights Developments

Children continued to be abused and mistreated around the world in 1998, condemned to serve as child soldiers or bonded laborers; beaten and arbitrarily detained by police; locked up, often with adults, in appalling conditions in correctional facilities; or confined in inhumane conditions and treated cruelly, sometimes to die of neglect, in state orphanages. For the most part, children did not have advocates working actively on their behalf in the political sphere. Children were seldom organized into political action groups and could not argue for their own rights. Most international childrens organizations worked on important economic and social issuessuch as childrens health and sheer survivalbut few worked on other aspects of the protection of children or carried out research and action on systemic abuse. To fill this gap, coalitions needed to be built, local nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) needed to become involved, and massive efforts needed to be made to raise awareness internationally of the often life-threatening abuses perpetrated on children around the world, and to persuade governments, intergovernmental organizations, NGOs, and ordinary citizens to join together to end them. Research was needed on a broad spectrum of childrens rights issues, including the means by which people and governments could be moved to take constructive action to end the abuses as they were identified.

In 1998 the United Nations Childrens Fund (UNICEF), fifty-two years after its creation, established a Child Protection unit as a demonstration of its commitment to protecting childrens rights. The unit included the division formerly known as Children in Exceptionally Difficult Circumstances. Its establishment reflected UNICEFs mission statement which, in 1996, mandated that action for the protection of childrens rights be guided by the Convention on the Rights of the Child. UNICEF thus acknowledged the centrality of rights to its agenda, which previously had been dominated by issues of health and poverty. The convention was adopted by the General Assembly in 1989 and entered into force in 1990. One hundred ninety-one countries had ratified the convention; only Somalia and the United States had not.

Childrens rights issues that required research and action for change in 1998 included:

 Child soldiers: about three hundred thousand children around the globe served as soldiers. Many were killed in combat or forced to kill others, and committed atrocities on their own or on threat of death. These children were often maimed physically and psychologically, denied education and a normal life. Most faced overwhelming difficulties at wars end in becoming normal, productive members of their communities.

 Children, some as young as six, continued to work as bonded laborersslaves, reallyin bad conditions, often physically abused, receiving little or no pay and no education. Some worked as domestics, toiling from dawn until late at night, six or seven days a week, for little or no pay, suffering physical and sexual abuse.

 Police continued to beat street children and to lock them up simply for being on the street. Children in institutions, both orphanages and penal facilities, continued to be confined in inhumane conditions, denied decent educations, and often physically abused. With little being done for their rehabilitation, care, and development, children confined in these institutions often ended up far worse off than before entering.
	Womens Human Rights

Human Rights Developments

Fifty years after the Universal Declaration on Human Rights promised respect for human rights to all people, womens human rights activists have forced governments to acknowledge the pervasive nature of violations of womens rights and their own duty to stop them. Despite the unprecedented visibility of the womens rights movement and governments articulation of policies supporting womens rights, many governments failed to reform laws that overtly discriminated against women and practices that denied womens rights. Womens rights advocates countered these failings with activism.

There were some milestones in 1998 that reflected womens struggle to bring human rights protections to bear in their own lives. In 1998 the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda convicted Jean-Paul Akayesu of sexual violence in Rwandas 1994 genocide, showing that there can be justice for women raped in conflict. In three African countries, Nigeria, Uganda, and Malawi, womens rights activists pushed their governments to prove their commitment to womens rights by granting women property and inheritance rights. In Mexico, women workers successfully petitioned a body established by the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) to recognize and remedy workplace sex discrimination. In these and other cases, change occurred as a direct consequence of womens activism: its development locally and strength internationally.

Yet in 1998 women still saw their ability to enjoy basic human rights challenged at every turn. Governments both proclaimed their commitment to womens rights and pursued policies that undermined them. At least fourteen countries that have sworn to combat sex discrimination by ratifying the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women continued to deny women full citizenshipAlgeria, the Bahamas, Cyprus, Egypt, Fiji, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Maldives, Morocco, Republic of Korea, Turkey, and Tunisiaand reserved the right to do so when they ratified. Other governments openly challenged the notion that universal human rights extend to women. Taliban authorities in Afghanistan, for example, confined women to their homes, cut off their access to education and health care, and beat them on the streets.

Progress in 1998 resulted directly from increasing visibility and strength of the international womens rights movement during the decade. Years ago womens rights activists in communities around the world began challenging the notion that human rights protections did not apply to the violence and discrimination in their lives. Women embraced the universality of human rights as a guarantee of respect for their dignity and the equality that, as human beings, they, too, should enjoy. Womens rights activists captured the attention of the international community at the 1993 U.N. World Conference on Human Rights and won recognition that womens rights are human rights. At the 1995 U.N. Conference on Women in Beijing, governments agreed that respect for womens rights must be the cornerstone of efforts to improve womens political, economic, and social status. Despite this change in the rhetorical climate, in 1998 women were frustrated in their efforts to make the structures of government live up to the Universal Declaration. Implementation of womens rights remained slow and inconsistent, reflecting the unwillingness of international actors to change the structures that accommodate and encourage daily abuses of womens rights.

Even the claim on human rights protections that women did assert remained tenuous. Universality was under siege in 1998 when it came to extending human rights protections to women. Governments did little to remedy violence and discrimination against women, two significant indicators of womens secondary status in societies around the world. Governments in countries such as Pakistan, Russia, and Peru did little to counter high levels of violence against women and failed to remove the barriers that block women victims access to justice and needed services. The fact of impunity for violence against women in peacetime only reinforced the longstanding problem of impunity for such acts in times of conflict or civil unrest. Ethnic Chinese women in Indonesia saw their reports of rape during and after May 1998 riots denied by government officials. In Algeria, authorities used reports of violence against women by armed extremists to discredit these groups but did little for women survivors of kidnapping and rape. Many governments refused to recognize, let alone remedy, discriminatory laws and practices that have cemented womens inequality. Morocco and Guatemala, among others, did not repeal legislation that robs women of their right to make basic decisions about their liveswhom to marry, whether to have children, when to work outside the home, and whether to seek divorce.

Signs of progress recorded in 1998 thus remained isolated incidents rather than indices of meaningful change. For example, the single conviction for sexual violence in Rwanda set a precedent but changed little for thousands of women awaiting justice from ad hoc U.N. tribunals in Rwanda and Bosnia. The slow progress of governments in responding to violence against women was tragically evident in Indonesia. Rather than setting up a credible investigation to determine what happened and guaranteeing the security of rape victims who came forward, the government denied not only its own involvement but also that rapes had occurred.

Gains for womens rights occurred in an isolated fashion in part because they came primarily where the cost was least; that is, womens rights were respected only when no competing interests dictated otherwise. Governments and other international actors showed their willingness to abandon womens rights when other pressures came to bear. This was particularly evident in 1998 with the economic downturn in parts of Asia and Eastern Europe. In countries facing economic crises, women workers were forced out of the workforce or, in some instances, tracked into low-skill, low-paying jobs. Adverse socioeconomic conditions in many regions also increased the likelihood that women and girls would be lured into forced prostitution, involuntary marriage, or other forms of forced labor. In Russia and other countries of the former Soviet Union, for example, women were barred from job opportunities simply because of their sex. The lack of local opportunities enhanced the appeal of even dubious job offers from other countries.

Governments also acted inconsistently to ensure accountability for violence against women in conflict or refugee situations. For example, governments turned in a mixed record in the Rome negotiations to establish an international criminal court, on the one hand specifying that crimes against women be handled by the court and, on the other, limiting the power of the prosecutor to hold perpetrators accountable. Moreover, the precedents of the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda did not translate into international condemnation of sexual violence against women in other conflicts such as in Sierra Leone, where women reported being raped and sexually assaulted as civil war raged, or in Tanzania, where refugee women seeking shelter instead experienced high rates of assault.

The following section provides an overview of the state of womens human rights in 1998. Our investigations and monitoring during the year showed that violence and discrimination against women as committed and tolerated by the states remained the norm in countries in which we worked. Reports from activists and press in other countries confirmed the pattern of abuse of womens rights and underscored the need for urgent attention to and remedy of the problems.
Hellman/Hammett Grants

The Hellman/Hammett grants are given annually by Human Rights Watch to writers around the world who have been victims of political persecution and are in financial need. The forty-four writers who received grants in 1998 hail from nineteen countries where they face obstacles ranging from imprisonment and torture to bans on their work and cut-off of their phone lines. Writers from Vietnam, Turkey, and Nigeria received a major portion of the 1998 grants, reflecting the especially repressive climate for free expression in those three countries. But as harsh as the situation was for writers there, conditions were equally severe in other countries where the signs of repression were less visible. Licensing policies and intimidation silence many voices before they can be heard. The suppression is just as egregious when expression is inhibited before it is put into words as when the abuse of writers is open and obvious.

In addition to the Vietnamese, Nigerian, and Turkish writers, this years grant recipients include Miriam Tlali, a South African who vigorously condemned apartheid and paid the price for many years; Gordana Igric who, despite threats to her life, wrote about human rights abuses in the former Yugoslavia; and Ahmad Taufik, an Indonesian journalist who courageously covered taboo subjects like the wealth of the Soeharto family and human rights violations in East Timor.

By publicizing the persecution that the grant recipients endured, the Hellman/Hammett grants focus attention on censorship and suppression of free speech. In some cases the publicity is a protection against further abuse. In other cases, the writers request anonymity because of the dangerous circumstances in which they and their families are living.

The recipients whose names can be safely released are:

Nizametdin Achmetov, Russian poet, spent twenty years in Soviet prisons and mental hospitals after being convicted of having nationalistic tendencies. Released in June 1987, he is in poor health and unable to work.

Mohamed Bangura, Sierra Leonean journalist, was abducted after he exposed government-rebel collaboration to prolong the civil war in order to stall popular demands for a democratic election. Taken with his sister and father to an isolated house, they were tortured and sexually abused. His father was murdered; Bangura and his sister escaped. He went to Turkey and then to Canada. In Canada, with help from the Canadian Committee to Protect Journalists, Mr. Bangura established a fund for exiled Sierra Leonean journalists ( see below).

Jesus Barraza, Mexican reporter, took over as editor of La Prensa after the owner was murdered on the orders of a local drug lord angered by the papers coverage of the drug trade. The presses did not stop that day nor subsequently, and Mr. Barraza continued to report aggressively on drug trafficking and political corruption in Mexico.

Simin Behbahani, Iranian poet, whose writing has been censored and banned because she spoke out in defense of free expression. She was one of 134 writers who signed the now famous letter protesting the suspicious death of Saidi-Sirjani, after which she and the other signatories received anonymous death threats.

Oral Calislar, Turkish columnist, was convicted under Article 8 of the Anti-Terror Law and sentenced to two years in prison for publishing interviews with Kurdish leaders in book form. Long versions of the interviews had previously run in Cumhuriyet, an Istanbul daily, without incurring any legal action.

Abdulhalim Dede, an ethnic Thracian Turk and Greek citizen, has incurred the wrath of both Greek and Turkish officials for reporting local tensions without partisan bias. In 1997, in one of four trials, he was convicted and sentenced to ten months in prison. The conviction was confirmed, but the sentence was suspended.

Koray Duzgoren, Turkish journalist, has been censored repeatedly, fired, and blacklisted for having written about the Kurdish conflict, corruption, human rights, and the rule of law.

Rahzy Gonzalez was kidnapped and questioned about his activities as a journalist while reporting on political conflict in southern Mexico. On his release, Gonzalez publicly denounced the incident and founded an independent weekly newspaper.

Hoang Tien, Vietnamese writer, joined the struggle for democracy and human rights in 1996 with the publication of several articles condemning the arrest and trial of Ha Si Phu, a widely respected Vietnamese dissident. Hoang Tien was then forbidden to publish.

Gordana Igric, Serbian journalist, known for covering the war and investigating war crimes in the former Yugoslavia, received death threats that periodically forced her into hiding. Despite the risks, she continued to use journalism to expose human rights violations.

Fadil Al-Khayyat, Iraqi poet and journalist, has been harassed and imprisoned for criticizing the dictatorship and refusing to praise Saddam Hussein. When his second book of poems was published in northern Iraq, security forces tried to arrest him, and he fled with his family to Beirut.

Lu Phuong, free lance writer, joined the North Vietnamese National Liberation Front in 1968, and after the war worked at the Ministry of Culture until he was forced to retire for expressing dissident views. His writing was banned in Vietnam, his foreign correspondence screened, and he was closely followed by agents from the Ministry of the Interior.

Nidal Mansour, Jordanian editor and outspoken opponent of the restrictions imposed on the Jordanian press, has been out of work since September 1997 when the government closed twelve papers including the one he edited. In June 1998, he was convicted and sentenced to six months in prison for harming relations with a friendly state in connection with an article about drug trade in Lebanon.

Abosede Sarah Nkoyo Abge-Davies Mbah, Nigerian journalist, wrote about prison conditions and lobbied for the release of political prisoners including her husband George Mbah (a former assistant editor of Tell magazine). While in England to urge theCommonwealth nations to expel Nigeria, Ms. Mbah learned that she faced almost certain arrest if she returned home. She stayed in London and continued to press for the release of political prisoners. George Mbah was released on July 20, 1998, following the death of Gen. Sani Abacha.

Fred Mmembe, co-founder and editor-in-chief of The Post, a leading independent daily in Lusaka, Zambia, was indicted on more than fifty charges for crimes like insulting the president, criminal libel, inciting mutiny, withholding information, and violating the Drug Act. If convicted, he could be sentenced to more than one hundred years in prison, but he has publicly promised to continue using his pen to reform parliament and other institutions of state.

Nguyen Ngoc Tan, Vietnamese novelist and journalist, was arrested in 1975 and spent fourteen years in prisons and prison hospitals. After his release, he supported Ng Dinh Huys Movement to Unite the People and Build Democracy for Vietnam and was arrested again, convicted, and sentenced to eleven years in prison.

Babafemi Ojudu, Nigerian journalist, was arrested in November 1997 as he returned from Nairobi after participating in a seminar organized by the U.S.-based Freedom Forum. He was held without charge at an undisclosed location until July 20, 1998, when he was released with other political prisoners following the death of General Abacha.

Ahmet Zeki Okcuoglu has faced continuing legal battles with the Turkish government over articles and books he published that deal with the Kurdish question. Six books have been confiscated. He spent ten months in prison, from June 1997 to April 1998.

Adebayo Onanuga, Nigerian journalist, was arrested several times in 1995 and 1996 when he spoke up for press freedom and criticized military regimes past and present. In 1997, he went into hiding for fear of re-arrest but, hearing that a shoot on sight order was out against him, he fled to the United States.

Abdul Oroh, Nigerian journalist, is a founding member of the Civil Liberties Organization, a leading Nigerian NGO that trains journalists and reports on human rights conditions. He has been arrested five times and spent as long as eleven months in detention without charge or explanation.

Pham Thai Thuy, aka Thai Thuy, Vietnamese poet and journalist, was arrested, tortured, and held in a solitary cell for one year after the Saigon government fell to the North Vietnamese in 1975. Released in 1986, he still had the courage to join Doan Viet Hoat to edit Freedom Forum. Arrested again in 1990, he was held for four years and then released in poor health. He emigrated to the United States in August 1997.

Fereshteh Sari, Iranian novelist and poet, also translates Russian novels into Farsi. Ms. Sari was not politically active, but she raised human rights and free expression issues in her work and has been interrogated by government officials. Until the election of President Khatami in August 1997, one novel was banned and other books could not be reissued.

Faraj Sarkuhi, Iranian editor and commentator on literature and art, was an organizer of a 1994 statement calling for an end to literary censorship in Iran. Authorities retaliated by targeting the signatories, and three were found dead under mysterious circumstances. Sarkuhi disappeared in November 1996. The government said he had gone to Germany, but German officials claimed he had not arrived. A month later, he appeared at the Tehran airport and confirmed the governments story. In January 1997, he was arrested, convicted in camera of slandering Iran, and sentenced to one year in prison. Released in January 1998, he is living in exile in Germany.

Ali Awwad Hamad Al-Snaid, Jordanian writer, was arrested and held briefly in 1996 for writing a play about the trial of Leith Shubeilat, a prominent critic of the Jordanian government. Arrested again in 1997 for writing an article that was deemed an insult to the dignity of King Hussein, Mr. Snaid was held incommunicado and forced to sign a confession that was used as evidence during his trial. He was sentenced to eighteen months in prison, but the sentence was reduced to six months on appeal.

Reynaldo Soto Hernandez, Cuban poet and journalist, was arrested several times in 1989 and again in 1990. Convicted of contempt of authority ( desacato ), he served three years in prison. He was arrested again in 1994 and within a week was charged, tried, and sentenced under the vaguely defined law of dangerousness that is often used to justify expeditious imprisonment of dissidents. He served another three-year sentence, was released in September 1997, and emigrated to Miami in June 1998.

Suh Joonshik, Korean editor and columnist, also published three volumes of letters written during seventeen years as a political prisoner. After his release in 1988, Mr. Suh founded Sarangbang, a human rights group, and became its director. In November 1997 police came to his home, took his books and the videotapes from a film festival that he had recently organized, and put him in prison. Following an international protest and the oppositions victory in the national elections, Suh was released on bail.

Ahmad Taufik, Indonesian journalist, was imprisoned and sentenced to three years in prison for publishing the magazine of the independent journalists union without a license and for expressing hostility, hatred, or contempt for the government. Taufik continued to write from prison, interviewing political inmates, describing prison conditions, and exposing corruption like the sale of parole and bribery of prison guards. He was released on parole in July 1997.

Thich Tri Sieu, Buddhist monk and scholar, was arrested in 1984 as part of a government crackdown on the United Buddhist Church of Vietnam and charged with engaging in activity aimed at overthrowing the peoples government. Held without charge for four years, he was convicted at a closed trial and condemned to death, a sentence later reduced to twenty years at hard labor. In 1995 at a political indoctrination session, he spoke out for democracy and human rights and was put in solitary confinement. He was released in September 1998.

Thich Tue Si, Buddhist monk, philosopher, and poet, was arrested in 1984 during a wave of government repression against the United Buddhist Church of Vietnam. As with Thich Tri Sieu, Thich Tue Si was held without charge for four years in a solitary cell, then charged with activity aimed at overthrowing the peoples government and convicted in a closed trial without access to counsel. After an international protest, his death sentence was commuted to twenty years at hard labor. In 1994, he joined other political prisoners to protest a ban on meeting with a U.N. delegation. He also spoke up for better prison conditions and respect for humanrights. He was released in September 1998.

Miriam Tlali, South African writer, wrote stories and articles condemning apartheid throughout the years it was law in South Africa. This made her a target for political persecution: her books were banned; police ransacked her home, seizing and destroying manuscripts; and the government restricted her travel. Her recent work has been about conditions for black women in southern Africa.

Horacio Verbitsky, Argentinian journalist, was convicted of contempt of authority ( desacato ) for writing articles that exposed corruption and human rights abuse. After exhausting all domestic remedies, he filed a complaint (with Human Rights Watch representation) before the Inter-American Human Rights Commission of OAS. This resulted in a settlement in which he dropped the complaint and the Argentine government repealed the law of desacato that had been on the books for more than one hundred years. In 1995, Mr. Verbitsky and other Argentine journalists formed Periodistas, an NGO founded to defend freedom of expression in Argentina.

Yang Lian, Chinese poet and essayist, took part in the 1979 Beijing Spring democracy movement and edited an underground literary magazine. In 1983, government authorities attacked an epic he wrote about Tibet and banned his writing for one year. Lecturing in New Zealand at the time of the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre, he organized demonstrations. Since then all his work has been banned in China, and he fled to England, where he has been living in exile.

Zhang Lin, Chinese poet, served several sentences in reform through labor camps for expressing dissident political views. Upon completing a three-year term in May 1997, he fled to the United States and applied for asylum.

Zhou Guoqiang, Chinese poet, lawyer, former factory worker, and a leader of the Beijing Workers Autonomous Federation during the 1989 protests, was charged with counterrevolutionary propaganda and incitement but released without being tried. He continued his pro-democracy activities and was sentenced to three years in prison in 1994. Released in March 1998, he emigrated to the United States.

Sierra Leonean journalists received a group award through a special fund created to support thirty-five journalists exiled from Sierra Leone. While the individual situations varied in detail, all the journalists were subjected to political persecution due in large part to opinions they expressed or facts they reported.

The Hellman/Hammett grants were awarded after nominations were reviewed by a five-person selection committee composed of writers and editors. In the course of the year the selection committee approved two additional grants to writers who needed emergency aid to help in situations where their lives were in immediate danger.



