	ALBANIA
The State Department's 1993 report provides a comprehensive, accurate record of human rights abuses in Albania during the past year. The report contains greater detail than in prior years, particularly regarding new threats to freedom of the press and continuing ethnic tensions involving the ethnic Greek minority. This attention to detail, however, also accentuates the report's greatest weakness: a tendency to report disconnected facts without providing appropriate context or attempting to link the facts together and draw necessary conclusions.
While noting that "significant human rights problems remain," and in particular that "freedom of assembly and association remain significantly restricted," the report contends that "Albania continued to make progress toward establishing a multiparty democracy with legal guarantees of human rights." Unfortunately, Albania's human rights record in 1993 demonstrates that significant obstacles continue to impede achievement of that goal. More disturbing still are the steps Albania took over the course of the last year that represent actual threats to basic human rights.
In 1993 Albania continued to be governed by the Law on Major Constitutional Provisions, a makeshift statute that is not an adequate substitute for a new Constitution. The Parliament's continued failure to agree on a Constitution, however, was mitigated somewhat by the adoption in March of an amendment to the Law on Major Constitutional Provisions to add a chapter on fundamental human rights and freedoms. While the amendment represents a significant step toward the protection of human rights in Albania, the law remains largely aspirational at this point, given the absence of effective mechanisms for enforcement. Provisions of the Albanian Criminal Code that conflict with the human rights chapter survive, and are apparently still enforced. For example, prosecutors continue to authorize searches of homes, although this authority is reserved for judges under the human rights law. As discussed further below, new provisions that apparently conflict with the human rights chapter were also enacted by Parliament during 1993, including a new Press Law and revisions to the Criminal Code.
One positive development, however, was the Constitutional Court's reliance on the human rights chapter in overturning a law enacted on January 26, 1993. This law would have prohibited large groups of people associated with the former Communist government, including former members of committees of the Labor Party of Albania and their employees, from being licensed as attorneys. The Constitutional Court concluded that the law's "laundry list" approach to licensing would have violated both the right-to-work and presumption of innocence provisions of the human rights bill. The Albanian Parliament is expected to consider a new draft Constitution in 1994, and the adoption of a formal Constitution remains essential to the protection of fundamental human rights.
CRITIQUE 1993
As the State Department report recognizes again this year, "The rule of law and the principle of an independent judiciary are not yet firmly established" in Albania. Much of the voluminous evidence supporting this conclusion is included in the report. What the recitation of individual cases fails to convey, however, is the sense that these examples demonstrate a pattern of government failure to recognize and punish abuses of authority by Albanian officials. This conclusion is supported by Amnesty International in its October 1993 report, entitled "Human Rights Abuses by Police," which found that "incidents of police violence have increased during 1993" and noted that "human rigjits abuses by members of police forces are still in certain circumstances officially tolerated." The death of a student at the hands of the special Rapid Intervention Force (RIF) in 1992 was followed by four deaths in 1993 attributable to use of excessive force by Albanian police. According to the State Department, only one of these deaths has been followed by the trial and conviction of the persons responsible.
In addition, Albanian police used excessive force on at least five occasions in dealing with demonstrators, resulting in many severe injuries. In June, Tirana police entered a building where former property owners were engaged in a hunger strike. Demonstrators refused to leave and were beaten by the police. On June 25, in the course of arresting and expelling Archimandrite Chrysostomos, a Greek Orthodox priest and Greek citizen, police beat with truncheons and mistreated 10 to 15 people who had gathered near the house in Gjirokaster where Archimandrite Chrysostomos was staying. Later that week, a number of people, some of whom were trying to attend a banned rally in Gjirokaster in support of Chrysostomos, were beaten by police at a roadblock near the village of Dervican. That same day in Gjirokaster, police used force to break up an unauthorized march after a church service in support of Chrysostomos. On July 30, police, including members of the RIF, forcibly dispersed demonstrators protesting the arrest of Socialist Party Chair Fatos Nano when they attempted to march to Tirana's main square without a permit. RIF officers kicked and beat demonstrators with truncheons while arresting them. The report fails to confirm directly police abuse in any of these cases, noting only that "there were credible reports that police beat suspects" in the June incident and adding the word "allegedly" before reporting police mistreatment of demonstrators on July 30. Amnesty International also documented two less severe instances of police use of force against supporters of the Socialist Party, in Kucova on May 9 and in Peshkopia on May 23.
The report acknowledges that, "There are significant restrictions on the freedom of peacefijl assembly and association" in Albania. Under the Law on Political Parties, political parties may not be formed on an ethnic or religious basis. Parties which are "fascist, racist, antinational, Marxist-Leninist, Enverist, [or] Stalinist" continue to be banned under Albanian law. While these legal provisions already restrained fi-eedom of association in 1992, this year witnessed additional
_ALBANIA
threats to freedom of peaceftil assembly in the form of numerous arrests of those participating in unauthorized demonstrations. Sentences of 15 to 45 days were imposed upon at least 16 people who took part in demonstrations in July protesting Nano's arrest and an August 14 rally in Lac protesting the death in custody of David Leka. Fatmh- Kumbaro, who was charged with organizing the unauthorized demonstration in Tirana on July 30, served two months of a four-month sentence. As the report notes, this demonstration did apparently exceed the tenns of its permit when participants left the original site of the rally to march upon Skenderbeg Square. As the report mentions, however, arrests for participation in unauthorized demonstrations may well have been made on the basis of the political orientation of the protestors. Despite claims that the arrests were necessary to prevent violence, few of those arrested were charged with advocating or participating in violence; the vast majority were charged instead with simple violations of the Law on Gatherings and Manifestations, which requires permits for political rallies.
Albania's legal system remains ill-prepared to address the difficult challenges of establishing tiie rule of law and ensuring an independent judiciary. Replacement of judges, prosecutors and investigators associated with the prior Communist government has resulted in the appointment of many legal professionals who have, as the State Department recognizes, "insuificient experience and training." The January 1993 case (included in the report) in which a judge was reprimanded by President Berisha after he had dismissed charges of labor agitation against two Socialist Party officials aptly illustrates how the combination of a relatively weak judiciary and an executive branch with considerable power can pose a significant threat to the rule of law. Concerns have been raised that the High Council of Justice, led by President Berisha, has removed judges immediately following unpopular decisions. The State Department's note that judges have lifetime appointments and may only be removed on conviction of a serious crime is falsely reassuring. The High Council of Justice may in fact remove lower court judges without cause; the "conviction of a serious crime" provision, which is applicable to judges of the Cassation Court, provides little comfort, given that this same language was relied upon in the removal and trial of former Attorney General Maksim Haxhia in 1992 for "falsifying" documents by appointing three prosecutors without approval of the High Council of Justice.
These problems will only be magnified by the accreditation of lawyers who took the six-month training course mentioned in the State Department report. This new course, in which over 400 students were enrolled in April 1993, has swelled the ranks of inexperienced and ill-trained legal professionals. While the State Department contends that those enrolled in the program were children of former political prisoners, this was apparently true of only a small portion of those enrolled. In addition, enrollment in the course was reportedly controlled exclusively by the ruling Democratic Party,
CRITIQUE 1993
In addition to abuses of police authority and restrictions on freedom of association, two vestiges of Albania's authoritarian past continue to impede reform. First, as the report again recognizes, "radio and television remained state monopolies." This simple statement fails to reflect the magnitude of this enduring legacy of state control, especially given recent attacks upon freedom of expression within the written press. Second, the National Intelligence Service (ShIK), the successor organization to Albania's notorious secret police (Sigurimi), continues to hold the Sigurimi's files. The report notes that, according to senior government officials, the files are not intact and "may have been tampered with in the fmal days of the Communist regime." Given that the files have been in the possession of ShIK for over three years, these findings are hardly surprising. The report's references to provisions in the draft Constitution which prohibit collection of information on individuals except on grounds of national security and require freedom of access to government files are misleading. These provisions were already made part of Albanian law through the human rights law of March 1993, yet files from the prior regime admittedly still remain closed and reliable reports confirm the continuing surreptitious collection of information by ShIK.
One remaining obstacle to successful democratic reform in Albania remains largely unaddressed by the report. Albania continues to struggle with the difficult challenge of coming to terms with its past. For the second year in a row, the State Department declines to comment upon the arrest, trial and imprisonment of some of the country's highest-level former Communist government officials, including former President Ramiz Alia. After nearly ten months of house arrest. Alia was jailed in August 1993, and his trial began on May 21, 1994. Nexhmije Hoxha, the widow of Enver Hoxha, Albania's authoritarian leader for four decades, was sentenced in May to 11 years in prison for embezzlement and corruption. Ten additional former Politburo members went to trial in December, also on charges involving corruption, abuse of privilege and the appropriation and misuse of state property. According to one newspaper account, the defendants were specifically accused of violating Article 40 of the 1976 Constitution (which declares the equality of citizens) by "creat[ing] privileges for themselves and their families."
Former Prime Minister Fatos Nano was arrested on July 30, 1993, two days after Parliament had stripped him of legislative immunity for abuse of duty and falsification of official documents in connection with Italian aid furnished during his three months in office. As the report discusses, when organizers of a rally protesting Nano's arrest decided to march on Tirana's main square without a permit, a confrontation with police resulted and some demonstrators were apparently mistreated by arresting authorities. According to the Albanian Ministry of Public Order, the "main organizers and participants" in the rally were arrested and held for trial. The report implicitly downplays the political context of the dispute by failing to mention that the rally's purpose was protest Nano's arrest.
_ALBANIA
Albania's treatment of former Labor Party leaders illustrates some of the remaining obstacles to establishing the rule of law and protection of human rights. First, treatment of the former leaders has not consistently conformed to international human rights standards. For example, former President Alia was held for one-and-a-half years before trial. In addition, the fact that the former leaders face charges based on abuse of privileges and on economic grounds exposes the current fragile balance of the Albanian polity. The Sigurimi files remain closed and few charges have been filed that address the systematic human rights violations under the former Communist government. One notable exception is the conviction and imposition of a lO-year prison sentence in November 1993 uponEngjel Toma, a former border point commander, for using deadly force against those who attempted to cross the border illegally. While the difficult decision as to what steps should be taken against those who were responsible for human rigjits abuses during the prior regime must ultimately reside with the Albanian people, the cathartic process of addressing past abuses beyond those simply involving economic corruption or misuse of privileges is essential to ensure that Albania's democracy rests on a stable foundation.
The past year also saw several new threats to human rights in Albania. Most significantly. Parliament passed a Press Law in October, which severely magnifies existing restrictions on freedom of expression. While the law is modelled upon a similar statute fi-om Westphalia, Germany, both the legal context and the enforcement provisions of the Albanian law are vastly different from the German model. The German Constitution and courts provide a reliable fi-amework for the protection of individual rights that is lacking in Albania. This difference is particularly important given that the Press Law's stringent standards concerning published material revolve around such vague terms as "state secrets" and "threats to peace. " German courts, unlike those in Albania, have long-standing experience in weighing individual rights against protection of state interests. In addition, the Albanian Press Law sets an exorbitant fee (from 20 to 160 times the average monthly salary) for violations, and this could have a serious chilling effect on free speech.
In practice, "freedom of speech, including freedom to criticize the Government and government officials, was sometimes restricted" in 1993, according to the State Department report. Charges were filed against three journalists in 1993 even before adoption of the new Press Law. As the report notes, Idajet Beqiri, editor of the National Unity Party newspaper, was convicted of defaming the President and sentenced to six months in prison for authoring and publishing an article entitled "Sali Berisha: You are the murderer of Albania!" Reporteri, the newspaper of the Journalism Department at the University of Tirana, was shut down after its first issue, although it subsequently resumed publication off-campus. The Albania Helsinki Committee reported that journalists also faced
CRITIQUE 1993
threats to their physical safety, including physical mistreatment of three journalists and the beating death of Albanian Telegraph Agency journalist Fatmir Elezi. These attacks, according to the Committee, were carried out by unidentified persons. Finally, foreign journalists, including reporters from Greece, France and Italy, were also harassed by Albanian authorities. One notorious case, described in the report, involved an Italian journalist who was detained for writing an article criticizing President Berisha and released only after agreeing to leave the country, Given the current state of press freedom in Albania, the State Department's comment that "[ojpposition parties had good access to radio and television and were unhindered in publishing their newspapers" at the time of the March 1992 election is akin to congratulating the host on dinner when the guests were executed after the meal.
The new Press Law was joined in November 1993 by a law amending the Albanian Criminal Code. This law also poses a serious threat to freedom of speech. Under the new law, insulting or defaming "the legislative organ, the government or other constitutional organs or one of their members" (Article 14) is a criminal violation punishable by imprisonment for three months to two years. The President of the Republic is specifically protected from insults in print, in a meeting, or through dissemination of writings by criminal penalties of imprisonment for six months to three years (Article 15). Defamation which infringes on the honor and dignity of the President bears a maximum sentence of five years (Article 15). Additionally, insulting "the Republic of Albania, its constitutional order, its flag, emblem, national hymn and national martyrs" is punishable by a sentence of three months to three years (Article 16). The new law even makes it a criminal offense, punishable by up to three years' imprisonment, to insult a head of state, member of a foreign government officially in Albania, or head of a diplomatic mission (Article 17). Finally, the amendments to the Criminal Code contain a broad provision making it a crime to prepare, disseminate, or "introduc[e] into the territory of the Republic of Albania" materials of an organization prohibited as anti-constitutional, anti-national, fascist, racist, totalitarian, communist-enverist" or organizations outside of Albania which share the aims of prohibited organizations and assist them (Article 9). The sweeping nature of these provisions presents a challenge not only to the freedom of speech of those residing in Albania but all those who may visit the country. The report fails to mention these troubling additions to the Albanian Criminal Code.
According to the report, "ethnic tensions increased" in 1993 after Albanian authorities expelled Archimandrite Chrysostomos. The report accurately describes Albania's ethnic communities and provides a useful summary of the areas of continued discord between Albania's ethnic minorities and the government. In particular, after the expulsion of Chrysostomos, conflict between ethnic Greeks and Albanians escalated when the Greek government decided to retaliate by deporting 25,000 documented and undocumented workers. The heightened tension continues
_ALBANIA
to pose a significant threat, as demonstrated recently when a Greek extremist group attacked a border unit in Albania, killing two Albanian soldiers.
The report's discussion of the status of women is accurate, but expands little upon the findings made last year. Further information concerning the role of gendCT discrimination in Albanian society is easily accessible, and should have been included. For example, the report points out that few Albanian women hold elected office, but fails to remark on the almost systemic exclusion of women from leadership roles in government or politics generally.
When Albania's continuing problems with abuse of police authority, freedom of association and ethnic minority rights are viewed in the light of recent legislative enactments imperilling freedom of speech and undermining the rule of law, it becomes apparent that the tone of the 1993 State Department report is over-optimistic. Except for the adoption of the human rights chapter of the Law on Major Constitutional Provisions, there seem to be few grounds for the report's opening assertion that "Albania continued to make progress" toward guarantees of human rights in 1993.
CRITIQUE 1993
