ARGENTINA
The State Department report on Argentina for the most part accurately portrays the most troubling human rights violations that occurred m 1993. These included threats and attacks against the press and the judiciary, extrajudicial killings, torture, unresolved "disappearances," and surveillance of students and government critics. However, the report avoids any direct criticism of President Carlos Saúl Menem or his administration, and its incomplete analysis fails to resolve the apparent tension between the facts reported and current US policy toward Argentina.
In June, President Menem was the first Latin American leader to be invited to the White House by the new administration, where President Clinton praised him as a "valued partner" and a "leader" in the "defense of democracy and human rights." Argentina's aggressive economic reforms and its support for international peacekeeping may ejqjlain Clinton's comments. However, his praise should not have extended to human rights. In 1990, Menem pardoned former junta members who had been convicted of multiple counts of torture and murder, severely undermining the rule of law and respect for human rights. In 1993 Menem sought to promote two known torturers to high-ranking positions in the Navy. He has continued to set an unfortunate tone on human rights and civil liberties issues, shown himself hostile to dissent and encouraged the extralegal intimidation of government critics. Death threats and physical attacks against the press and political opponents have once again become a common occurrence in Argentina. While there is no direct evidence linking Menem to many of these incidents, he has shown no commitment to stopping them. The report refuses to address this central reality in a responsible manner.
The most alarming development in Argentina in 1993 was the proliferation of threats and attacks against the press, and the report is properly critical of these violations. The detailed discussion of the physical attacks on Marcelo Bonelli and Hernán López Echague appropriately conveys their audacity and brutality. It also provides a good summary of other significant attacks, and this candor is a welcome improvement over the 1992 report, However, the report still has its weaknesses. It understates the scope of the problem by failing to address the sheer number of incidents registered. According to data collected by the Argentine Press Workers Federation (FATPREN), there were 105 threats, attempts and physical attacks against the press between March and September 1993. The attacks continued after mid-term congressional elections in October. Numerous journalists were publicly threatened with assassination, and fliers were distributed warning that "those who did not disappear in 1976 will be executed in 1993." Although Argentina's press
ARGENTINA
has remained vigorous even in the face of such incidents, the resurgence of poHtical violence against journalists presents a clear and present danger to press freedom.
The report's discussion of press issues should have included the August 14 beating of seven reporters by a gang of Peronists during an appearance by President Menem at a rural fair. The reporters were attempting to interview a man who had heckled the president. The subsequent attacks on Hernán López Echague were precipitated by his investigation of this incident, and by his reports that Peronist "shock troops" had perpetrated the assaults, allegedly under the direction of prominent Peronist politicians. At year's end, two members of the violent Peronist "Commando Organization" were arrested and charged with the August 14 assaults. A third participant in the attacks, who was later photographed embracing President Menem at an official ceremony, was not charged. The State Department should have discussed the evidence linking such an attack to persons with ties to President Menem and his party.
More troubling still is the report's failure to address President Menem's hostile criticism of the media throughout 1993, which was widely perceived as encouraging acts of violence against members of the press. In September, after López Echague was brutally attacked for a second time and while scores of journalists received death threats, the president made a number of provocative public declarations characterizing the press as "the principal force of opposition" against his government. He warned that "fr"eedom of the press can operate as a dictatorship of the press," and sought to minimize incidents of threats and attacks as "occupational hazards." In September, a New York Times editorial called on President Menem to "clarify his personal commitment for a free and unintimidated press and insist that criminal attacks against journalists and other critics be fully prosecuted."
The report does not address the government's inability or unwillingness to identify and punish those responsible for the threats and attacks. It mentions that President Menem appointed a "special prosecutor" in September to investigate, although that step may only have been intended as window dressing for external consumption. Unlike special prosecutors in the United States, who are independent as a matter of law and are usually drawn from an opposition party, the prosecutor appointed by Menem is closely aligned with the ruling party and reports directly to the president. At year's end, the prosecutor had not produced any concrete results.
The coordinated nature of the campaign of intimidation against the press virtually compels the conclusion that organized groups were responsible. Many incidents occurred only hours after journalists published articles or broadcast stories critical of the government. Telephone threats were made to unlisted numbers and members of the press and their families were followed, leading to the widespread suspicion that the police, the military or the intelligence services were involved. The State Department ignores these issues.
CRITIQUE 1993
The report fails to mention the death under suspicious circumstances of Mario Bonino, a press agent for the Union of Press Workers of Buenos Aires (UTPBA), which had mounted a highly visible pubUc campaign to demand a fiill investigation of previous attacks against journalists. Bonino disappeared on November 11. His body was found floating in a river four days later. Three days after Bonino's disappearance, three individuals forced their way into the union's offices and attacked a guard, causing him to be hospitalized. The next day, the union received a telephone call warning that, "What happened last ni^t could happen again." Despite two autopsies, the cause of Bonino's death had not been determined by the end of 1993, and there was no additional evidence to determine whether Bonino's death was politically motivated. However, his death was a disturbing end to the worst year for the press in a decade of Argentine democracy, and certainly merited discussion.
The report's discussion of legal restrictions against the press is mostly accurate and complete. It correctly notes that, in May, after the government was challenged on this issue before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, it eliminated antiquated laws that criminalized criticism of public officials {desacató). However, although the report also correctly notes President Menem's controversial efforts to regulate the press through "anti-monopoly" laws, it creates the inaccurate impression that by the end of 1993 the president had abandoned his attempts to muzzle the press. In November, the government proposed amendments to the criminal code that would double the penalties for libel communicated through the press (creating a maximum prison term of six years), and that would criminalize group libel (including, apparently, criticism of government agencies). Instead of standing firmly behind press freedoms, the government continued to threaten them.
The activities of those dedicated to intimidating government critics extended well beyond the press. In February and June, Juan Schroder of Greenpeace reported that he had received death threats after he criticized poor working conditions and lax security at the state-owned Atucha I nuclear reactor. In the first such incident since Argentina's return to democracy, Andrés Petrillo, a student leader at the University of Buenos Aires, reported that he had been beaten and threatened with death by unknown assailants only a few hours after President Menem held a tense meeting with student representatives in July. That month the small Workers Party {Partido Obrero) reported that unknown persons had ransacked its offices, photocopied the telephone numbers of its members and scrawled threats on its office walls. In August, Hebe de Bonafini, president of the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo, reported that an unknown man appeared at her home at 3:00 am and warned: "If you do not shut your mouth we will shut it with bullets." These events led many to believe there was an organized campaign to reinstate fear in Argentine society and to silence opposition to the government.
10
ARGENTINA
The report also avoids discussing a sustained campaign by certain sectors in the military to justify past human rights abuses. For example, in November, former junta member Jorge Rafael Videla reportedly stated that, instead of being asked to atone for its "supposed errors," the Argentine military should be compensated for "services rendered" during the dictatorship. Videla had been convicted in 1985 of 66 counts of homicide, 306 counts of aggravated illegal detention, and 97 counts of torture, but was later pardoned by Menem. Althou^ the Minister of the Interior, through his Under-Secretary for Human Rights, initiated legal action against Videla for publicly justifying criminal activity, such statements contributed to a climate of fear and intimidation.
The report alludes to the surveillance of students, labor unions and others, but does not discuss the issue in sufficient depth. For example, it fails to detail reports in June and July of governmental efforts to collect information about private citizens in eight of the nation's provinces. In Buenos Aires province, high school educators reported that police officials had circulated questionnaires seeking the "urgent" transmission of information about "student agitators," including the members of student organizations, and their names, nicknames, home addresses, national identification numbers and political tendencies and ideologies. Human rights leaders and community advocates reported that persons identifying themselves as government employees were questioning parents at their homes about the political ideologies of their children. In July, less than half an hour after a woman in Córdoba complained on local television about the practices of a local businessman, provincial security agents reportedly appeared at her doorstep and "invited" her to attend an interview with the Chief of Intelligence.
The report's most troubling omission concerns the highly credible evidence that these surveillance activities were set in motion by the central government. At first, Menem claimed that such charges were "inventions" of the opposition. However, the press later obtained and published a copy of a top secret order to all police chiefs nationwide from the Director of National Intelligence, with the approval of the Minister of the Interior, requesting the "systematic collection" of information regarding "all relevant aspects of crime, the social situation, and its projection and derivation in conflicts caused by social sectors, when such activities affect or could affect life, liberty or property, the rights of others, essential public services, and, in particular, the maintenance of constitutional and legal guarantees." Confronted with this evidence, the Interior Minister claimed the order had been misinterpreted. However, it was apparent that officials at the highest levels of government had knowingly instructed the police to monitor the political activities of private citizens, in apparent conflict with an Internal Security Law that prohibits such activities. Calls for more effective oversight of intelligence activities went unheeded at year's end.
11
CRITIQUE 1993
The use of fear as a political weapon was aided by contmued extrajudicial killings and other serious human rights abuses by the police. In a November report, Amnesty International disclosed an apparent "pattern of beatings, torture and other forms of ill-treatment to people under police detention in Corrientes and Chaco provinces." The State Department report correctly notes that police were involved in a number of extrajudicial killings, often with impunity, and that police violence continues to be a serious problem. However, it softens this criticism by claiming that, "The level of incidents of police brutality, particularly directed against young men, declined somewhat from 1992." This conclusion is reñited by available data. According to the Center for Legal and Social Studies (CELS), 85 civilians were killed in "shootouts" with the police during the fu^st half of 1993, compared with 52 for the same period in 1992. This hardly represents an improvement.
The report also should have emphasized that children and adolescents are the main targets of police and vigilante killings. According to the Center for Social Investigation and Popular Legal Assistance (CISALP), at least 11 boys under the age of 18 were allegedly killed by police or retired police in greater Buenos Aires in a period of less than four months. These included the machine-gunning of a 17-year-old juvenile detainee in May; the rape, castration and lynching of a 10-year-old in June; and the shooting of a 14-year-old in July, allegedly for kicking a plastic bottle along the sidewalk. In August, a private security guard shot and killed a 13-year-old boy as he played in a cemetery. These incidents should have been discussed in the section of the report addressing human rights violations against children.
The report appropriately emphasizes the continued failure of state authorities to resolve the 1992 murder of Senator Regino Maders, noting "credible reports of attempts to intimidate witnesses in the case, and of political interference with the investigation." It also should have discussed recent events concerning the 1990 rape and murder of teenager Maria Soledad Morales. The accused, a son of a Congressman with close ties to the provincial government in Catamarca, has remained at liberty, while the investigation continues to be hampered by intimidation of those involved in the judicial process. In May, Sister Martha Pelloni, the victim's former teacher, reported several death threats in connection with her testimony in the case. In September, the eighth judge assigned to the case publicly complained of deliberate interference with the judicial investigation.
The report downplays numerous reports of torture in 1993, only discussing one incident of alleged torture by the police. According to the Permanent Assembly for Human Rights, torture continues to be used as an interrogation method. In February, three police officers were charged with torturing and murdering a suspect in Rosario, and ten others were charged with covering up the incident. In September, Gerardo Raúl Montes de Oca, aged 24, reported that he had been beaten
12
ARGENTINA
and threatened with an electric cattle prod by the police in Mendoza after he was detained to determine his identity. In November, Alejandro Walter Sagado, accused of kidnapping the Governor of San Luis province, claimed he had been suspended by his wrists and beaten during questioning.
The report correctly concludes that "unresolved disappearances that may have been attributable to the police took place in 1993." It appropriately focuses on the case of journalism student Miquel Bm, who disappeared in August after filing a complaint against the police, and whose case was the subject of an appeal by Amnesty International. However, the report's statement that "a judicial inquiiy was commenced" is misleading and incomplete. In October, the judge assigned to the case denied a petition to intervene brought by Bru's parents, and was accused of delaying the investigation.
The same judge was also responsible for investigating the September 1990 disappearance of Andrés Alberto Núñez. In December, after being accused publicly of mishandling human rights cases, the judge ordered the detention and trial of 11 police officers in Buenos Aires province allegedly involved in Núñez's disappearance, charging them with illegal detention, torture and murder. The move was largely symbolic, however, as the officers were all ftigitives from justice. At year's end, they had not been located.
The report incorrectly implies that the 1992 disappearance of Pablo Christian Guardatti was resolved after his "body was positively identified" in June. Subsequent genetic tests and other analyses raised questions about whether the body at issue belonged to Guardatti. In November, the eighth judge to handle the case charged a Mendoza police officer with aggravated illegal detention. The judge refused to charge the officer with murder because Guardatti's body had not been positively identified. The reduced charge, based on the testimony of witnesses who saw the officer take Guardatti into custody, carried a limited sentence of two to six years imprisonment.
In a marked improvement over the previous year, the 1993 report emphasizes that threats and attacks against judges adversely affected the independence of the judiciary, and correctly concludes that, "There is credible reason to believe such attacks were sometimes perpetrated by the police or the military." The report also includes a substantive discussion of several significant cases in which judges were threatened or attacked. However, it does not adequately address the government's tepid response to the problem. Although police protection was provided to some judges, little was done to identify, prosecute or convict those responsible for acts of intimidation. There appeared to be little political support for the embattled judiciary at any level of government.
The absence of a strong, independent judiciary in Argentina continues to be a serious institutional impediment to the enforcement of civil, political and human rights. The report correctly notes that there was "growing public awareness
13
CRITIQUE 1993
of the shortcomings of the system" and that, "There were continued allegations that the executive branch exercised undue influence on the courts." However, for the second year in a row, the report fails to address the relevant facts or to express its own judgment as to the credibility of such allegations.
The events of 1993 suggest that the State Department understates the problem. There were several examples of presidential interference in the judiciary. In February, one of three remaining judges in the Cámara Federal of Buenos Aires was "promoted" just as the court was about to rule on an appeal concerning President Menem's former aide and sister-in-law, charged with money-laundering for an international drug ring. The reassignment of judges literally prevented the Cámara Federal from proceeding with its docket and stalled several important cases, including the sensitive trials of lower-level military officers charged with insurrection (carapiniadas). Several prominent attorneys and political figures denounced Menem's actions as a transparent effort to interfere with the independence of the judiciary. According to a poll commissioned in December by the daily newspaper Clarín, 68.7% of respondents believed that the judiciary was less independent under democratic rule than it had been under the military dictatorship.
The most egregious example of political interference with the judiciary provoked the worst court scandal in the history of Argentina. The State Department's report, however, is silent on this incident. In October, just prior to mid-term elections, two Supreme Court justices, both appointees of the main opposition party (UCR), publicly accused the Chief Justice of physically removing an anti-government decision from the court's official register of decisions at the request of the Minister of the Economy. President Menem and the Economy Minister accused the justices of breaking the news for political reasons. When an internal court investigation confirmed that the opinion had been improperly withdrawn, members of Congress and most major bar associations called for the resignation or impeachment of the entire court. The court then reissued the opinion, claiming the incident had been a misunderstanding. Many proponents of judicial independence maintained that only formal impeachment proceedings could restore the court's integrity, but such action appeared unlikely at year's end. There was no meaningful investigation of the Economy Minister's role in the incident.
The report's discussion of the government's attitude toward nongovernmental and international human rights organizations states incorrectly that there were "no requests" to investigate human rights abuses in 1993. In April, Human Rights Watch/Americas requested a full investigation of cooperation among the Southern Cone military during the 1970s, including cases of "disappearance" in which such cooperation was apparent. The request was prompted by the discovery in Paraguay of archives containing the names of victims from Argentina
14
ARGENTINA
and other countries. The Argentine Under-Secretary for Human Rights responded that she would make any information in her files available to the victim's families, but that any affirmative investigation was the military's responsibility. The military did not respond to Americas Watch's subsequent request that it investigate the matter. In December, a government commission in Honduras issued a report accusing 13 Argentine military officers of participating in the "disappearance" of at least 184 Hondurans in the 1980s, and called for the extradition of those officers for trial in Honduras. Finally, there continued to be credible reports that the Argentine government is not cooperating in resolving the fate of the "disappeared." The UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances reported in December that it had received numerous complaints fi"om Argentine human rights groups alleging that index cards on the "disappeared" still exist in microfilm form, and tiiat other information is being withheld.
The State Department's continued attention to the cases of children whose biological parents disappeared during the military dictatorship is praiseworthy. As the report notes, approximately 500 cases remain unresolved. These children, many of whom are now teenagers, cannot seek legal remedies unless they have an opportunity to leam their true identities.
The report concludes incorrectly that, "Prison conditions vary widely, but on the whole are acceptable." This conflicts with the reported statement by the government's own prison ombudsman in August that Argentina's prison system was "in a near-terminal state." In December, prison riots erupted throughout Buenos Aires province. Thousands of prisoners demanded that the government comply with Article 7.5 of the American Convention on Human Rights, which mandates that prisoners be released pending trial if they do not receive a trial within a "reasonable" period of time, The prisoners also protested overcrowding, lack of appropriate medical care and other poor conditions of confinement. At the end of 1993, the government proposed a law that would limit preventive detention to two years, subject to a one-year extension with court approval.
Finally, the report emphasizes the beneficial effects of Argentina's economic reforms, but does not mention the social unrest that these have generated, especially in the poorer provinces, where the government is the primary employer and there are few private sector jobs. In December, government workers protested pay cuts and other "adjustments" in several northern provinces, including La Rioja, where President Menem was formerly governor. Shortly before Christmas in Santiago del Estero, a demonstration exploded into riots. Government buildings were burned, dozens of people were wounded and some reportedly died. The incident appeared to be a spontaneous expression of outrage by state workers who had not been paid in over three months. Nonetheless, President Menem quickly characterized the riots as "acts of sedition," and alleged that he had "proof they were the work of "subversives." The Secretary for Internal Security in Santiago del
15
CRITIQUE 1993
Estero rqDortedly stated that he had no evidence supporting Menem's allegations, and polls indicated that most people did not believe the president.
Menem's comments are extremely disquieting. In 1992, he criticized students for protesting government policy, and warned teachers that there could be "new contingents of parents claiming their children in the Plaza de Mayo" if their protests continued. President Menem's attempt to revive the specter of "subversion" in the final days of 1993 raises concerns that he may be laying the groundwork for intensified repression of those who criticize government policies. The State Department's failure to hold President Menem accountable for Argentina's deteriorating human rights situation is a serious error.
16
