BULGARIA
With a few exceptions, the 1993 State Department report on human rights in Bulgaria prompts the same reaction as the previous year's. It continues in the positive vein that the reports have displayed since the overthrow of the Zhivkov government in 1989. The 1993 report, however, overcomes two deficiencies of its predecessors. It provides stronger and more detailed examples of certain human rights violations, and it is more willing than in the past to criticize the government for both its action and inaction.
The report again recognizes Bulgaria's progress toward democratic reforms in spite of continuing governmental instability and a deteriorating economy. At the same time, it pays si^iificant attention to deficiencies that remain to be addressed in the Bulgarian Constitution, citing weaknesses and ambiguities in the judicial system, inadequate recognition and protection for minorities, and the slow progress to date in implementing the human rights concepts embodied in the Constitution. In common with most international non-governmental human rights groups, the report focuses particular criticism on the Panev Law, which calls for the removal of academic staff previously affiliated with the Communist Party from management positions in Bulgaria's universities and scientific institutions.
At the same time, the report repeats a significant shortcoming that was pointed out in last year's Critique. This is the failure to recognize Bulgaria's remarkable stability in the face of political and economic challenges as well as the disruptive and often violent nationalism of its neighbors. Since 1989, Bulgaria has had five national elections and five different prime ministers. Nonetheless, it continues to play a stabilizing and constructive role in the strife-tom Balkans and has been enforcing UN Security Council-mandated sanctions despite severe losses to its own struggling economy. Bulgaria's human rights record has improved dramatically and stands in sharp contrast to the dismal practices of the pre-1989 period. The few violations that have occurred, while serious, are well documented, generally localized and have not risen to the level of national crisis.
As in 1992, government instability and a deteriorating economy were the year's most pressing political issues. As the report notes, the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF) government of Philip Dimitrov fell in October 1992 after several weeks of parliamentary turmoil. After both the UDF and the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) failed to form a government, the predominantly Turkish Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF), together with the BSP and a splinter group of the UDF, elected an independent technocratic government headed by Prime Minister Lyuben Berov. But despite controlling 160 of the 250 Parliamentary seats, the Berov government did not function smoothly, and on numerous occasions the heterogenous coalition nearly fell apart over differences on economic, social and
32
BULGARIA
minority issues. The primary reason it held together was the lack of any viable alternative in parliament. Moreover, the UDF concentrated much of its efforts on trying to weaken the power of President Zhelev, a member of the party, whom it held responsible for losing power in late 1992. The result was a significant increase in the power of the MRF and a strengthening of the BSP, the successor to the former Communist Party, which began to reassert itself as the strongest force in the government.
Bulgaria's economy continued to deteriorate during 1993, with annual inflation expected to be around 60%. This is further exacerbated by Bulgaria's agreement to honor UN sanctions. By one estimate, Bulgaria lost over $2.5 billion from the embargos against Iraq and Libya. Losses from the embargo against Serbia were estimated at $942 million in 1992 and another $810 million between January 1 and April 30, 1993. The lack of any prospect of compensation for these losses and the country's isolation from international markets as a result of the blockade of the Danube will only worsen the situation and heighten social tensions.
These political and economic shifts have had important repercussions for Bulgaria's treatment of its ethnic minorities, who have faced discrimination for generations, hi the past, ethnic Turks have borne the brunt of abuse, most egregiously during the brutal forced "assimilation campaign" of Todor Zhivkov from 1984-1989. In 1992, there were repeated reports of harassment and discrimination against ethnic Turks. Since the ascendance to parliamentary power of the largely Turkish MRF, however, conditions have changed dramatically, and the report fails to recognize fully the implications of these power shifts for Bulgaria's Turkish minorities. Turkish language is now freely spoken and openly taught; Islam is freely practiced; and there has been a dramatic reduction in anti-Turkish violence.
In a curious turnaround, as the report correctly notes, the Turks are now being accused of discriminating against Bulgarian Muslims. The report cites localized incidents of oppression and violence during the recent census, as Turkish community leaders tried to force Bulgarian Muslims to "Turkify," particularly in Satovcha and Gurmen, There were reports of Bulgarian Muslims being forced to assume Turkish names or being denied access to religious rites if they retained their Bulgarian names. (This is an interesting twist on the prior assimilation campaign, which obliged Turks to assume Bulgarian names.)
In general however, the focus of violence and discrimination has shifted from the Turks to the Gypsies, or Roma. The 1993 report shows a marked improvement in noting the increasing problems that face the Roma. It documents several serious incidents of police brutality against Roma in Novi Pazar and elsewhere, as well as the reported failure of police to intervene or to conduct aggressive follow-up investigations. For instance, as the report indicates, in 1993 the Interior Ministry concluded an investigation into a major incident of violence
33
CRITIQUE 1993
against Gypsies in Pazaijik the previous year. The ministry armounced that it had found no evidence of serious transgression but declined to release its report. Human Rights Watch/Helsinki sent a letter to President Zhelev requesting that the report be released, but received no response.
While the report gives details of two Roma men brutally beaten by police, it should also have included the case of 23-year-old Zaharie Aleksandrov Stefanov, an ethnic Turk married to a Roma woman, who was arrested on June 3 for allegedly committing several thefts. Eyewitnesses reported that he was brutally beaten by the police and later taken to the regional police station, where he died on June 5 under suspicious circumstances. Police claimed that he jumped from the window of a third floor interrogation room while alone in the room.
Althou^ economic decline affects all Bulgarians, there are reliable reports that the Roma bear a disproportionate burden. They are generally the first to be fired and currently suffer an unemployment rate of more than 70% as the result of a low level of literacy and a lack of professional qualifications. Some anti-Roma hostility may simply reflect the inevitable search for scapegoats during difficult economic times. Roma have also reported being barred from entering restaurants and other public places in towns and are frequently harassed by police on repeated passport checks.
Despite these problems, Bulgarian minorities are far freer today than in the past to manifest their identities, speak their languages and follow their cultural traditions. A return to the wholesale suppression of minority groups, such as the 1984-1989 forced assimilation campaign against the Turks, appears inconceivable.
In 1993, Bulgaria pressed ahead with the criminal trials of Todor Zhivkov and other former Communist leaders, with charges that initially centered on economic and political decisions made when they were in power. The Chief Prosecutor's office was criticized for failing to bring claims for criminal acts and serious human rights abuses, such as the forced assimilation of Turks or the atrocities at the Lovech labor camp from 1959-1962. Some observers speculate that the political climate in Bulgaria may have led prosecutors to concentrate first on the less controversial economic crimes. In 1990 and 1991, there was still strong popular support for some of Zhivkov's anti-Turkish policies. As noted in last year's Critique, objections were raised to these prosecutions on the grounds that Bulgaria's 20-year statute of limitations had expired. The Prosecutor General rejected these objections, maintaining that Bulgaria did not have a normal legislative system at that time, and further maintained that there should be no statute of limitations for "crimes against humanity."
As the report notes, the first indictments on these issues were handed down in 1993, and the trials began of five defendants involved in the forced assimilation program. Zhivkov and former Interior Minister Dimitur Stoyanov were scheduled to go to trial in February 1994 on similar charges. In January, Parliament voted to
34
BULGARIA
strip former BSP leader and Commnnist Party ideology chief Alexander Lilov of his parliamentary immunity so that he could face charges for aid given to pro-Soviet governments in the Third World. The BSP objected, claiming the actions were politically motivated.
During 1992 and 1993, due in part to the political unrest in the country, there were repeated charges that many facets of Communist rule were being restored. As a result, parliament passed a series of "lustration" laws to break the hold on the civil service held by former Communist Party supporters. In 1992, parliament passed a Banking Law, the effect of which was to prohibit former Communists from holding high-ranking posts in the fmancial sector. This was closely followed by the Pension Law, which prohibited former Communist functionaries from obtaining pensions. The Constitutional Court revoked both laws in late 1992 on the grounds that they violated several constitutional provisions, including the prohibition on discrimination on the basis of political affiliation. In addition, several other lustration bills were drafted and presented to the National Assembly, including a bill for Overcoming the Consequences of Communist Rule, and the Law on Decommunization in the Sphere of Government, the Public Servants Act and the Law on Democratization were introduced. None of these latter reached a vote in the National Assembly.
The report does not mention any of these laws or legislative initiatives, commenting only on the so-called Panev Law, passed by parliament in December 1992. This calls for the removal without appeal of academic staff previously affiliated with the Communist Parly from management positions in research and science over the next five years. President Zhelev and 102 parliamentarians challenged the law before the Constitutional Court, which astounded human rights observers by upholding it, finding that the law does nothing more than introduce additional professional qualifications for members of the elected boards of scientific organizations. This was particularly surprising since the court had already stricken down the Banking Law and the Pension Law. The report comments quite correctly that, "The Panev law applies a presumption of collective guilt that is clearly in conflict with international human rights standards."
While the report is generally accurate in its description of Bulgaria's attempts to develop an independent judiciary, it should have gone into greater detail about conflicts between the courts and the executive branch. For instance, the Constitutional Court overruled governmental decrees on six occasions in a five-month period ending July 1993. Yet in late October, Bulgaria's Judicial Council accused Berov and his cabinet of "inadmissible interference in the affairs of the judiciary." A few weeks later, parliament passed the first reading of a bill proposing that any member of the Judicial Council must have at least five years experience as a judge or a jurist. Political observers agree that the true purpose of the bill was to purge the council of strident anticommunists. At the end of 1993,
35
CRITIQUE 1993
the amendments were still pending and may be subsumed under a judicial reform law, These developments should have been mentioned in the report.
In other areas considered by the report, Bulgaria's human rights performance was generally good. As last year's Critique pointed out, Bulgaria continues to make progress on human rights and democratic reform. Human nghts problems remain, primarily regarding the treatment of ethnic minorites. Bulgaria has demonstrated, however, that it can change governments and leadership peacefully without disruptive upheavals, national crisis or recourse to violence. In this respect, it has distinguished itself from its neighbors. The country's economic situation, however, will bear close monitoring in future reports, since fiuther decline will undoubtedly increase the risk that some of Bulgaria's citizens will be made to suffer as scapegoats.
36
