	BOSNIA
The State Department's 1993 report on human rights practices in Bosnia and Herzegovina (hereinafter Bosnia) provides a grim and generally accurate accounting of the abuses in that war-torn country. The report is more ambiguous than its predecessor, however, and is flawed in several crucial respects. First, it understates the degree and scope of the atrocities perpetrated by all sides to the conflict, a fact that cannot easily be divorced from the unwillingness of the United States to become more deeply involved in the Bosnia conflict. Second, the report attempts to characterize the war in Bosnia as an internal ethnic conflict and to minimize the role of the governments of Serbia and Croatia. Finally, although the United States has repeatedly emphasized the need to hold individuals accountable for their war crimes and crimes against humanity, the report completely fails to ascribe blame, even where credible evidence exists that would justify naming the perpetrators.
Unlike the 1992 report, which correctly stated that the war did not erupt "spontaneously but was consciously stimulated from the outside in the absence of any significant threat to the safety of the Serbian population," the 1993 report plays down any connection between the government of Serbia and the Bosnian Serbian Army (BSA), or between the government of Croatia and the militia of the Croatian Defense Council (HVO). For example, the report states that, "Supported by the Serbian authorities in Belgrade, the BSA began a brutal campaign of terror — in which acts of genocide took place — to establish an ethnically pure state linking Serb-occupied territory in Croatia with Serbia/Montenegro to form 'greater Serbia.'" In fact, there is substantial evidence that both Belgrade and Zagreb have done much more than "support" the BSA and the HVO. The report attempts to minimize these external influences and to mischaracterize the Bosnian conflict as civil war rather than an instance of international aggression.
The report correctly states that approximately 50% of Bosnia's prewar population of 4.4 million people had been affected directly by the war as of October 1993. Two hundred thousand Bosnians had died; 800,000 had become refugees outside Bosnia; and 1.2 million had been displaced within Bosnia. Although these figures are in themselves staggering, the report fails to mention that when the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) began humanitarian airlifts to Sarajevo in July 1992, shortly after the city was sealed off from the outside world, it conducted "the largest operation of its kind since the Berlin airlift." By June 1993, some 2.28 million persons (more than half of the population) were being assisted by the UNHCR.
The report accurately describes the campaigns of "ethnic cleansing" that continued to occur throughout 1993. However, it is often ambiguous about who is
17
CRITIQUE 1993
directing these campaigns and does not directly link the policy of "ethmc cleansing" to Serbia. For example, it states that "the BSA, supported by paramilitary forces from Serbia and Montenegro, moved to complete ethnic cleansing campaigns in eastern Bosnia." Since there is ample evidence that these paramilitary forces were acting either under direct orders from or in conjunction with the Serbian government, the report's failure to state this connection creates a misleading impression. Moreover, the report frequently fails to identify the particular paramilitary forces.
The report also correctly lists the various techniques used in "ethnic cleansing" campaigns, such as rape. In that sense it is an improvement over the
1992	report, which only mentioned the occurrence and probable extent of rape. The
1993	report accurately identifies rape as a "tool of war to terrorize and uproot populations," and states that the BSA used rape in this fashion. For example, 100 women aged 15-17 were said to be detained for purposes of sexual abuse by the BSA in a coffee house near Skijana. Although the report states that the number of alleged rapes by the BSA was lower in 1993 than in the previous year, there is no accurate way to determine whether this statement is correct. HVO and government troops have also been accused of rape, but these reports were fewer in number and did not appear to be part of an organized campaign of "ethnic cleansing." For example, during the HVO's "ethnic cleansing" of Mostar, women were said to have been raped by soldiers from both the HVO and the government. The report also correctly takes note of allegations that UNPROFOR troops have frequented some of the locations where Muslim women were held.
The report's unemotional and purely factual listing of one atrocity after another committed by all three parties to the conflict is truly unnerving. The 1992 report stated at the outset that, "Limitations of space and the standardized format used in this report make it difficult to detail the true scope and horror of the atrocities committed by these Serbian forces." This year's report offers no such apology.
The report correctly notes that in early 1993, the BSA "virtually destroyed the hamlet of Cerska . . . and subjected Srebrenica, Gorazde, and Zepa to strangulation and intense shelling." However, conditions in these enclaves merit just a single sentence, slating that when UNPROFOR forces finally reached them in March, they "described conditions as the worst they had ever seen and noted that there were virtually no residents left to help." The UN Special Rapporteur on Human Rights in the Former Yugoslavia, on reporting on the siege of Cerska, provided much more illuminating detail:
There are reports of there being many wounded. Medical
conditions were medieval, with little or no drugs or anaesthetics.
Amputations were carried out without anaesthesia. Bandages,
18
_BOSNIA
when available, were used and reused without detergent or disinfectant. People died of the simplest injuries because of the lack of medical treatment while skin diseases, lice, gastroenteritis and hepatitis aifected much of the population .... It is reported that almost everyone who remained in Cerska village left in a group of about 10,000 people on the night of 1 or 2 March, using the trail towards Konjevic Polje along the river. One witness reports watching from the mountain above as Serb forces entered Cerska village with infantry, then tanks and then armoured vehicles: 'The houses had already been destroyed by shelling, but even if a piece of a roof was intact the Serbs would set it on fire so that everyone else could see.'
The report also correctly states that "by late spring, the BSA had consolidated most of its military gains in the east" and, with the threat of tighter economic sanctions against Serbia, scaled back its assaults in the east. The report goes on to say, accurately enough, that the BSA then renewed its siege of Sarajevo, but it fails to convey the severity of this operation. The UN Special Rapporteur, by contrast, has expressed concern that "the basic needs of civilians in Sarajevo are being used as a weapon of war," in violation of international law. For example, from the start of the siege until August 1993, the central hospital at Kosevo had been hit by 264 shells, in violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, which protects the wounded and sick. Since the hospital is clearly visible from Bosnian Serb positions, the Special Rapporteur concluded that some of those impacts must have been intentional.
Although the report mentions that "ethnic cleansing" campaigns also took place in Banja Luka and Bijeljina in 1993, it fails to give specific details. The Special Rapporteur has reported as follows on BSA tactics in these operations:
Non-Serbs from Brcko, Bijeljina, Banja Luka and other places have told how commission [for exchange] officials put them on a bus at short notice with a minimum of personal belongings and forced them to surrender their house keys. The military police searched them and confiscated valuable items, sometimes with beatings. They were then driven to points on the confrontation line and forced to walk across minefields to positions held by the Government, for instance at Satorvici and in the Tuzla region. In some cases, this was the fate of non-Serbs who believed they were being taken abroad to be reunited with their families. Hundreds of non-Serbs from Bijeljina and Doboj who had not
19
CRITIQUE 1993
even applied to leave have also been deported across the confrontation line.
Although the report correctly states that periodic skirmishes between the HVO and the Bosnian Government army had escalated into outright war by April 1993, the report downplays the role of Croatia in this conflict. There is substantial evidence that Croatia has provided direct and substantial economic, political and military support to the HVO. Thus, the report's assertion that Croatian support is "significantly less than that which Serbian authorities provided to the BSA" is misleading.
The report accurately notes that the trigger for the Govemment-HVO conflict was Mate Boban's proclamation on August 28, 1993 of a separate Bosnian Croat state within Bosnia. Boban declared Mostar as its capital and demanded that government troops submit to HVO command. The report also correctly states that when the government refused, the HVO blockaded Mostar and began a siege that was marked by "some of the most extreme human rights abuses" in Bosnia in 1993. The report is also correct in stating that the HVO has engaged in vicious acts in central Bosnia, and lists the villages where they perpetrated the most notorious abuses: Ahmici, Vitez, Stupni Dol and Maglaj (where the HVO collaborated with the BSA). But again, the report offers no illuminating details of what in fact occurred. John Bums, the Pulitzer prize-winning reporter for the New York Times, described what he saw in Stupni Dol:
In a storage room at the rear [of a house] was one of the most miserable images of a war that has produced countless scenes of slaughter and at least 200,000 deaths.
Shining a flashlight behind sacks and barrels filled with potatoes, beets and squashes, reporters found a wooden trapdoor opened to reveal a shallow crawl space. Sitting upright through the opening, their arms intertwined as if for comfort from their terror, were three women in their late 30's or early 40's, their bodies blackening. One had had her throat cut. All three had been shot several times, in the face, throat and chest.
Elsewhere in the village, reporters saw 13 other bodies. United Nations officers said they had counted 19, and more were turning up by the hour. A boy of perhaps 15 lay naked, his body burned, one foot in an old army boot, the fingers of one hand chopped off. Nearby, a girl said by United Nations doctors to be about 10 years old lay face-down, her skull broken, her body also burned.
20
_BOSNIA
In a house on an upper ridge of the village, four charred bodies lay clustered together, one of them a man lying atop a small boy, another a woman.
Also on the upper ridge, by one of the few houses that had not been dynamited, there was evidence of what could have been one of the rapes reported by some of the 25 survivors who fled across the mountains to the Muslim-held town of Breza, five miles away. In a storeroom, a crawl space lay open, the wood planking that covered it cast aside, with a blanket and a jacket abandoned on its floor. A few paces away in the garden, perhaps pulled from the crawl space, two sisters, Amela and Suvada Likic, aged 19 and 22, appeared to have been assaulted.
In a muddled pile, reporters found the young women's medical cards, issued to all citizens in what was Yugoslavia, and what appeared to have been their clothing, a black cotton dress and a two-piece yellow track suit, along with a pair of tights. As if the two women had been forced to empty their handbags, the pile on the ground included tubes of lipstick and eye liner, a bottle of perfume, a box of sanitary pads and a pair of spectacles. Nearby, one of a half-dozen pyres set by the Croatian soldiers continued to smolder, giving off a heavy odor of burned flesh.
The UN Special Rapporteur also reported that the HVO and the BSA had together destroyed 90% of the mainly Muslim town of Maglaj and prevented it from receiving deliveries of humanitarian aid for four months. In Maglaj, civilians were shot and killed when attempting to retrieve aid dropped from the air. The report does not directly address the significance of this collaboration between the HVO and the BSA, As the New York Times reported on July 2, 1993, UN officials had strong evidence of close military cooperation between Serbian and Croatian militias against the mostly Muslim Army of the Bosnian government in the regions of Zepce, Maglaj, Brcko and Gradacac, This strongly suggests that Serbia and Croatia had reached an agreement regarding the territorial division of Bosnia.
The report accurately states that, "Bosnian government forces perpetrated a number of abuses and atrocities in 1993, for the most part against the Bosnian Croats." However, the report fails to mention some well-documented abuses. For example, it has been reported that Bosnian forces refused to allow seriously wounded Croat civilians to be evacuated from a makeshift hospital in the village of Nova Bila, which led to the death of 18 patients, including children. Human Rights Watch/Helsinki has also reported that Muslim forces burned and looted villages
21
CRITIQUE 1993
near Konjic and that between nine and 12 male Serbian prisoners from Konjic were allegedly summarily executed.
The report correctly states that in January 1993, the US government estimated that there were 135 Serb-run detention centers in Bosnia, and that as many as 260 camps (including HVO- and government-run camps) have been known to exist at one time or another. Although statistics regarding the number of detained civilians and combatants cannot be independently verified, there is evidence to suggest that the report underestimates the number of detainees. In January 1993, some US officials reportedly estimated that as many as 70,000 prisoners were held in detention centers run by all three sides to the conflict (other US officials put the figure lower, in the range of 35,000 to 60,000). All these figures are substantially higher than those in the report, which cites a maximum of 16,650 registered detainees). The report also states that a significant number of the 135 Serb-run camps had been closed by the end of 1993, but offers no support for this assertion.
The report correctly describes living conditions in various prison camps as ranging from "poor" to "brutal and degrading," and notes that beatings, torture and summary executions continued throughout 1993. Again, however, this laundry list of abuses does not adequately portray the reality. The UN Special Rapporteur provided this account of the HVO detention center in Gabela, where mostly Muslim men were held:
One former detainee told the Special Rapporteur's field staff that between 2,000 and 3,000 men were held in the two hangars at Gabela at any one time. The daily food ration consisted of 650 grams of bread, to be shared between 16 prisoners, and a bowl of thin soup. On some occasions they received no food for two or three days consecutively, apparently at times when HVO forces had suffered defeats in areas of central Bosnia. The hangars were almost hermetically sealed, and during the summer months prisoners feared they would suffocate. Guards threatened to spray the hangar walls with heavy-calibre machine-gun fire if they knocked to ask for air.
One of the most notorious abuses in the prison camps during 1993 — practiced by all sides — was the use of prisoners as human shields. The report mentions this fact in passing, but without further elucidation. Testimony from Banovici in north-east Bosnia illustrates how civilian detainees were placed in the firing line:
Between 12 and 30 May 1993 around 80 Bosnian Serbs and Bosnian Croats were arrested or drafted into the army and
22
_BOSNIA
immediately taken to Podobala village, where they were divided into detachments and forced to dig shelters on the confrontation line between government and Bosnian Serb forces. As the shelters were dug, the government forces advanced.
The report correctly states that the Bosnian government attempted to maintain a functioning judicial system. It goes on to say that international observers have reported that a trial in Sarajevo in March 1993 for the war crimes of two Bosnian Serb soldiers was fair. However, Amnesty International has questioned the fairness of this trial, reporting that one of the Serbs, Sretko Damjanovic, has denied the charges against him and claimed that he was forced to make a false confession by guards who beat him in prison following his arrest in November 1992. According to Amnesty International, a court-appointed doctor reportedly concluded that Damjanovic bore scars consistent with these allegations. Given the circumstances under which this trial was conducted, the report should have carefully considered the possibility that it did not afford the defendants due process.
Although at one point the report says that "only the pro-Karadzic Bosnian Serbs pursued ethnic cleansing as a matter of broad policy," it never directly links this policy to the Serbian authorities. Instead, it makes oblique references to "specific policies to expel Muslims and Croats from areas the Serbs desired for themselves," and talks about some of these abuses being committed by "[pjaramilitaries, vigilantes, 'weekend warriors,' [and] criminal gangs reporting to local warlords," This is evasive, given the comprehensive effect of the policy of "ethnic cleansing." As the UN Special Rapporteur reported in November 1993, only 1,000 Muslims of the 43,000 recorded in the 1991 census remained in Doboj; only 900 of the 15,000 Muslims registered in April 1993 remained in Bosanski Novi; all non-Serbs had been expelled from Bukovica, Mala Vukovica, Tombak and Zajir; and by October 1993, the vast majority of Muslims and Croats had been driven out of Banja Luka.
The report accurately describes the violations of humanitarian law as "widespread and egregious." These violations include the BSA's "ethnic cleansing" campaigns m the eastern enclaves in 1993, its siege of Sarajevo, and its "ethnic cleansing" in Banja Luka, Bijeljina and towns in north-central Bosnia. Violations of humanitarian law were also committed by the HVO in Ahmici, Vitez, Stupni Dol and Maglaj, and by Bosnian government forces in Uzdol and central Bosnia. One particularly disturbing tactic, to which the report rightly draws attention, was the mass killing of civilians fleeing these besieged areas. However, the report does not elaborate on this fact. The UN Special Rapporteur reported that when UNPROFOR entered Konjevic Polje in March 1993 to evacuate the wounded, they "found thousands of people clamouring to be evacuated:"
23
CRITIQUE 1993
A crowd of at least 2,000 civilians gathered around the two UNPROFOR vehicles and both the crowd and the vehicles were deliberately shelled by Serb Forces. One of the APCs was destroyed by an almost direct hit just moments after its occupants had moved to the other APC. According to eye-witnesses, at least 150 women and children, most of whom had fled intense shelling in Cerska in the previous days, were killed outright by this bombardment. Several children were decapitated. There is no accurate figure for the number of wounded who lost arms and legs.
As a result, no one was evacuated and when the people realized that UNPROFOR could not protect them, they decided to leave Konjevic Polje on foot.
The report also describes the UN's creation of the "safe areas" of Srebrenica, Gorazde, Zepa, Sarajevo, Tuzla and Bihac, and accurately notes that the BSA continued to attack these havens relentlessly through June and more sporadically for the remainder of 1993. However, the report does not adequately describe the deprivation that awaited those seeking the safety of these areas. By March 1993, Srebrenica's population had swelled to an estimated 60,000 from a prewar figure of approximately 7,000. Moreover, Srebrenica had been under siege for eleven months, with the BSA allowing no humanitarian aid to enter since December 11, 1992. Local authorities said that most of the displaced people were women, children and old people, but there was no place to put them. As the Special Rapporteur reported, "Many had to sleep rough in half a metre of snow and temperatures of minus 15 centigrade." The Rapporteur also found that between 20 and 30 people were starving to death each day and that "tens of thousands of people were subsisting on a diet of tree buds and cakes made from ground corn-cobs."
Gorazde, Zepa and Tuzla also experienced similar conditions after being designated "safe areas." For example, Zepa's population grew to 29,000 from a prewar 9,000, and Gorazde's to 70,000 from a pre-war population of 40,000. In spite of the fact that these enclaves had been designated as "safe areas," both remained under siege by the BSA, which denied them shipments of humanitarian aid.
The report accurately and vividly depicts the HVO's "ethnic cleansing" campaign in Mostar and the forced ghettoization of non-Croats in east Mostar, but it is silent on the events that led up to this campaign. Although Mostar was predominantly Croatian, by April 1993 an estimated 16,000 Muslim refugees had sought refuge there. On April 15, the Mostar city authorities adopted Statute No. 266/93, severely restricting the provision of humanitarian aid to displaced people. As a result, an estimated 10,000 Muslim refugees were disqualified fi-om assistance and told by the HVO to leave by May 9. In some cases, this deadline "was
24
_BOSNIA
enforced with arson and threats of death." The report correctly describes the forced eviction of the remaining Muslim residents to east Mostar in June. Amnesty International also reported that as early as May 23, according to UN officials, "HVO troops were evicting up to 200 Muslims a day in Mostar."
In general, the report does a good job of depicting violations of religious freedom, describing the destruction of mosques and churches and discussing instances in which citizens "hid their religious backgrounds or sought shelter with those of a different faith to avoid being separated from their families." However, while the report correctly notes that "religion became one of the justifications for fighting," it fails to say — as the 1992 report did — that those who "promoted the war encouraged religious hatred to motivate their followers."
The report discusses the tactic, extensively employed by all three sides, of restricting the movement of civilians, usually for prisoner exchanges. However, it does not adequately elaborate on this practice. For example, in September 1993, the Bosnian government announced that Zenica's 23,000 Croats were forbidden to leave the city. The Bosnian Serbs frequently have used civilians for prisoner exchanges. The movement of non-Serbs is controlled by "Commissions for Exchange," and all non-Serbs who wish to leave Serb-held territory must apply to be "exchanged" for Serbs outside the area, or to be reunited with family members in other countries. The procedures established by the Commissions for Exchange include paying a "tax" to each municipality crossed in transit, and it has been reported that some "individuals have been forced to leave behind close relatives, because they could not afford the cost of leaving."
The 1993 report is weakest in its failure to draw overt conclusions about the identity of those responsible for the massive human rights violations that have occurred in Bosnia, and to analyze and assess the nature of their crimes. The report discusses the Security Council's creation of the UN Commission of Experts in October 1992 to investigate possible war crimes as well as the subsequent creation of a War Crimes Tribunal. Although the report correctly states that by the end of 1993, all judges for the War Crimes Tribxmal had been sworn in and a chief prosecutor had been named, these facts as presented are misleading. In fact, the tribunal has held three sessions and has adopted Rules of Procedure and Evidence and Rules Governing the Detention of Persons Awaiting Trial or Appeal. However, the Chief Prosecutor, who was appointed for a four-year term, quit in February 1994 leaving the prosecution of alleged war criminals temporrily in limbo.
By listing the number of reports submitted by the United States to the Commission of Experts, the report appears to be implying that the United States is steadfastly trying to hold individuals in the former Yugoslavia personally accountable for their war crimes and crimes against humanity. However, in spite of its rhetorical support of the War Crimes Tribunal, the United States has been less
25
CRITIQUE 1993
willing to support it financially and has opposed funding the tribunal from the UN budget for peacekeeping operations.
26
