	BRAZIL
The 1993 report, like its predecessor, provides a generally accurate description of the human rights situation in Brazil. It succeeds in addressing the criticisms leveled at the 1992 report in last year's Critique, particularly regarding the problem of impunity, Due to the public emphasis placed by President Itamar Franco in 1993 on the social and economic rights of Brazil's poor majority, one might have expected an analysis of the impact of government policies on social justice issues. However, the report fails to meet these expectations by downplaying the extent to which the human rights of Brazil's growing legion of poor, 32 million of whom suffer from an inadequate daily diet despite the tenth-largest economy in the world, are systematically violated. This is the only significant failing in an otherwise well-reasoned and thoroughly researched report, which accurately places Brazil in the front ranks of Latin American human rights violators.
The discussion of the problem of impunity is the best illustration of the improved quality of this year's report. It repeats last years's accurate assessment that "a widespread climate of impunity remains the greatest obtstacle to improving human rights in Brazil." This year's discussion breaks new ground, however, with nuanced commentary of a sort not found in most reporting. For example, the report's introductory remarks are properly measured in their praise for the government in connection with the swift arrests of policemen involved in two notorious massacres in Rio de Janeiro. Five policemen were indicted for the killing on July 23 of eight homeless children in Candelaria Square, and 31 military police were indicted for the killing of 21 residents in the Vigario Geral shantytown (favela) on August 31. While noting that these arrests represented progress, the report correctly observes that "the key will be whether the investigations result in credible prosecutions with appropriate punishment of the perpetrators." This statement marks a positive shift in the focus of the report, which in prior years often gave unwarranted credit to authorities for promising initiatives rather than for actual results. More importantly, the report accurately observes that in most similar cases, "no one is charged and the police fail to carry out effective investigations."
In the ensuing discussion on extrajudicial killings, the State Department states no less than seven times that in the overwhelming majority of cases, perpetrators are not tried and/or punished. Rather than highlight exceptional actions in a handful of notorious but not representative cases, the report emphasizes the vast landscape of failure and complicity that characterizes Brazil's criminal justice system.
The report's discussion of police violence following the 1992 Carandiru Prison massacre in Sâo Paulo, in which 111 inmates were killed by military police, includes a solid analysis of the problem of impunity. The report correctly points out that the significant drop in police killings of civilians, from 1,470 individuals in 1992 to 409 in 1993, following the fu-ing of the SSo Paulo State Secretary of
27
CRITIQUE 1993
Security for his role in that massacre, indicates that "police violence is controllable." Here again the State Department displays commendable acuity. By concluding from the decrease in killings that official violence can be combated, the report acknowledges the critical importance of political will at the command level, and by extension, the responsiblity of superiors for such widespread abuse. The report, however, should have also mentioned that no military police officers have been arrested or fired from the force in connection with the 111 killings and that three police officers who participated in the attack were actually promoted in June, two of them for "merit."
In the discussion of violence by private parties, the report is similarly sensitive to the various levels of responsibility. It notes, for instance, that in Para, the state with the largest number of murdered rural workers and leaders, only one gunman was convicted of murder and no landowners punished for financing such crimes.
Amcmg other positive aspects, the report displays commendable skepticism regarding the "confrontations" between Sao Paulo police and suspects, concluding that police policy is to murder suspects rather than apprehend them. The report notes that the state has devoted inadequate resources to contend with the mushrooming docket of police abuse cases. After citing a low 20% conviction rate in courts assigned police cases, the report acknowledges estimates that Sao Paulo's four police court judges will not get through their 14,000 case backlog in this decade.
By confrast, the report's analysis of extreme social inequalities as an underlying cause for the deterioration of the human rights situation in Brazil and, in particular, as an element in extrajudical killings, generally lacks adequate depth. This is evident in the sketchy accounts of the notorious Rio massacres, in which the State Department downplays the significance of social inequalities in cases of police violence.
The discussion of the Candelaria massacre omits facts that would have made clear that this was one of the most appalling acts of police violence in recent years. In the early morning hours of July 23, several military police officers surrounded and fired on a group of 50 homeless children, most between the ages of II and 17, while they slept in front of Candelaria church. At least two of the "street children" died in their sleep and seven others were hunted down and shot at point-blank range in the head or back. By failing to describe the killings, the report understates the gravity of human rights violations dfrected against "street children."
Similarly, although the report correctly notes that 328 minors had been killed in Rio between January and June, suggesting a pattern of such human rights violations, it fails to state that the number of killings in the first six months represented a dramatic increase over 1992, since 428 children were killed in the whole of that year.
28
_BRAZIL
The account of the Vigario Geral massacre also lacks suificient detail, thereby failing to convey the indiscriminate nature of police violence in cases involving the poor. The report merely restates the claims of the police that the killings were in revenge for the murder of four policemen by drug traffickers in the fave la a few days earlier, while omitting a more telling description of the criminal actions of the police. Dressed like bandits, 33 hooded and heavily armed policemen rampaged through the fave la for two hours. First, after tossing a grenade into a bar, they killed seven men while they were playing cards; then, they shot dead eight members of an evangelical family, including an elderly grandmother and a 15-year-old girl, after breaking into their home while they were sleeping; finally, they killed six others in a shooting spree as they left the favela. The rampage ended with the police cutting telephone lines, shooting out street lights and setting ñre to vendors' kiosks. The absence of such details, coupled with the flawed account of the Candelaria massacre, obscures the virtually limitless brutality employed by police against Brazil's poorest and most vulnerable citizens.
The report mentions but does not sufficiently address the deliberate targetting of the poor and marginalized. Recalling the Rio massacres and the killing of 17 Yanomami Indians by invading gold miners deep in the Amazon forest in August, one Brazilian newsweekly, Isto E said in an editorial, "In all three episodes, there is one common element: the victims all belong without distinction to that wide stratum of people on the margin of society. But they are not the only ones. Swelling this defenseless army are the 60 million Brazilians forced to live below the misery line, a contingent that continues to grow because of a recession that has already lasted more than a decade,"
Systematic abuses against the poor extend to discriminatory treatment within the criminal justice system and to other forms of social and economic discrimination, which are completely ignored in the report. In the section on arbitrary arrest and detention, the report notes that the constitutional provision for judicial determination of the legality of detention "is usually respected" but fails to identify laws that have the effect of discriminating against poorer citizens. For example, Brazilian law grants detained suspects the right to an individual cell if they hold a college degree. Whether or not such laws explicitly violate Brazilian constitutional principles prohibiting discrimination based on social status, they clearly reflect social bias in the criminal justice system and should have been discussed in the report. Similarly, in the subsection on denial of fair pubhc trial," the report merely summarizes legal requirements granting poor defendants a right to counsel without acknowledging that, in practice, people who can afford competent lawyers are rarely convicted.
The report notes allegations that policemen routinely enter slum dwellings without judicial order on the grounds that these do not constitute domiciles. This is perhaps the most flagrant example of the way in which poor Brazilians are
29
CRITIQUE 1993
deprived of the basic right of privacy and security in their home. Worse, the police essentially offer the victim's poverty as the basis for stripping them of the law's protection. Such egregious behavior should have elicited some analysis or commentary by the State Department. In addition, the report's oddly positive construction concerning warrantless searches (". . .[a] report. . .found that [such] searches. . . theft of property, and threats . , . were often a police practice") needlessly dilutes the evidence of serious abuse. The report's discussion of the government's attitude toward independent human rights investigations should have incorporated information contained elsewhere, that subsequent to damaging reports about grave abuses in the Recife prison, access to the prison has been denied to investigators.
The State Department's own guidelines for preparation of the Country Reports direct the drafters to include "a discussion of civil rights and all other instances of discrimination, including social, economic and cultural." The social and economic ri^ts of Brazil's poor majority, long ignored by the Brazilian government, merit greater scrutiny than they are given in the report. In particular, ¿le report should have included some discussion of the absence of effective governmental policies to address the social and economic rights of the poor, given that Brazil ratified and acceded to both the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in 1992. However, the report remains silent on the systematic social and economic discrimination against the poor in Brazil. To the extent that it refers to inequalities, it downplays them. While the report correctly notes that large disparities in income distribution characterize Brazilian society, it should have noted (as previous reports have) the fact that Brazilian society has the largest gap between rich and poor in the world.
The report provides information that reflects serious human rights problems without noting government responsibility for them. For instance, it notes without comment that the minimum wage established by the government is less than one-fifth of the minimum necessary to support a family of four, based on the standard set by the 1988 Constitution, and is steadily diminishing. Given that 35% of economically active individuals earn no more than the minimum wage, the report should have pointed out that the government is effectively responsible for inadequate diets for fully one-third of Uie workforce and their dependants, contrary to Brazil's international obligations.
The report also ignored the significant decreases m the standard of living of the poor experienced in 1993. Although the 1992 report stated that the minimum wage that year was less than one-third of the minimum necessary to support a family of four, the 1993 report fails to point out the significant decrease in the purchasing power of minimum wage earners over the succeeding year.
30
_BRAZIL
Against an economic backdrop of faster growth than any other country during this century, except Japan, and a 1993 trade surplus of $16.5 billion, the report should have highlighted the government's continuing failure to address the social and economic rights of the poor, 54% of whom are malnourished children, and its demonstrated tolerance for increasing social inequalities.
The Franco administration's approach to these significant human rights problems, including a much heralded program to combat hunger and poverty, have been limited and clearly inadequate. The current human rights situation belies the proclamation by Brazil's foreign minister upon Brazil's accession in 1992 to the International Bill of Rights: "Brazil emphasizes the importance it attaches to the concept of indivisibility and interdependence of human rights. In fact, democracy, human rights and social and economic development must go hand in hand and cannot be fiilly achieved independently."
As the country prepares this year for its second direct presidential elections since the end of nearly three decades of military rule, Brazil's fledgling democracy is beginning to lose the support of many citizens and even some political and military leaders who are growing impatient with the failures of the government to forcefully address issues such as human rights and social and economic development. In the interests of social justice and the stability of the world's third-largest democracy, ftiture State Department reports should address the effects of government policy on all human ri^ts issues, in particular the social and economic rights of Brazil's poor majority.
31
CRITIQUE 1993
