	CHILE
The State Department's human rights reports on Chile have improved markedly since the advent of the freely elected civilian government in 1990. However, while usually comprehensive and accurate, they still tend to present a distorted portrait of contemporary Chilean society.
This should come as no surprise since Chilean democracy still operates in the shadow of the 17-year militaiy dictatorship, its development warped by residual human rights issues. These include the structural constraints left solidly in place by the Pinochet regime; the continued presence of uniformed personnel — both retired and on active duty — who committed abuses during military rule and in ahnost no cases have been brought to trial; and the hundreds of cases of disappearances or other abuses stagnating in the courts. To this must be added the very visible presence of the Army Commander-in-Chief and former dictator, General Augusto Pinochet. In May 1993, displeased by the continuing accusations of past abuses, Pinochet directly threatened Chilean democracy by ordering some 40 commandos, wearing fiill combat dress and carrying antitank weapons, to stand guard around the Defense Ministry in Santiago, where he was meeting with the Army high command.
The period covered by the 1993 report includes the end of the government of Patricio Aylwin, as well as the December elections, which were easily easily won by his political successor and fellow Christian Democrat, Eduardo Frei. The Aylwin government took upon itself the difficult task of returning the country to democracy; although it maintained the same economic policies as its military predecessor, in the political sphere the new civilian government set out to revitalize the institutions of ftill democracy, which meant removing the structural obstacles left behind by the military. The Aylwin government chose to achieve this goal without alienating Gen. Pinochet, who did not leave the presidency until he had secured his own legal position as Army Commander-in-Chief until 1998, and still indulges in occasional sabre-rattling whenever past abuses threaten to besmirch the reputation of the Chilean armed forces.
The State Department report briefly describes this ongoing abnormal situation, in which, as it notes, Chilean democracy must rely on "a Constitution written under the former military government . . . which places limits on popular rule." As in the two previous reports, it correctly remarks on the presence of eight senators appointed by the military regime, "which effectively continue[s] to deprive the Government of a majority in the Senate" and prevents the approval, for
43
CRITIQUE 1993
example, of a law that would restore the president's right to name — and remove — the nation's top military commanders.
The report again notes that, "The constitutionally independent judicial branch remained largely dominated by appointees of the former military regime." This phrase, a version of which has been used each year since the elected government took office in 1990, is accurate. Yet it hardly conveys the full extent of the crucial role that the judiciary has played under both military and civilian rule. Nor does it remark on the incongruousness of a democratic government tolerating a judicial system dominated by appointees of a dictatorship that routinely violated the rule of law. The report should also have noted that the president is constitutionally barred from removing Supreme Court justices at will. The main mechanism for such removal is an impeachment motion. Three Supreme Court justices were subject to such motions in January 1993, although Congress only upheld the charges against one of them.
The report's description of Pinochet's May show of force is bland in the extreme. It states: "The Army deployed a small number of troops around its headquarters in Santiago on May 28 and its officers appeared in combat dress for several days to express displeasure with civilian authorities over several issues, including judicial processing of past human rights violations." However, reports from Chile indicate that several bases in the Santiago area remained on alert for a full week. President Aylwin, aptly expressing his own displeasure, later indicated that such a display was "unacceptable in a state of law."
The report's characterization of the May 28 incident appears mild, even —obtuse. Gen. Pinochet's well choreographed display seemed intended not only to express his displeasure but to remind Chileans of the military's might, and its continued willingness to resort to arms in the face of perceived excesses of civilian authority. The boinazo — a neologism coined by combining the word boina (beret) with the suffix -azo (a violent act) came close to attaining its goal of ending judicial proceedings against military personnel accused of human rights abuses during the early years of the military government. As a result of subsequent negotiations between the armed forces and the government, the Aylwin government presented a draft law that would have quickly put an end to the ongoing trials. The draft was defeated in Congress, however, a month later. It hardly does justice to this state of affairs for the report to describe the Chilean armed forces as "largely autonomous institutions."
The State Department continues to understate the case by remarking that Gen. Pinochet is the "only surviving member of the 1973 military junta still on active duty." Again, this is technically true. But it neglects to mention that less than a year after the 1973 coup, which he led, Gen. Pinochet assumed the title of President of the Republic, and it was in that capacity that he retained power for the
44
_CHILE
next 16 years. For most purposes Gen. Pinochet was the military junta, and his influence has continued virtually without interruption.
The State Department displays a similar penchant for oblique understatement in its discussion of specific human ri¿its abuses. When it comments that, "Elements of the police forces were again responsible for human rights abuses," it is making a statement that could be made without fear of —contradiction about any security force in the world. As such, this assessment is not illuminating, and some more qualitative and/or quantitative reading of the human rights situation is definitely required. In fact, wiüi a few notable exceptions, most of the perpetrators of the most flagrant human rights abuses under military rule summary executions, disappearances and torture — were committed by military personnel, usually ñ^om the Army. Some remain on active service, and even in high-ranking positions. Such a legacy of impunity, even so long after the worst abuses were committed, is not a good breeding ground for fiiture generations of law-abiding police forces.
The report correctly emphasizes the two most important events affecting the Supreme Court during 1993 : the impeachment of its second-ranking judge for "gross neglect of duties" and the conviction of retired Army Gen. Manuel Contreras, former head of Pinochet's brutal secret police (DINA, later renamed CNI), as the intellectual author of the 1976 assassination in Washington of dissident Orlando Letelier and his US assistant Ronnie Moffitt. Both incidents were encouraging steps toward restoring the independence and professionalism of the judicial system. The Contreras ruling marks the first time that a Chilean court has sentenced a senior arrny officer to prison for human rights abuses (a retired major, Alvaro Corbalan, also cited by the report, is the only Army officer of any rank to be imprisoned for such abuses, in connection with his role in the 1982 murder of prominent trade union leader Tucapel Jiménez). Gen. Contreras remained free in 1993, however, pending appeal.
Despite describing the Supreme Court's attitude as one of mere "reluctance" to confi"ont the military over past abuses, the report gives fiill details of the court's decisions in several high-profile cases, all of which came before it after the removal of Justice Hernán Cereceda in January. The report also gives due credit to the few Chilean judges who attempted to bring the guilty to justice, such as appeals court judges Gloria Olivares and Violeta Guzmán. These cases are described one by one; in almost all of them, the Supreme Court (still "largely dominated" by Pinochet-era appointees) transferred jurisdiction to the military justice system, thereby virtually ensuring that impunity was granted before culpability was estabhshed.
Curiously, the report makes no comment whatsoever about the nature of military justice in Chile, even while it confirms that military judges invariably interpret Pinochet's 1978 amnesty law as a blanket pardon for all military personnel
45
CRITIQUE 1993
involved in even the most egregious abuses prior to that date. The Aylwin government, unable on its own to repeal or modify the law, considers that amnest}' may only be granted after a prior investigation determines whether the case falls witiiin the terms of the law. Despite the 1991 legal reforms, or "Cumplido" laws (named after the Justice Minister at the time), Chile's military judges continue to obstruct justice systematically, by reasserting military jurisdiction. By largely acquiescing in this, the civilian judiciary shares responsibility for this misapplication of the law. The State Department is wrong to say that the Cumplido laws "handed most human rights cases from military to civilian jurisdiction." In fact, they left untouched provisions that gave military courts jurisdiction over crimes involving military personnel on active service or committed on military premises. Elsewhere, the report talks of a Supreme Court decision granting military jurisdiction as "confirming the precedent that the military will take jurisdiction if an active duty ofticer is indicted for a human rights violation." This is not a matter of precedent, but of established law that has been consistently applied.
The report's comment that, "Efforts to redress the abuses were shaped by often conflicting requirements for justice and national reconciliation" reflects the Aylwin administration's often conciliatory attitude toward the armed forces in the face of the monumental conflicts and structural entanglements that it inherited from the military government. By posing "national reconciliation" as the counterweight to the demand for justice, the report has miscast the fundamental limitation on future accountability: that is, the fear of the civilian government that the military will not stand idly by while its members are brought to trial. The reference to "national reconciliation" connotes a deep societal wound that will require great forbearance if it is to heal. Some, perhaps many, Chileans are undoubtedly sympathetic to the military's efforts under Gen. Pinochet. However, the main constraint on the civilian government is not the views of its constituents but the latent threat from the military.
The report notes that allegations of torture by Chile's two police forces. Carabineros and Investigaciones, "seldom resulted in arrests, in part because members of the judiciary, many of them appointed by the military regime, are reluctant to pursue the issue vigorously" — or at all. The report of the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, released in January 1994 (and thus unavailable to the drafters of the State Department report) refers to 47 cases of people detained between 1991 -1993 and allegedly subjected to torture and mistreatment. These are described briefly in the Chilean government's response to the UN Special Rapporteur on December 2, 1993. The government indicated that, in 16 of the 47 cases, a medical examination found no visible signs of torture or injuries; in another 16, no information was — given; in eight cases, bruises or signs of blows with blunt instruments were found; — in three, the victim was recovering from bullet wounds; and in two, the person
46
_CHILE
had never lodged a complaint of ill-treatment. In four cases, the government stated that the person was being tried or sentenced for terrorism. This last reply — hardly an apposite one — contrasts with the generally cooperative attitude that the government has displayed toward human rights groups. Persons held on terrorism or arms charges can be detained for longer periods of time (prior to being charged) than ordinary detainees. The government may have wished to imply that the possibilities for torture or mistreatment are therefore greater in those cases. However, this would also acknowledge that the government has little control over its own police forces. The document also reveals that the Third Comisaria (police station) of Carabineros in Santiago was cited as a place of torture no less than 11 times; the headquarters of Investigaciones was mentioned six times.
The brief discussion of prison conditions is disarmingly sangtiine in the face of serious problems. "Prisons are strapped for funds and antiquated, but conditions are not life-threatening," the report says phrasing that subtly conveys a disturbingly low standard for assessment. Further on, it notes without comment that prisoners with sufficient fimds can rent better space within the prison. The report should have recognized that this practice amounts to a form of discrimination based on economic status.
When describing extrajudicial killings allegedly committed by members of the police, the report omits an important incident recorded by Amnesty International and the World Organization Against Torture. One of two people who died during the mass demonstration on September 11,1993 — the 20th anniversary of the military coup — was a bystander, Sergio Calderón. All accounts appear to confirm that he was run over by a police water cannon vehicle, and two eyewitnesses (a couple) testified to that effect. Two days later, armed men in a car spoke to the couple's 9-year-old daughter, Majorie Agosin, who was alone on the street near her home. The men apparently tried to persuade her to enter the car, but seeing a gun, the girl ran home. The vehicle followed her, and its occupants then threatened her parents with death if they persisted in telling their story. Amnesty International also reports that a habeas corpus filed on the witnesses' behalf was rejected by the courts.
The report's discussion of the arrest and alleged torture of Tania Maria Cordeiro, a Brazilian citizen, after the detention of her boarder on a terrorist charge, states that the Brazilian consul "tried for months to call the Government's attention to the case" before Ms. Cordeiro's lawyer. Hector Salazar, publicized the case in August. The report should have pointed out that Ms. Cordeiro's daughter, 13-year-old Patricia Vaz, was also arrested for four days. According to the World Organization Against Torture, the girl was refused adequate treatment for her diabetes and at one point lost consciousness. She was interrogated "under threat of reprisals against her mother," and was forced to sign unspecified documents.
47
CRITIQUE 1993
This sort of abuse against children is not a common occurrence. But in the cases of both Majorie Agosin and Patricia Vaz, the children were deliberately used to threaten the parents, with no consideration whatsoever for their special status or welfare. Although this abuse cannot be condemned too strongly, the report does not deal appropriately with either case.
The report's sections on civil liberties, including censorship and freedom of assembly, are accurate and detailed. Again, however, there are no comments on direct military intervention in civilian affairs, such as the confiscation of a newspaper by a military court or the Navy's seizure of a book on ethics and military intelligence, written by a retired Navy captain. Both cases illustrate once more the stubbornness of resistance from the armed forces when confronted with issues they perceives as their own.
Such incidents continue to occur in Chile, and all too often the official response is inadequate to punish such abuse or deter its repetition. In the uneasy coexistence of civilian and military worlds, the government often fmds itself uncomfortably caught in the middle. For example, President Aylwin, with an obviously anxious eye on the potential response, asked the state-owned television station to delay the broadcast of a revealing interview on state-sponsored terror with a former American DINA agent, Michael Townley. The interview was broadcast after a brief delay, and there was little surprise when former DINA chief Gen. Manuel Contreras subsequently threatened that he would one day "take out the war hatchet."
As the report states, 1993 saw "no new cases against journalists" instigated by the military courts. However, the book Impunidad Diplomática, by investigative journalist Francisco Martorell, was banned by a court of appeals, a result that apparently precluded a trial and investigation of the facts.
In May, at the Army's invitation, there was an unprecedented meeting at the War Academy between leading press officials and the top echelons of the military. The event was aptly described by one news editor as "one of the most . . . delayed events of the transition" to democracy. The mutual mistrust could hardly have been cleared during such a brief encounter, and its significance lies in the fact that it took place at all. It was less than three weeks later that Pinochet, who had presided over this unusually democratic meeting, staged his boinazo on the streets of Santiago.
The report's section on political rights is both comprehensive and accurate, correctly describing once more the structural limitations imposed by the former military government, including the unique binomial electoral system and the inability of the present administration to remove the chiefs of the armed forces. Future reports will do well, however, to incorporate facts such as these into a more integrated analysis of the limitations on Chilean democracy, which recognizes that
48
_CHILE
respect for human rights cannot take proper root as long as the rule of law continues to exist under military suffrance.
49
CRITIQUE 1993
