CHINA
The 1993 report on the People's Republic of China (PRC), like its recent predecessors, is a generally accurate and hard-hitting portrayal of the numerous continuing human rights violations in the PRC. The report appears to take into account many of the comments made by the Lawyers Committee on last year's report, and leaves relatively few areas for criticism. In particular, the 1993 report is generally significantly less generous to the PRC than earlier reports with respect to the overall human rights environment, which for the first time is specifically acknowledged as falling "far short of internationally accepted norms. " The report also gives less facile credence than its predecessor to Chinese government claims and statistics about the human rights situation. The report nonetheless still contains some inaccuracies and issues that merit greater coverage.
One such issue, which is mentioned in the introductory paragraphs of the report, relates to the government's failure "to control abuses by its own security forces." To be sure, human rights abuses in China result, in part, directly fi-om official political and legal policies. Another major source of problems, however, is local disregard of such safeguards as exist in government laws. Long thought of as a monolith, the central government of China has in fact long since begun to lose control over the actions of local authorities. The need for the government to take this problem more seriously and engage in greater education and control of local authorities is an issue that bears further attention. On the question of "disappearances," the Critique pointed out last year that, while there might be no evidence in China of people who disappear and are found dead, there are numerous cases of people simply being taken away for long periods — often years — of administrative investigation and detention. This year's report does acknowledge the government's failure to account for all those detained in connection with the suppression of the democracy movement in 1989. It might also have pointed out, however, the frequent continuing phenomenon of individuals being taken fi"om their homes and held incommunicado for long periods.
The report discusses the claims of the PRC procuracy to be monitoring the welfare of detainees and supervising the activities of law enforcement personnel. While the procuracy is indeed intended to play this watchdog role in the PRC system, which is inherited fi"om the Soviet model, it also acts as state prosecutor, and discussions with legal experts in China suggest that the procuracy's supervisory role has always been weak at best, if not wholly ineffective. The extent to which the procuracy has really proved able to play an effective, independent role in curbing human rights abuses would merit further study in next year's report.
50
_CHINA
In its treatment of torture, the report makes specific mention of a number of individual cases of prisoners subject to particularly arduous conditions. While it is of course impossible to name all such cases, one wonders why, for instance, Qi Dafeng should have been singled out as a "reeducation through labor" prisoner, and why no mention was made in this context of Fu Shenqi, who has been repeatedly imprisoned for political reasons. As noted in a different context, Fu was sentenced in 1993 to a 3-year term of reeducation through labor and consigned to backbreaking labor in a camp fifteen hours from Shanghai,
A number of points bear noting in the report's section on arbitrary arrest, detention and exile. The discussion of administrative mechanisms designed to circumvent formal detention rules is generally accurate. It should be noted, however, that "supervised residence" is not the subject of unpublished administrative regulations. Rather, it is an open-ended mechanism provided for in the PRC's Criminal Procedure Code as a way of dealing with suspects "whom it is necessary to arrest but against whom there is not yet sufficient evidence." Thus the frequent use of this lactic to keep people such as legal scholar Yu Haocheng and journalist Zhang Weiguo in public security "guesthouses" for long periods has a specific public legal basis, representing one of the many serious defects in China's formal law codes.
The report's reference to the release of some detainees "at the discretion of public security officials" raises an issue that is not dealt with in the report but is, by China's own admission, of increasing severity. This is the extent of corruption in the legal system and, particularly, in the public security and prison apparatus. Reports from Chinese sources in the past year tell in shocking detail of an increasingly sophisticated system under which release from custody may be obtained for a certain amount, medical parole for another sum, and so forth. Corruption represents an obvious distortion in the legal system, creating the potential for substantial human rights abuses, and is an issue that the drafters of the report should monitor carefully over the coming year.
On the question of judicial independence, the comment that "party and government leaders ahnost certainly predetermine verdicts and sentences in some sensitive cases" understates the degree to which the Chinese courts are subject to pressure from behind the bench. According to research by the Lawyers Committee, the role of party-dominated "adjudication committees" within the courts, and "political-legal committees" outside them, in exerting strong pressure over sentences — and sometimes actually setting them — has been on the rise in recent years. This is true even in cases that do not appear to be "sensitive" in a political sense. In the same connection, while the report notes that there have been reversals in moves to separate the party from government, it might also have remarked on the fact that Ren Jianxin, President of the Supreme People's Court, has served
51
CRITIQUE 1993
concurrently since 1992 as Chairman of the central Political-Legal Committee of the Chinese Communist Party.
A number of other legal points raised in this section also require clarification. First, the insufficiency of confessions without other evidence as a basis for conviction is a matter of formal law (Article 35 of the Criminal Procedure Code) and need not be simply attributed to "judicial officials." Second, the period of seven days before trial for retention of a defense lawyer is a legal minimum; Chinese lawyers report being able to become involved somewhat earlier than that in some cases.
As far as court appeals are concerned, the report might have gone into somewhat greater detail as to the reasons for the inadequacy of the appeals process. The problem relates in large part to the fact that the higher court that will ultimately take the appeal is often consulted for "guidance" by the court of first instance. On a related point, the specious nature of the "nominal" review of death sentences by higher courts can only be ftilly understood if it is explained that the Supreme People's Court, which was originally required to review all death sentences, was authorized in 1983 to deputize the higher people's courts at the provincial level to review death sentences in a wide variety of crimes (not including political crimes). Since the higher people's courts normally hear appeals of death penalty cases under the relevant jurisdictional rules, the efiFect of the 1983 change was to eliminate the safeguard of an additional judicial review intended by the original legislation.
The section on denial of fair public trial adds a welcome but too brief mention of the "exemption from prosecution" mechanism, under which the procuracy may, without ever referring the case to the courts, issue a guilty verdict that enters into the individual's record. This is a wholesale violation both of international norms and of China's own declared principle of the separation of police, procuratorial and judicial powers. The problems associated with this system and the cases in which it has been used deserve more detailed consideration in the report. This is an issue on which many PRC jurists are currently clamoring for reform but encountering staunch resistance from the procuracy.
The discussion of the legal profession might have noted that, while the advent of collective law firms offers some greater degree of independence for lawyers, regulations issued last year on the conduct of lawyers were stark evidence of the continuing political control over the profession. The regulations provide, for instance, that expulsion from the Chinese Communist Party is automatic grounds for disbarment.
The treatment of the administrative sanction of reeducation through labor, one of the most severe abuses of due process in the PRC legal system, is much more clear and comprehensive in this year's report. It should be noted, however, that the so-called "labor reeducation committee," which is supposed to be composed
52
_CHINA
of labor, civil affairs and public security authorities, is widely known to be effectively run by the public security authorities with no outside checks.
The report this year makes much more judicious use than its predecessors of Chinese government statistics on the number of prisoners and releases. There is just one minor omission. In correctly noting that official figures on counterrevolutionary prisoners do not include those held for reeducation through labor (since these are technically not "criminal" offenders), the report should have added that the figures also exclude individuals held in various other forms of administrative detention such as "shelter for investigation." It is probable that the numbers of those detained in this manner exceed those held for reeducation through labor; many of them are political offenders.
In the section on freedom of expression, a number of cases are described to illustrate the use of the crime of "leaking state secrets." Even more egregious than the cases mentioned was that of PRC journalist Wu Shishen, who was sentenced to life imprisonment in 1993 for selling the text of Party Secretary General Jiang Zemin's speech to the Party Congress to a Hong Kong journalist, about a week before the speech appeared on the front page of every PRC newspaper. A second journalist, Ma Tao, was sentenced to six years for assisting Wu. Also worthy of discussion in the context of state secrets is the way in which this rubric seemed in 1993 to be used increasingly to handle cases of politically active individuals, such as the journalist Gao Yu, who was closely associated with leaders of the 1989 democracy movement. It may be that invoking "state secrets" appears more palatable to the outside world than the use of "counterrevolutionary" charges.
Also in this section it is inaccurate to suggest that the well-known dissident legal scholar Yu Haocheng was able to "overcome bans." Yu remains on a blacklist and is unable to publish in official journals, attend academic conferences or participate in academic associations. He has been able to publish some articles in local private publications and in Hong Kong, where he has published critical articles about human rights conditions in China that may well have contributed to his continued inability, until May 1994, to obtain permission to travel abroad.
In its discussion of the freedom of movement, the report neglects to mention the role of international pressure in obtaining permission for dissidents to leave China. It is clear, for instance, that Hou Xiaotian would not have obtained her passport after a two-year wait without the pressure of the debate over China's Most Favored Nation (MFN) trading status. The case of labor leader Han Dongfang, who was refused permission to return to China, is mischaracterized in the report as it has been generally, thereby missing the most egregious nature of the wrong perpetrated on Han. His passport was not actually revoked, or even stamped canceled; he was simply expelled each time he tried to enter PRC territory from Hong Kong. As a result, when he filed an administrative lawsuit against the Ministry of Public
53
CRITIQUE 1993
Security, one of the court's ready responses under the relevant statute was that no specific administrative act had taken place; therefore no jurisdiction could be taken over the lawsuit. Han was thus a victim of the "Catch 22" that characterizes many aspects of the Chinese legal system and brings about some of its most serious violations of due process rights.
One fmal issue in this area that should bear further attention in next year's report is the treatment of illegal emigrants when they are returned to China. Recent reports, which came out after the 1993 State Department report had been completed, suggested that some of the returnees fi^om the Golden Venture and other illegal emigrants were fmed as much as $3,000, rather than the $1,000 mentioned. It is also possible that some returnees were subject to reeducation through labor. As the United States and other countries continue to return such individuals to China, the issue of their treatment on arrival bears close examination.
The report understates the extent to which coercive family planning policies are enforced. Credible sources have documented forced abortions and sterilizations, as well as mandatory insertions of lUD's and criminal penalties for unauthorized lUD removals. The report's conclusion that these incidents occur only in "remote, rural areas" is inaccurate and misleading.
In the section on worker rights, the report correctly dwells on the role of trade unions, which was a focus of attention last year with the convening of a congress of the All-China Federation of Trade Unions (ACFTU). As the report says, the ACFTU has called for an increase in the establishment of government trade unions in Sino-foreign investment enterprises. In the coming year, there should be careful scrutiny of the degree to which workers in such enterprises are forced to form unions and of the role that these unions play, whether as genuine representatives of workers' interests or as ideological watchdogs, as appears to have been the case in some joint-venture enterprises.
54
