	ZAIRE
The State Department's report on Zaire does a masterful job of chronicling the myriad deprivations and torments perpetrated on the Zairian people in 1993, mostly at the behest of, or with the acquiescence of. President Mobutu Sese Seko. As the report states with welcome forthrightness in its introduction: "Zaire is undergoing its worst human rights crisis since the end of the civil war in the early 1960s."
By the end of 1993, Zaire was no closer to having a freely elected democratic government than it had been at the outset. From April 1993 on, two parallel governments, one authorized by the political opposition and one by President Mobutu, vied for legitimacy. Tens of thousands of people died in inter-ethnic violence or were killed outrigjit by security forces. One of the largest provinces, Shaba, declared its autonomy at the end of the year with no response from Mobutu's cenfral government. The economy was all but destroyed by the end of the year, with inflation running at almost 10,000%. At the end of 1993, the World Bank suspended its activities in Zaire following the Mobutu government's failure to pay $25 million in arrears.
The report documents the vast majority of the incidents of violations of basic rights in 1993, including specific names, dates and locations. Its only major fault is its continued apparent understimation of the involvement of Mobutu himself in the events of 1993, Instead, the report lays the blame on "random acts of violence and intimidation" committed by "undisciplined froops," or on other political actors, without seeing the hand of Mobutu, the puppet-master, behind the scenes.
The central issue in 1993 was Mobutu's prevention of Zairian citizens' exercise of their right to change their government. The report succinctly describes Mobutu's success in stymying the progress of democratic reform. Most of the other violations chronicled in the report are related to the infringement of this fundamental political right. As the report states: "The Mobutu regime has never permitted the Zairian citizens to exercise their right to change their government," effectively blocking the fransition to democracy that began most recently in April 1990 with the reluctant opening up of the political process by Mobutu, and culminated in 1991 in a sovereign National Conference. Dominated by a political opposition under the umbrella of the Holy Union, a coalition of political parties and associations, by the end of 1992 the National Conference had adopted a two-year transition plan for power to be shared between Mobutu, a government headed by long-time opposition leader Etienne Tshisekedi wa Mulumba, and a new legislative body, the High Council of the Republic, presided over by Archbishop Laurent Monsengwo Pasinya.
As the report indicates in its discussion of respect for political rights, Mobutu has been able to derail the transition through his continued control of an
419
CRITIQUE 1993
overlapping system of security forces and of key units of the administration, such as the Central Bank. In order to maintain this control, Mobutu has dealt harshly with those members of the armed forces who show the slightest sympathy for the opposition, and the report takes due note of attacks on former army officers such as Felix Mbayi Kalombo, the Mobutu government's continuing detention of 62 members of the Zairian Air Force in Iribu Detention Camp in Northern Zaire, and the massacre of hundreds of soldiers in Kinshasa in January and February.
During 1993, the 28th year of his rule. President Mobutu's political machinations reached new extremes. The clearest examples of this were his instigation of rioting by troops in Kinshasa in the end of January, his alternate action and inaction with respect to the interethnic conflicts in Shaba and North Kivu provinces, and his encouragement of the "ethnic cleansing" of judges and civil servants from ethnic groups favorable to the opposition from regional governments in Bandundu, Equateur, Haut-Zaire, Shaba and Bas-Zaire provinces. In essence, Mobutu's strategy has been to ignite such local hot spots in order to distract attention from democratic reform and cast himself in the role of "fireman."
Mobutu turned his continuing struggle with Tshisekedi for control of Zairian financial policy into an opportunity to purge opposition loyalists in the armed forces. On January 28, 1993, soldiers in Kinshasa rioted in protest at being paid with five-million zaire bills, issued by the Central Bank on Mobutu's orders but declared to be worthless by the Tshisekedi government. (The new bills had provoked similar riots by froops in Kisangani the previous month.)
The two days of rioting in Kinshasa resulted in hundreds of deaths. Local human rights groups put the number at between 289 and 500, while the Tshisekedi government claimed that as many as 1,000 died. As the report recounts in its section on political and oher extrajudicial killing, the majority of the dead were soldiers suspected of opposition sympathies, although a number of civilians also died, including French Ambassador Philippe Bernard.
The report accurately recounts the January 28 killing of Bertho Kibassa, 28-year-old son of Frederick Kibassa Maliba, a leader of the opposition UDPS party, during an attack on his home in Kinshasa by security forces identified as members of President Mobutu's elite guard, the Special Presidential Division (DSP). However, it does not mention that, on February 3, members of the DSP killed another 45 allegedly mutinous soldiers in the vicinity of the Kinshasa airport. As the report accurately states, "No one was prosecuted for the murders committed during the uprising." In fact, as the report points out, "The more than . . . usual footdragging in the prosecution of soldiers involved in pillage-related abuses" lends credence to the belief of local human rights groups that the entire incident was a pretext to rid the army of soldiers loyal to the opposition.
On February 5, Mobutu used the rioting as an excuse to dismiss Etienne Tshisekedi as prime minister, blaming him for provoking the army mutiny and
420
_ZAIRE
accusing him of "endangering the security of the state." When the Tshisekedi government refused to step down, Mobutu continued to harass members of his government, particularly through the use of arbitrary arrest and detention. The security forces made a sweeping round of politically-motivated arrests in March and April and another round following the "monetary reform" in October, The report details the two-day arrest and detention on April 26 of Pierre Lumbi, the Tshisekedi government's Foreign Minister, followed by several weeks of house arrest. It could also have included details of many others arrested in March and April, including Joseph Olengha Nkoy, Josue Bakatumana Mulowayi, Marcel Kabongo, Bosco Kalala Ntambwe, Jean Kalenga, Kasongo Tshilenga, Gustave Lemba, Martin Liongo, Felix Mbayi Kalombo, Mukende Kabongo, Anderson Mukoma, Mutombo Kalala, Dolly Tshimpaka Tambwe and Lambert Tshitshimbi Katombe, In addition, the report does not discuss the fact that the security forces' "jails," officially closed by Mobutu in 1990, were opened again in March to hold Marcel Kabongo, Felix Mbayi, Lambert Tshitshimbi and several journalists, including Kenge Mukengeshayi.
The report correctly notes that, "There was a pattern of attacks by security forces, some of them lethal, against opposition party activists," However, apart from the cases described above, the report only mentions the killing of Nyamwisi Mwingi of the Federalist Christian Democratic Party on January 3 by 13 gendarmes in Butembo in eastern Zaire; the killing of "several" people (five, in fact) by police forces in Kinshasa on July 4; and the murder of one priest in November when secm-ity forces looted a Catholic relief center in Kananga, (In fact, three priests were killed in September.)
The report should also have mentioned the April 15 attack that wounded six people seriously, when troops fi-om the elite DSP opened fire on a crowd outside Etienne Tshisekedi's house during a meeting of his cabinet, as well as the May 17 attack, when between six and 10 people were killed by a grenade thrown by a civilian accompanied by uniformed men in Gambela market in the Kasavabu district of Kinshasa. Finally, the report fails to mention the December 22 assassination by security forces of Valentin Lubuma, a leader of the Lumumbist-Congolese National Movement opposition party and a member of the High Council of the Republic, the transitional parliament.
In those cases that it does discuss in detail, the report speaks of "random acts of violence and intimidation [by] undisciplined and often unpaid security forces." Implicit in this phrasing is the notion that this is rogue violence, not subject to any central control. But if the government of Zaire wished to secure the peace and protect its citizens, it certainly has the weapons and the manpower to do so. Moreover, the report fails to convey the true extent of the problem when it states that, "[w]hile it was impossible to determine with any precision how many deaths can be attributed to armed forces indiscipline, there is enough... to indicate
421
CRITIQUE 1993
that such deaths are a fairly regular occurrence." The Zairian Association for the Defense of Human Rights has issued a report that chronicles the murder by security forces in 1993 of 7,000 people in Kinshasa alone. The murders included in the report were only those in which the victim could be identified by name and the facts verified.
The State Department report commendably points out that Mobutu's opponents are not entirely innocent of human rights violations of their own. It notes "occasional allegations that extremist elements of the Holy Union Opposition Coalition, which backs Tshisekedi, intimidate political opponents, although it was difficult to confirm these incidents." The report goes on to describe the killing of Makoba Bidimu, Assistant Secretary General for Information for Mobutu's MPR, by supporters of the Holy Union's UDPS party. This is not the only dimension of the problem, however. Tshisekedi supporters have also resorted to intimidation against fellow opposition leaders who appear to be gaiiiing too much popularity and influence. Thus, according to local human rights groups, Pierre Lumbi and Kamanda wa Kamanda, among others, were threatened that they should not entertain any aspirations of replacing Tshisekedi.
By far the worst violence during 1993 occurred in the course of the numerous inter-ethnic conflicts that flared up in this nation of 450 different tribes Of these, the most serious were the massacre of Balubas by Katangans in Shaba province and the massacre of Banyarwandas by Bahundes and Banyangas in North Kivu province. These conflicts are described in the report's section on violations of humanitarian law. This is not an entirely satisfactory place for the discussion, however, given the fi-equent role of the Mobutu govemment in instigating these acts of mass ethnically-based violence. The opening statement that, "Zaire's continuing political crisis greatly exacerbated ethnic tensions and regional disputes" also tends to gloss over the exact relationship between the ethnic violence and deliberate govemment policies. Some analytical context would have been helpful here.
In October 1991, Mobutu acceded to the demands of the National Conference, appointing his arch-rival Etienne Tshisekedi as Prime Minister. Mobutu dismissed Tshisekedi within a month, however, and replaced him with Jean Nguz a Karl-I-Bond, leader of the Union of Federalist and Independent Republicans (UFERI). One of the largest constituent parties of the Holy Union, the UFERI is based in Nguz's home province of Shaba. Tshisekedi, on the other hand, was a member of the Baluba tribe from Kasai province, whose prosperity had fanned local resentment since members of the tribe were imported to work in mineral-rich Shaba (then known as Katanga) by the Belgian colonial administration at the end of the 19th century.
At the same time that Mobutu named Nguz to be Prime Minister, he named another UFERI leader, Gabriel Kyungu wa Kumwanza, to be Governor of Shaba province. Under Governor Kyungu, the provincial administration began a
422
_ZAIRE
witch-hunt against the Baluba, whom Kyungu referred to as "insects." Sporadic acts of violence against Kasaians were reported soon after Kyungu took office, with complete impunity from prosecution for the perpetrators. In August 1992, the sporadic acts of violence escalated, taking the form of mass expulsions, when Mobutu was forced by political pressure to accept Tshisekedi's nomination once again as Prime Minister to replace Nguz. The UFERI organized the youth wing of the party (JUFERI) into an anti-Kasai militia armed with machetes and jugs of — gasoline. As the report shows, Governor Kyungu continued his anti-Baluba campaign in 1993, declaring that any Kasaians who had not left Shaba by the end of July would be imprisoned or killed. By the end of the year, the conflict had left hundreds dead and about 600,000 people displaced fully half of the total Baluba population in Shaba.
Oddly, the report does not discuss Mobutu's total inaction with respect to the massacre in Shaba, until shortly before the arrival of Lakhdar Ibrahimi, special envoy of UN Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali at the end of July. At that point, Mobutu ordered the razing of the unsightly Kasaian refugee camps that surrounded a number of railway stations. Government froops burned the refugees' belongings and drove the Balubas out into the countiyside. In an interesting twist. Governor Kyungu declared the autonomy of Katanga from the rest of Zaire on December 13. The report does not discuss the Katangan secession, or the total lack of any response by the Mobutu government.
As the report says, longstanding ethnic rivalries were similarly ignited in North Kivu province in March 1993. At the end of the last century. North Kivu, one of the richest agricultural areas in Zaire, was deemed by its Belgian colonizers to be underpopulated. The Belgians therefore encouraged the emigration of Hutus and Tutsis from neighboring Rwanda. The Banyarwandas, as the newcomers came to be collectively known, prospered, but were never totally integrated into the local government structure. The numbers of Banyarwandas were swelled by refugees fleeing the civil war in Rwanda in the late 1950s, until the group made up 48% of the province's population. In 1993, the existing interethnic tensions were heightened by the prospect of general elections in the not too distant future,
According to the opposition government, Mobutu encouraged the Banyarwandas to resist integration efforts by the local authorities and to set up a parallel government structure. Provincial vice-governor Bamwisho of North Kivu denounced the Banyarwandas' desire for autonomy and encouraged the Bahundes and Banyangas to take action against the "foreigners," On March 20, violence erupted when unidentified individuals armed with automatic weapons, rifles and machetes stormed into Ntoto market in the Walikale district, killing a great number of Banyarwanda. The next day, the same band reportedly attacked again, this time killing Banyarwandas as they left churches. The angry Banyarwanda then retaliated, and the inter-ethnic violence spread throughout the province in a vicious
423
CRITIQUE 1993
cycle of killing and reprisals. According to Amnesty International, to date, between 6,000 and 7,000 have been killed, and over 200,000 people have been displaced.
While the report accurately recounts the basic facts, it is somewhat misleading in its comments on the role of the Mobutu government. "[HJostilities continued virtually unchecked for almost 4 months," the report says, "until the Goverrmient sent DSP troops to quell the disturbances." This statement does not convey the true role of the troops. Not only did they do nothing to prevent the massacres, but eyewitnesses also reported seeing soldiers taking part in the looting, rape and killings. Nor does the report comment on allegations that Zairian officials confiscated the citizenship cards of Banyarwandas before sending them across the border into Rwanda. Finally, the report fails to note that Mobutu did not send troops to North Kivu until the end of July, when confronted with the imminent arrival of the UN special envoy.
The report's section on "freedom of speech and press" contains a very good general discussion of the Mobutu government's repression of free speech and harassment of journalists. It mentions that the Kinshasa newspaper Les Palmares was suspended in August for a special edition considered insulting to President Mobutu, and that four opposition papers—Umoja, La Renaissance, Elima and Salongo — were suspended for articles critical of the October monetary reform. However, the report should also have mentioned by name at least some of the individual joumahsts arrested in 1993.
According to International PEN, Zairian journalists persecuted this year include: Kenge Mukengeshayi, Mulumba Kandolo, Nicaise Kibel Bel'oka, Kalala Mbenga Kalao, Ferdinand Ferrela and Michel Labi Luya. Kenge Mukengeshayi, editor-in-chief of Le Phare, was arrested on April 23 for publishing an article alleging that members of Mobutu's government were involved in the ethnic cleansing in Shaba province. He was held illegally in Makala prison until late July following a week-long hunger strike. Also released at the same time was Mulumba Kandolo, a journalist with Le Potentiel, who had been arrested on April 30 for writing about the expulsion of certain Belgian citizens. Nicaise Kibel Bel'oka was detained on June 16 in connection with an article alleging that a close friend of Mobutu's was involved in corrupt practices. Despite orders for his release by four courts, including the Supreme Court, he was only released on bail on July 26. Although the State Department instructions for the preparation of the Country Reports discourage detailed lists of individual cases, the credibility of the report would be enhanced by including at least some of these representative cases.
Apart from a brief reference to the "continued intimidation of justices," the report fails to discuss the enormous pressure that was brought to bear on Zairian jurists in 1993. While the report mentions the truly remarkable decision by the Zairian Supreme Court in February, overturning President Mobutu's 1986 order banning the Jehovah's Witnesses, the full significance of the event is lost by
424
_ZAIRE
reporting it only in the section on freedom of religion. The report fails to mention that the court's decision was based on the new Zairian Transitional Constitutional Act, adopted by the National Conference, rather than the Second Constitution of Zaire adopted under Mobutu. An even more important and surprising omission is the report's failure to mention the reprisals suffered by members of the court. The house of Supreme Court Chief Justice Balanda Mikwin Leliel was subjected to a seven-hour attack by members of the DSP following the decision, and Justices Ngoma Kinkeka Masala, Munoma Ntambanzilanji and Kabamba Penge received death threats and were otherwise harassed for months afterwards. These four justices are among 11 that were arrested, attacked or suspended for trying to maintain the independent judiciary guaranteed under both of the rival Constitutions.
As the preceding discussion amply demonstrates, 1993 was a year of unprecedented violence and disregard for even the most minimum standard of human ri^ts. Continuing a trend that has been apparent for several years now, the State Department report is a thorough and professional piece of documentation of the misery with which President Mobutu has plagued his people. One hopes that future reports will continue to improve in the few areas where deficiencies have been noted.
425
CRITIQUE 1993
426
