COLOMBIA
Colombia continued to suffer from a human rights crisis in 1993 in the context of a tense domestic situation. Over the course of the year. President César Gaviria Trujillo twice renewed the nation's state of emergency, or "internal commotion," initially declared in November of 1992. As documented in the reports of Colombian and international human rights groups, state agents were involved directly and indirectly and implicated in numerous human rights abuses, including extrajudicial executions, "disappearances" (an average of one per day), torture, rapes and harassment. This occurred amidst a level of violence unmatched in the hemisphere, including, as the report notes, more than 15,000 murders in the fu"st half of the year.
Generally, the report acknowledges ongoing violations and assigns responsibility for them with more accuracy than reports in prior years. The report succeeds in providing relatively complete coverage of those events which most affected or exemplified the nation's human rights situation in 1993. Although Colombia has recently taken a number of formal legal measures to help curb human rights violations, the report also recognizes the serious disparities between written law and common practices.
Nevertheless, the report falls short of a comprehensive understanding of human rights conditions in Colombia and understates state responsibility for human rights violations in several important respects. First, as in previous years, it continues to place official abuse in the context of nongovernment violence. This represents a conceptual flaw (since human rights law is directed only at state abuses) and an unfortunate diversion of attention from slate responsibility for such abuses. At the same time, this practice results in insufficient attention to humanitarian law, which provides a better framework for discussing abuses committed by all parties in the context of significant internal conflict.
In addition, the report's discussion of the lack of effective prosecution of culprits is inadequate, and obscures the chronic absence of state accountability. Ironically, the report also largely misses the excesses of the Colombian penal system, which denies many citizens basic due process guarantees. Finally, the — report lacks sufficient general analysis and conclusions, which are needed to overcome the report's standard format of atomized topic sections.
The report's use of statistics gathered by two non-govemmental human rights groups the Center for Investigation and Popular Education (CINEP) and the Andean Commission of Jurists — Colombian section (CAJ-SC) — is commendable. For security reasons, US embassy staff cannot travel to many parts of the country and are otherwise dependent on official sources and an unreliable local press. However, the report's editorial practice in this regard is not uniform or consistent.
55
CRITIQUE 1993
For example, the report cites totals for political killings for the January-October period from both CINEP (581) and CAJ-SC (437, plus 755 presumably political killings). However, as the report proceeds to apportion responsibility for these acts among the major armed entities (state security forces, paramilitary groups and guerrillas), it cites only CINEP data, according to which guerrillas were responsible for the largest portion (41.2%) of the violence, followed by security forces (27.4%) and paramilitary groups (6.4%). The CAJ-SC figures, which the report does not cite, suggest that over the same period, 56% of killings were committed by security forces, 25% by the guerrillas and 19% by paramilitary and other groups. The report should have cited both sets of figures and/or explained its reasons for choosing only one.
Moreover, the report employs egregious understatement to characterize the violence it details. "Individual members and units of the police and army" are, as the report states, responsible for extensive abuses. However, the sheer number of violations by state actors, by either the CINEP or CAJ-SC reckoning, reveal the institutional nature of the problem. So, too, does the armed forces' near-total impunity, a fact the report acknowledges but does not incorporate into its analysis. Military impunity is neither coincidental nor the responsibility of the civilian judiciary. It is the result of the military's longstanding insistence on reserving jurisdiction over virtually every crime committed by military personnel, and its equally consistent practice of acquitting or failing to prosecute those who come before its courts. Rather than confront this reality the State Department chooses to accentuate the positive, stating: "The armed forces initiated a human rights awareness campaign at the end of the year, creating a special office staffed by civilians to advise the joint chiefs of staff on human rights issues and to develop training materials and programs." The report's treatment leaves the impression that, for diplomatic reasons,it has intentionally shied away from a forthright analysis of the problem.
The report also fails to explore the military's open refusal to disavow or halt atrocities by paramilitary groups carrying out "cleansing" operations or counter-insurgency actions. There is also considerable evidence of collaboration between government forces and paramilitary groups. For example. Human Rights Watch/Americas cites a municipal official in the town of Mesetas in the central department of Meta:
I have submitted twenty-nine declarations of witnesses to paramilitary activity and links with the security forces, but not one has resulted in serious action. Everyone in Mesetas knows who the paramilitaries are, and who they work with. But is action ever taken against them? To the contrary, these killers are considered allies of the police and military.
56
COLOMBIA
One well-publicized incident reflects the flagrant cooperation of the nation's security forces with its worst criminals. After human rights groups denounced a series of gruesome murders and mutilation by a self-styled death squad called "Chainsaw," a team of journalists travelled to the area in the Santander department where the incidents took place. The journalists quickly located members of the group, accompanied by soldiers and brandishing a chainsaw, in an open area midway between two military checkpoints only minutes away. When the journalists approached, one member of the group fired a shot.
There is evidence that members of the police were principally responsible for the acts of "social cleansing," including attacks against indigent street dwellers, prostitutes, homosexuals and others viewed as dispensable, which continued to terrorize citizens on the margins of Colombian society. The report notes a well-publicized incident in which police beat to death a street poet. It also cites CINEP's finding of 118 incidents of "social cleansing" in nine months. The report falls short, however, of drawing any conclusions on this issue, preferring to cite somewhat conflicting findings by various state agencies. One has to parse the report's passive account carefully to extract the fact that authorities concur On the matter of police involvement in several incidents, but continue to debate the existence of "official police complicity in organized attacks against a specific class of citizens." There is sufficient evidence of police involvement in numerous incidents to warrant the State Department's own assessment and condemnation. For example, between May and September, 12 youths involved in the Street Gang Project in Cali were shot and killed. The project is an attempt to bring gang members off the streets and encourage them to turn in their weapons, and it has already attracted more than 200 children. However, it has recently come under attack, and the Cali Police Adviser believes that members of the police were behind the killings.
Similarly, the report acknowledges that women are often the victims of social and economic discrimination in Colombia. However, the discussion would have been well served by a few illustrative cases. The report should also have mentioned more specifically that women are oflen targeted for sexual abuse at the hands of the elite counterinsurgency units known as Mobile Brigades that operate in rural areas. Local human rights groups have documented such abuses, such as the rape of a woman and a young girl by Mobile Brigade 2 soldiers in the department of Norte de Santander in February.
One of the report's most obvious misrepresentations of the extent of government abuses involves the mistreatment of Colombia's indigenous groups. The report correctly concludes that, "Indians often suffer at the hands of narcotics traffickers and guerrillas in their homelands," who insist on cooperation and punish communities that have signed peace accords with the government. It entirely omits, however, the fact that state agents have also perpetrated widely documented
57
CRITIQUE 1993
indiscriminate attacks on indigenous groups, particularly those located in areas of significant guerrilla activity. In such cases, it is precisely the suspicion of cooperation with traffickers and/or guerrillas that motivates the army's illegal acts. Members of the Arsario Indian community in Marocazo , for example, alleged that they were attacked by forces from the La Popa Battalion, who arrived on their land on April 13. One of their members, Gregorio Nieves, was murdered by soldiers claiming that the local men were guerrillas. The soldiers tortured the survivors and threatened them. The Arsario community has requested the Special Investigations Unit of the Procurator General's office to investigate the killing and protect Nieves' family from further harm.
In 1993, local human rights groups documented grave violations of international humanitarian law by members of the Mobile Brigades. Various accounts indicate that these groups demonstrated a troubling disregard for the civilian population in zones of conflict. The report states accurately that, "Targets of abuse in rural and urban areas by the security forces included workers, politicians, labor organizers, human rights monitors, and, most frequently, peasant farmers in guerrilla territory." Peasants in rural areas were, in fact, at great risk due to the state agents' perception of them as collaborators in the guerrilla struggle. On January 6, for example, the Conde family farm in the department of César was attacked by members of Mobile Brigade 2 searching for local guerrillas, resulting in the wounding of four children and one adult.
The report also claims in this section that military aircraft were not responsible for targeting civilian communities. In fact, the Colombian Air Force has conducted aerial strafmg of villages in preparation for counterinsurgency attacks by the Mobile Brigades, in direct violation of international covenants. This is a principal cause of the plight of the internally displaced in Colombia, which has reached alarming proportions. The report takes note of this severe problem, although it inappropriately locates this discussion in the section on freedom of movement. The State Department's insistence on subdividing its analysis of the conduct of warfare by all parties detracts from its ability to portray comprehensively the patterns of abuse that characterize military tactics and strategy.
Insurgent guerrilla forces, which have been waging war on the government for decades, were responsible for a significant number of forced abductions, bombings of oil pipelines and attacks on former guerrillas who had laid down their arms. The "black September" campaign of terror launched late last year by the Simón Bolívar Coordinating Board (CGSB) escalated the brutal conflict within Colombian society. In addition to Colombia's guerrilla war, the drug war has for years heightened internal conflict, and in 1993 continued to exact its toll on civilian life.
58
COLOMBIA
The provisions of the Geneva Conventions require that basic judicial guarantees be maintained even in states of emergency. This would appear a particularly appropriate yardstick for analyzing events in Colombia, which has adopted numerous decrees modifying its legal system in order to prosecute members and allies of armed insurgent groups. Most notably, the military exercises police power in conflict zones and surrounding areas, as discussed below. Much of this has been promulgated pursuant to presidential declarations of "internal commotion. "
Legislative and judicial developments in 1993 in Colombia undermined individual rights even more than the report would suggest. In general, as it observes, there is a significant distinction between the civil protections afforded to Colombian citizens by law and in practice. While the Constitution prohibits illegal detentions, there have been many cases in which this has occurred; Colombian law guarantees the right to due process, although in practice this right is often violated. Such disparities cast a shadow over the Colombian government's otherwise commendable efforts to address the nation's human rights situation, for example, through police reform. The report falls far short in its discussion of Colombia's regional (formerly "Public Order") courts, which are cause for concern on numerous grounds. While troubling, this is not surprising, since the US government has been closely involved in the development of these special courts.
The regional courts try charges of terrorism, rebellion and other insurgency-related acts, as well as narcotics crimes. Their particular attributes — closed proceedings, secret evidence, anonymous witnesses, prosecutors and judges, and the widespread use of the military for police functions — were originally justified by supporters on grounds of personal security for judicial employees and increased prosecutorial efficiency. But they have failed to yield the anticipated results, and have instead led to widespread due process violations, lengthy arbitrary detentions, increased corruption and the misuse of the judicial process against social protest.
Although the report does mention problems associated with the anonymity of prosecution figures, it neglects other key aspects. Most important, it omits the dominant role of the military in the regional system, particularly in conflictive areas. For example, official sources estimate that in key parts of Santander the army makes virtually all arrests of those charged with political offenses. In many cases, it does so without the order of the prosecutor, relying instead on its own anonymous paid informants to identify suspects for capture. Typically, an overburdened or intimidated prosecutor's office immediately ratifies such arrests, orders preventive detention and allows the case to proceed for months — even a year or more — before conducting a meaningful review of the basis for the detention of the accused. Since regional jurisdiction does not admit judicial review of such detention orders (a November 1993 reform to this effect was ruled
59
CRITIQUE 1993
unconstitutional in a recent Supreme Court decision), the system effectively provides the military with carte blanche to "sentence" suspects for months, even years, based only on the secret allegations of its own paid informers. Because there are only five sites nationwide for trial of cases in the regional jurisdiction, witnesses almost never come before the courts that decide cases largely on the basis of their testimony. Hence, convictions are to a great extent based on statements often kept secret from the defense, by anonymous witnesses who are never seen or heard by those passing judgement and sentence.
The report distances itself from additional concerns, citing only claims by "critics" that the system is often used against social protest and political opposition. This is in one sense understandable since the US government has been instrumental in fmancing and developing this jurisdiction. However, the State Department has no excuse for its continued failure to asses these allegations, which, if true, would further undermine the credibility of US judicial reform programs. The "critics," including the Andean Commission of Jurists, Human Rights Watch/Americas, the Washington Office on Latin America and the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, have repeatedly raised this issue in writing and in meetings with US officials, who still concede that they have not obtained from the Colombian beneficiaries of US funding information that is responsive to these concerns.
In fact, published reports suggest that of the cases processed by the regional jurisdiction courts by late 1992, only six percent concerned acts of terrorism. Although the report fails to make the connection, this overarching jurisdiction has greatly contributed to the backlog and inefficiency which now characterize the courts and undermine their fundamental purpose. In August 1993 the courts had 1,431 deputy prosecutors for approximately 300,000 cases. In addition to inefficiency and delays, the ability of the regional jurisdiction courts to try those involved in nonterrorist activities invites the criminalization of social protest, as demonstrated in the TELECOM case, which the report cites.
The report points out that many of the decrees issued by President Gaviria during the state of internal commotion were, after debate, passed into law by Congress, and notes that this debate was conducted "with the participation of human rights groups." Although this implies that such groups provided their approval, many have in fact protested vigorously the institutionalization of the state of emergency through the conversion of temporary decrees into permanent laws. For instance. Decree 1810 of 1992 permits members of the armed forces to detain and investigate civilians at military units. Law No. 81 of November 1993 limits the use of habeas corpus to obtain pretrial release in the regional jurisdictions; since these courts are often used to try social protestors, such a restriction helps suppress dissent.
While the Colombian legal system seriously compromises the rights of civilian defendants, it simultaneously deprives civilian victims of state violence of
60
COLOMBIA
a meaningful legal remedy. The 1991 Constitution, hailed as a significant step — toward reform, ensured that military jurisdiction will prevail in cases involving members of the security forces who have committed offenses in connection with their duties, rendering criminal proceedings of their violations of human rights ineffective. Worse, military courts presided over by active-duty commanders — have successfully expanded the definition of acts of service beyond any reasonable limit by concluding that army personnel are on duty around the clock.
The report correctly points out that the widespread impunity enjoyed by members of the Army and security forces is a predominant cause of human rights violations in Colombia. One of the most chilling examples of the consequences of this impunity in 1993 was the massacre of thirteen civilians in Riofiio, in the department of Valle, by the Palacé Battalion (not, as the report states, by a paramilitary unit) under the command of a Lt. Col. Becerra. Althou^ this officer — had been implicated in the 1988 massacre of 20 banana workers in Urabá, he was subsequently acquitted and promoted. In February 1993, 150 members of UNASE, a government kidnapping unit, were charged by the Procuraduría with kidnapping, torture and involvement in disappearances the very crimes which the UNASE units are entrusted with eliminating. The investigation remains in its initial stages. Such examples reveal the government's incapacity or unwillingness to hold its agents responsible for human rights violations. The report notes that the Procuraduría, a government agency that examines human rights complaints, completed five investigations into violations in the first nine months of 1993, but fails to mention that fewer than 10% of the complaints received by the Procuraduría ever reach the criminal courts. Furthermore, of the approximately 1,200 cases the special investigative office of the Procuraduría investigates each year, only a tiny percentage result in disciplinary action.
Moreover, many more abuses occur for which the Procuraduría does not receive a report or complaint. Thus, the report's assertion that, "The Procuraduría did not receive any reports of illegal searches by state officials between January and September 1993" is misleading, since it implies that there were no illegal searches committed by state forces. In fact, government agents regularly conduct arbitrary searches. To cite just one example, on May 6, 1993, members of the Nariño de Magangue Battalion illegally searched the house of Alfonso Palacio, a peasant well-known for his activism. The soldiers ruined his library and harassed his family. Government officials conceded to the Lawyers Committee that in certain conflictive areas, virtually every search and arrest carried out by the army occurs without a written order.
Of course, given that human rights abuses are so widespread and numerous in Colombia, it would be impossible for the State Department to have reported every violation that occurred throughout 1993. Within these limitations, the report has in most sections focused appropriately on the most prominent or illustrative
61
CRITIQUE 1993
examples of human rights violations. For example, the discussion of worker rights is one of the report's most comprehensive and well-drafted. In other sections, the report should have included at least the following notable cases:
•	Although the report correctly notes that members of the Barrancabermeja-based Comité Regional para la Defensa de los Derechos Humanos (CREDHOS) were forced to leave Colombia in 1992 after the killings of two of their colleagues, it also should have noted that CREDHOS members remaining in Colombia continue to be targets of harassment. Between May and July, they received many threats by members of the army's Nueva Granada Battalion, headquartered in Barrancabermeja, in response to CREDHOS allegations of human rights abuses by the Nueva Granada forces. Based on the events of previous years, it is clear that these human rights workers are in danger of renewed, and possibly more violent, attacks.
•	In Cali, Jesús Antonio Montoya Ospina was murdered on December 14. He had been involved in the founding of the Solidarity Committee with Political Prisoners and was an active member of the Patriotic Union party, which has lost more than 2,200 members to political killings since its establishment in 1985.
The section on political rights omits two contextual points that color the effectiveness of political exercise by Colombian citizens. The first is the power-sharing arrangement between the two established parties (Conservative and Liberal), in effect fi"om the late 1940s to the mid 1970s, and continuing de facto to the present. The existence of a formal joint monopoly has over time ossified the political party system, at least at the presidential level, and has resulted in a historical tradition of abstentionism. Thus, President Gaviria was elected in 1990 with less than 45% of the electorate choosing to vote; during the first round elections for his successor, fewer than six million out of more than 17 million eligible voters went to the polls.
Second, no discussion of Colombia's political system should fail to highlight its novel mechanism for converting emergency presidential decrees into permanent law. Although President Gaviria proclaimed the dawn of a new day with the lifting of Colombia's near-perpetual state of siege in 1991, he has since returned Colombia to emergency rule for the majority of his tenure. The 1991 constitutional reform, moreover, included a mechanism for converting extraordinary decrees, which under international law are apart from their substance legal only if temporary, into permanent law. President Gaviria's extensive exploitation of this faculty has transformed Colombia's legal landscape. As a practical matter it has diminished the political voice of the legislature and those it represents.
62
COLOMBIA
While this year's report succeeds in providing an appropriate level of detail and concrete examples of the human rights conditions it asserts, it falls short of a broad understanding of the events as part of a systematic pattern of abuse in Colombia. Little attempt is made to draw connections between, and more generalized conclusions from, different categories of human rights violations. For example, the report notes that torture most often occurs during long pretrial detention periods. As noted above, legislative measures in 1993, which originated as executive decrees pursuant to the state of "internal commotion," limited pretrial release in the regional jurisdiction courts; the regional jurisdiction courts, in turn, are being used to prosecute ordinary crimes and to suppress dissent. Similarly, a failure to prosecute human rights violations in military courts permits the repetition of the security forces' abuses against indigenous populations, noncombatants, women and socially marginalized individuals; another emergency decree allows the armed forces to detain and interrogate civilians at military locations. A more comprehensive approach would reveal the connection between executive decree-making powers, violations of humanitarian law in internal conflict, due process guarantees, torture and the lack of investigation or prosecution of human rights abuses. The alarming human rights situation in Colombia, seen in this light, is not due to a collection of unrelated occurrences, as the structure of the report permits readers to infer, but instead reflects a complex pattern of ongoing and mutually reinforcing official activities.
63
CRITIQUE 1993
