	CUBA
With the 1993 Cuba report, the Clinton Administration has missed an important opportunity to recast the United States' analytical approach toward human rights in Cuba. Although the quality of the reports has improved since 1989, the 1993 report unfortunately fails to advance that positive trend. While the report, like its immediate predecessor, provides a detailed evaluation of human rigjits violations and obstacles, it suffers from a certain degree of inconsistency and contextual omissions. Despite the administration's emphasis on human rights, extraneous political concerns continue to undermine the report.
The report's principal virtues lie in its compilation of information and its skeptical and insightful treatment of the discrepancy between Cuba's formal legal structures and government practice. The report surmounts a major methodological barrier — the absence of legally recognized human rights groups in Cuba — through the excellent use of accounts by visitors, journalists and dissident groups in and outside of Cuba. Such perserverance in the collection of information on human rights abuses should serve as an example for all reporting on the Americas.
The report's discussion of respect for the integrity of the person, including degrading freatment and arbitrary interference with privacy, bears comment. First, in addressing cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, the report fails to mention a major concern raised by Human Rights Watch and the American Institute for Free Labor Development regarding the alleged application of electroconvulsive "therapy." During the 1970s and early 1980s, Cuban dissidents were interned in mental hospitals and systematically subjected to this treatment. The Special Rapporteur reported having received some complaints about the use of psychiafric methods for other than strictly medical purposes. Former prisoners, the UN report notes, were threatened with this kind of treatment, which is sanctioned by Articles 78 and 79 of the Cuban Penal Code.
On May 12, Juan Garino, President of the Confederation of Democratic Cuban Workers, was arrested after issuing a call for a boycott of the government-sponsored May Day festivities. He was transferred to the Psychiatric Hospital at Mazorra, reportedly for electroconvulsive treatment. As the report notes, Garino had been harassed by police forces earlier in the year for union activities. Alhough it is impossible to determine with certainty whether electroconvulsive procedures were actually used on him, there are credible reports that he and other labor leaders, like Rafael Gutiérrez and Domiciano Torres of the Democratic Civic Party, were at least threatened with such treatment. Torres lost his job as a result of his dissident activities and was held for 42 days by State Security before being transferred to the Havana Psychiatric Hospital.
69
CRITIQUE 1993
The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights stresses the "widespread fear of being subjected to 'therapeutic' measures among groups not ahgned with the regime and the prison population." It records additional cases, such as that of human rights activist Carlos Santana Ochoa, who was jailed on May 13 and reportedly confined in the special "Carbó Servía" Room of the Havana Psychiatric Hospital. According to the Inter-American Commission, this room has repeatedly been denounced by human rights organizations as a place used by State Security for the psychiatric torture of dissidents.
The report's criticisms of the difficulty of overseas communications omits one important fact. Clearly it is appropriate to criticize the Cuban government for tapping telephone calls. However, the report fails to mention the obstacles to overseas communications imposed by the US embargo, which has impeded the activation of a new telephone link to Cuba on a normal commercial basis and blocked the export of communications technology such as fax machines and e-mail.
The report's discussion of civil liberties, including fi"eedom of association, religion and movement, requires clarification and greater precision. The report states that the Cuban Constitution does not provide for fi-eedom of association, but this is not strictly correct, It would be more accurate and usefiil to point out the combination of qualified de jure rights with a highly restrictive practice. The report is certainly correct in observing that governmental practice is not permissive. However, to declare categorically that such fi^eedoms are not recognized at all is to overstate the case. Perhaps the key factor to note would be that, notwithstanding constitutional reforms. Article 62 of the Cuban Constitution remains a significant obstacle to political rights, since it subjugates their exercise to the goals of socialism as interpreted by the government. Without this article and others like it, the Cuban Constitution would provide a laudable catalogue of de jure political and economic rights. As the report acknowledges, the Justice Ministry, which processes requests by organizations and associations for legal recognition, has denied this to non-governmental human rights groups. However, as last year's Critique noted, there has been increased official recognition and tolerance of religious groups, including practitioners of the Afro-Cuban religion Santería.
The report does recognize the Cuban government's new policy of allowing religious adherents to join the Communist Party. This policy, as the report notes, was formalized via a constitutional amendment in 1992 and has led to improvements in Church-State relations, as well as enhancing protection of the rights of religious adherents and bolstering the autonomy of the Catholic Church. A pastoral letter issued by the Cuban bishops, calling for national reconciliation and dialogue, was harshly criticized by the state-controlled media as well as President Castro, However, it did not trigger direct government repression — a welcome change from past experience.
70
_CUBA
Another sign of positive change in the climate of religious freedom, not mentioned in the report, was the visit to Cuba in January of a representative of the women's Zionist organization Hadassah, who chartered a new chapter in Havana. The chapter is part of an international network dedicated to medical and scientific exchange between Israel and Jewish communities worldwide. The official recognition of this group and its foreign ties represents a departure from past efforts to isolate the estimated 1,400 to 1,600 Jews living in Cuba.
However, the report understates the importance of religious reform by singling out the continued government harassment and persecution of Jehovah's Witnesses and Seventh-Day Adventists. While rightly condemning such repression, the report should have pointed out that the basis for the government's abusive posture is the call by such groups for prohibited political action against the institutional powers of the State. The nature of these two special cases does not deny religious reform but rather reveals its limitations. The political arena remains off limits for church activity.
The report's observations on freedom of movement, including domestic and foreign travel, is short on detail. For example, the report critiques the government's quarantine of people with AIDS. Undoubtedly, the policy merits the controversy it has launched: initially, HIV-positive individuals were confmed to sanatorium communities and allowed to leave only under restricted circumstances and with a chaperone. However, the Cuban government has reassessed its initial policy in light of its success, and since 1990 has gradually permitted patients to enjoy greater freedom and unsupervised freedom of movement. (A number of individuals have decided not to take advantage of the liberalized approach, choosing to remain in sanatoriums to take advantage of the better living conditions.) Seropositive individuals who demonstrate acceptance of "safe sex" practices have been allowed to leave the sanatorium, and the Ministry of Public Health has initiated a system of outpatient care that it intends to extend to all seropositive people. Former patients have been stigmatized, however, by government authorities who inform employers of their condition. As a result, people with AIDS often believe, with good reason, that they will face great difficulty returning to their jobs. Finally in relation to AIDS, for the sake of consistency the report should recognize and apply to Cuba the same criteria that the United States has enforced throughout 1993 in detaining HIV-positive Haitian asylum-seekers at the Guantanamo Bay military base in Cuba.
The report highlights the controls imposed by the Cuban government on foreign travel, which continues to require an exit visa. It does take into account the recent liberalization of such policies by recognizing, for instance, that the vast majority of those who qualify for immigrant visas or refugee status are allowed to leave. It notes that the government continues to delay or deny exit permits in certain cases, particularly when solicited by professionals. The report overstates
71
CRITIQUE 1993
its case, however, by imphcitly blaming Cuban travel restrictions alone for the flow of "raft-people" (balseros) across the Florida Straits. (A record 3,656 Cubans reached the United States in this fashion in 1993, with an unknown number perishing at sea.) A 1984 agreement permits the annual issuance of 20,000 US visas to Cuban immigrants. In 1993, however, only 4,800 were granted, and in the six years that the agreement has been in place (excluding three years of suspension) only 33,000 Cubans have become permanent US residents. While US immigration policy toward Cuba compares favorably with that toward other countries in the region, the denial of immigrant visas certainly contributes to the flow of balseros.
The report also notes that the Cuban government has lifted the restrictions on travel to the island by Cubans who live abroad, although they are still required to apply for permission to return for visits. An increased annual quota of visits and the removal of a ban on visits by those who left Cuba after 1980 form part of the more relaxed travel policies. However, this general liberalization of travel regulations has not been matched by any similar easing of controls by the US government. Restrictions on the entry of Cubans to the United States, imposed by tiie Reagan Administration in 1985, remain in force. Moreover, US controls on the travel of its own citizens to Cuba — which, much like Cuban restrictions, flout international standards of freedom of movement — undermine the impact of otherwise valid concerns expressed by the State Department regarding the Cuban government's infringements of these rights.
The report's brief discussion of political rights calls for greater detail. It mentions the February 24 elections to the national legislature, the first since 1976, and accurately stresses the limitations of the process. Candidates were screened and only one candidate was permitted per seat. The voters had only two options: to vote affirmatively for the official candidates or leave the ballot blank. Nonetheless, the February election represented a significant and unprecedented opportunity to cast a protest vote by secret ballot in direct elections. The report fails to discuss the outcome of the vote. In municipal elections in December 1992, an estimated 25-35% of ballots nationwide were blank, spoiled or defaced with anti-government graffiti. One academic expert on Cuba, Marifeli Pérez-Stable, suggests that the December elections were the first clear sign of large-scale discontent within Cuba.
Credible official results of the February elections revealed that 92.8% of the votes were in favor of the candidates, while 7,2% of ballots were blank or mutilated. The number of nullified ballots reached 14.3% in Havana. Pérez-Stable suggests several reasons for the lower percentage of spoiled ballots in February. First, the December vote was a routing municipal election, while February's was the first scheduled election to the national assembly. Concerned over the December results, the government took precautionary measures in preparation for the February
72
_CUBA
vote. These included reforming the electoral college to reduce the number of people in each district from 1,100 to about 400. Members of the Committees for the Defense of the Revolution (CDR) visited homes to urge citizens to vote for the official slate of candidates. The government also launched an intense media campaign to encourage citizens to vote. These measures further reveal the severe limitations in the realm of political rights.
In dealing with the government's reponse to dissent, the report states categorically that state officials systematically harass, beat and otherwise publicly abuse activists and dissidents as a means of exerting social control. This may be true, but more evidence should be given to support so broad a statement, unless documentation is unavailable. The report does accurately point out that the Cuban government has permitted hundreds of former political prisoners to emigrate, including several prominent activists who had been denied visas. For example, as it admits, Elizardo Sánchez Santacruz and Rolando Prats were granted exit visas to make extensive trips abroad during the summer and then to return to Cuba. The report might have observed that such liberalization probably reflects only a tactical shift in the Cuban government's practice toward the more influential human rights activists and potential political leaders, who are now encouraged to leave the island. Such "encouragement" is often applied in tandem with more traditional coercive alternatives. In May, for instance, four well-known activists — Sebastián Arcos Bergnes, Rodolfo González, Luis Alberto Pita Santos and Yndamiro Restaño Díaz, all of whom have been imprisoned as a result of their dissident and human-rights related activities — were reportedly offered release from jail on condition that they immediately leave the country. Each refused the offer and all four remain in prison.
In other respects, the government's treatment of dissidents presents a decidedly mixed, though still very troubling picture. There has been a significant reduction in the harassment of human rights monitors and activists and the infamous "acts of repudiation" (actos de repudio), organized by the CDRs. However, as the report points out, the CDRs continue to maintain a network of informants to report on the public activities of private citizens, especially activists, and security forces still employ other repressive techniques. A source at the Cuban Committee for Human Rights reports an increase in the number of arrests for the ill-defined crime of "dangerousness to society." This trend, coupled with apparently greater flexibility toward well-known dissidents, suggests that the Cuban government is attempting to minimize public attention to human rights while continuing to intimidate lower-level opposition activists.
The report's analysis of worker rights and labor-related issues is mostly reliable. It notes, for example, the Cuban government's decriminalization of self-employment, which had been abolished in the late 1960s. However, the report understates the extent and effect of these reforms. With the approval of the Fourth Party Congress in 1991, private citizens were permitted to engage in certain forms
73
CRITIQUE 1993
of private enterprise, and by the end of 1993 some 150,000 hcences have been granted for such activities. Another major economic reform initiated in 1991 was the creation of joint ventures with foreign capital, a break with ftmdamental tenets of Cuban socialism. As a result, ventures in manufacturing, agriculture, risk contracts for petroleum exploration and tourism are on the rise. While these changes are viewed by some Cuba experts as promising steps toward economic liberalization, they have led to the emergence of one problem not mentioned by the report, that of "tourist apartheid." While Cubans face daily shortages, power blackouts and a virtual halt of transportation services, foreign tourists dine in tourist-only restaurants, shop in well-stocked stores and ride in taxis. In a real sense, Cubans have been relegated to second-class status in their own country, and many young Cubans have begun to prostitute themselves to foreign visitors for a hot meal, a bar of soap or a stick of deodorant.
Cold War echoes still permeate the report, which fmds cause for concern and criticism in fondamental political differences between the Cuban and US systems that have nothing directly to do with human rights. Many of the conditions criticized in the report are negatively affected by US policy. While the Country Reports should be objective, it is apparent — and not only in the case of Cuba — that there is a direct correlation between US policy and the tone of the reporting. The report is filled with critical comments about severe prison overcrowding and the lack of food and medical care in jails; the prohibition on building new churches; the record numbers of Cubans risking the Florida Straits in makeshift rafts and inner tubes to escape misery; the rise in prostitution; poor working conditions; the use of "voluntary" labor to increase productivity; lax pollution controls; and the shortages of most basic necessities, such as food, medicine, clothing and cooking fiiel. All of these factors are aggravated by the embargo, and fiirther heightened by the effects of the Cuban Democracy Act of 1992, which has eliminated all but a narrowly defmed category of humanitarian aid.
The Cuba report, in summary, reflects many of the strengths and weaknesses of the State Department's human rights reporting. On one hand, it reveals a model determination to gather pertinent information on human rights conditions, despite the considerable obstacles to such research. On the other hand, the analysis is too often distorted by a political agenda.
Once again the State Department's reporting is the victim of a fundamental contradiction, criticizing conditions in Cuba that are exacerbated by an expanded US embargo. As indicated in a study by the UN Special Rapporteur on Cuba, US economic sanctions have contributed significantly to the deterioration of living conditions in Cuba. The embargo directly impacts both trade and productivity. The dire economic straits in which this places Cuba, particularly in the absence of Soviet subsidies, have adverse effects on economic and social rights. The report generally makes selective use of the Special Rapporteur's findings, which openly
74
_CUBA
criticize the embargo as a dubious tool for bringing about respect for human rights and points out that the state of human rights in Cuba must be analyzed in light of international hostilities that continue to threaten the government's existence.
The objective analysis of human rights requires a rigorous effort to filter out political motives and preferences. In this sense, the Cuba report presents certain findings without sufficient context, and in some cases ignores the responsibility of US policy for exacerbating the conditions that it criticizes. In the end, however, the report is correct to conclude that there were no systematic changes in the area of human rights in Cuba in 1993, and that the overall human rights situation remained poor. Only reform of the de jure restrictions on human rights, coupled with a consistent change in government practice, will bring about real improvement. Isolated short-term displays of tolerance, or tactical variations in government behavior, are not enough to signify a true departure from repressive policy.
75
CRITIQUE 1993
