CZECH REPUBLIC
The 1993 State Department report on human rights practicès in the Czech Republic reflects the significant and sophisticated progress in pohtical and economic development there. The report presents a generally thorough compilation of the key issues and events in the Czech Republic in the first year since the dissolution of the former Czechoslovakia. Moreover, the report has made notable improvements in its examination of particular issues that were dealt with superficially or incompletely in 1992.
For example, the report presents an extensive analysis of the "lustration" — or screening — law that the Czech Parliament carried over following the dissolution of Czechoslovakia. The law on lustration (which is derived fi"om the Latin word for purification) excludes fi"om a wide array of positions in government, academia, the media and state-owned companies those who are believed to have collaborated with the Communist government's secret police or who were members of the Communist Party or of party-controlled institutions. In addition, the lustration law created a commission to enforce its provisions. Whereas last year's Critique criticized the 1992 report for treating the law superficially and minimizing its significance, the 1993 report provides an extensive analysis.
The report reflects progressive changes in the status of the lustration law in the Czech Republic during 1993. Although the law remains on the books and therefore remains a potential tool for abuse, the report acknowledges that it is considered a dead letter by Communist Party members and human rights activists alike. In addition, the ILO, whose criticism of the lustration law in 1992 was omitted fi"om last year's State Department report, did not renew its criticism of the law, perhaps reflecting its dormant status.
By contrast, however, the report gives only passing attention to a July 1993 law that criminalizes the Communist regime of 1948-1989 and invalidates any statute of limitations for crimes committed by the Communists during that era. The new law paves the way for possible prosecutions for past crimes committed in the name of communism. Although there is no information that any charges have so far been brought under this law. Human Rights Watch/Helsinki has critidzed it as "retroactive criminalization of heretofore legal conduct, in violation of international law." Members of the Czech Communist Party also suggest that the anti-Communist law violates the Czech Republic's Charter of Fundamental Human Rights and Freedoms, contained in the Czech Constitution. The criminalization of the Communist regime reflects the same zealous reaction that spurred the lustration law. The contrast between the report's attention to the lustration law and inattention to the criminalization of the prior regime is therefore striking. Although the report
76
CZECH REPUBLIC
notes that the law has been condemned by human rights advocates for adopting the principle of collective guilt, the report does not ofifer its own opinion of the matter.
In 1993, the Czech Parliament also amended the criminal code to forbid, and criminally punish, defamation of "the Czech Republic, its Parliament, government, or constitutional court." The defamation law imposes a maximum punishment of two years in prison. Amnesty International, however, has concluded that the amendment violates the right to freedom of expression set forth in Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights. Although both treaties permit limited restrictions on free expression, such restrictions are permitted under strictly defined circumstances. Amnesty International appropriately criticizes the amendment as, at best, overbroad. Again, the report refrains from expressing any opinion of its own, and merely refers to the defamation law as "controversial."
In contrast to these excesses, other aspects of the Czech reaction to the Communist era have served to advance human rights. For example, Human Rights Watch/Helsinki has noted that by the end of 1993, over 96% of those unjustly convicted under Communist rule had been rehabilitated by Czech courts. In addition, in March 1993, the Parliament established a commission to investigate repressive actions taken by the pre-1989 Czechoslovakian security police against dissidents.
The dual nature of Czech political developments — sometimes excessive and repressive reactions to the past contrasted with progressive reformation of past excesses — is exemplified by the call of President Vaclav Havel for Czechs to objectively reevaluate their past and to own up to their failure to support resistant movements against the Nazis and the wide support in the country for the Communists during their rule. "We are not worse than others," Havel said last year, "but we are not better either." Havel's public reassessment of Czech history, however, has drawn angry reactions from all sides.
Reformation of past injustices is also at the heart of a complicated issue facing the Czech Republic concerning Sudeten Germans. Although this issue may not fit squarely within the report's formal framework, its importance should have been justified some reference to it. The expulsion of Sudeten Germans from Czechoslovakia after World War II remains a sensitive and potent issue in the Czech Republic. In 1993, a delegation composed of members of each of the parties constituting the governing coalition in Parliament met with Sudeten German representatives. Although the talks were a major positive step, even this initial gesture was rife with controversy. The Parliament itself engaged in an extensive semantic debate over whether the delegation should be characterized as a governmental or private one.
A major potential controversy involves the restitution of property taken from Sudeten Germans as part of the post-war expulsion. While the Czech
77
CRITIQUE 1993
Republic has made significant strides toward the restitution of property to Church and Jewish groups (a fact the report notes), restitution of property taken from expelled Sudeten Germans remains controversial and far from resolution. A Czech poll in 1993 revealed that a majority of Czech citizens are alarmed by Sudeten German demands for restitution, and no fewer than 82% of respondents said they viewed the Sudeten Germans as a threat to the welfare of the Czech Republic. The Sudeten issue remains a potent rallying point for Czech opposition groups on both the extreme right and left. Criticism from these extremists appears to have succeeded in making moderate and informal contacts with Sudeten Germans even more difficult.
With regard to racial and ethnic minorities within the Czech Republic, the report gives generally extensive and proper attention to the Roma, who, as the report notes, suffer disproportionately from poverty, crime and poor health. A delegation from the Council of Europe noted that the treatment of Roma in the Czech Republic presents a serious human rights issue and that the status of Roma differed qualitatively from that of other ethnic minorities in the country. The report might also have cited an Interior Ministry report of December 1993, which confirmed that there are increasing number of racially motivated attacks in the Czech Republic, with Roma almost always the victims. Between 1990 and 1993, 16 Roma were reportedly killed in racial attacks. Last year, the police reported 46 racially motivated attacks on Roma, an increase from 31 in 1992 and 25 in 1991. The report acknowledges that there are "credible reports" that police ignore or condone anti-Roma violence. Moreover, the Czech Interior Ministry itself has noted that there is only one crime department in Prague organized to deal with the problems of extremist violence, and recommended in a December 1993 report that other police units be assigned to combat the rise in racially motivated crime.
The report gives proper attention to a discriminatory, anti-Roma decree issued in the town of Jirkov in northern Bohemia that was later emulated in other Czech municipalities. But it fails to note similar and equally significant legislative activity. For example, the Czech Justice Minister, in order to preempt local decrees like that in Jirkov, proposed an anti-Roma bill that would have regulated the migration of non-permanent residents in regions declared by the government to be threatened by immigration. Under the law, legislators would have had the power to limit individuals' rights to use apartments and houses in designated regions. The proposed law, however, was widely criticized as a potential violation of the Czech Constitution's Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms. The Czech Prosecutor General also proposed a national anti-migration bill to deal with "the unrest caused by undisciplined groups of migrants" in certain areas. In a detailed report that accompanied the proposed bill, the undisciplined migrants were clearly identified as Roma. The Czech Parliament, however, voted down the measure.
78
CZECH REPUBLIC
In addition, the report appears to have oversimplified the controversy surrounding the Czech citizenship law that went into effect on January 1, 1993. Helsinki Watch has commented that the law may have a negative impact on the Roma. The report attributes the issue, however, only to cultural differences between Roma and Czechs. Many Roma never applied for Czech residency, either because they did not believe it was necessary, or because they were ineligible. In addition, the Roma may be disproportionately affected by the requirement under the citizenship law that applicants have no criminal record for the last five years. There are also concerns that because of the poor literacy rate of the Roma, many will not be able effectively to exercise their right to apply for Czech citizenship.
Although citizenship applications are generally granted, many individuals are never allowed to apply because applications require onerous documentation. The document requirement presents a serious obstacle, requiring would-be applicants to assemble records fi"om abroad, including Slovakia, and sometimes to provide their parents' citizenship records. In addition, applicants must prove past residencies and mastery of the Czech language, a requirement which precludes many Roma who speak Romany or Slovak.
A poll in February 1993 revealed that 67% of the Czech population believes that the rights of ethnic minorities may be restricted in the interest of the majority. President Havel has referred to the issue of the Roma as "a litmus test not of democracy but of a civil society." While noting success in creating democratic Czech institutions, the President said that the more difficult challenge is to promote a civil society that encourages the democratic spirit and that would "drive out manifestations of intolerance."
Roma leaders, however, charge that without affirmative governmental action they will become the target of ethnic war. Groups such as the Romany Petition Committee argue that by remaining silent, the government is supporting fascist groups and organizations such as the skinheads who demonstrated in Pardubice in January 1993. To its credit, the report observes that most government programs aimed at the Roma are ineffective and that government policies neglect the seriousness of the issue.
The Czech newspaper M?<3£/ii Fronta Dnes reported in December 1993 that the number of racist- and Fascist-oriented movements in the Czech Republic is increasing. Experts have estimated that between 1,000 and 3,000 people between the ages of 18 and 30 years belong to such movements, particularly the skinhead movement. Over ten journals in current circulation openly promote Fascism and racial and ethnic hatred, particularly against Roma, Jews and Vietnamese. Police report increasing contacts between Czech ultra-right extremists and similar groups from other countries, especially Germany.
The unfortunate situation faced by Roma children suggests that discrimination is likely to continue for another generation. For example, Radio Free
79
CRITIQUE 1993
Europe reported in 1993 that as many as 80% of Roma children in Prague are classified as mentally backward and placed in special schools. The report made no reference to this alarming statistic, althou^ it did note that Roma children frequently do not receive basic health and welfare benefits. The report attributed this to "cultural differences and instances of social prejudice" rather than official policy. By contrast, however, Human Rights Watch/Helsinki noted that there have been government attempts to improve conditions for the Roma minority, including a pre-school program launched in September 1993 by the Ministry of Education to provide higher quality education and more individual attention for selected Roma children.
An amendment to the Czech refiigee law last year falls far short of the requirements of the 1951 Convention on Refugees which the Czech Republic adopted as a successor state to Czechoslovakia. Access to refugee procedures is severely limited, and Czech law includes more restrictive time limitations on refugee applications than any other European country. If an initial review of an applicant's claim is determined to be unfounded, the applicant has only three days to appeal it. In addition, someone who is accused of a crime may be denied reftigee status without further review of the merits of the charge. Finally, although the refugee convention requires a refugee to be treated as a citizen or permanent resident, refugees in the Czech Republic are given the rights of "long-term residents," which provides for inferior treatment in access to health and social security benefits. This treatment, by violating the Convention, also violates the Czech Constitution which, under Article 10, makes international human ri^ts treaties superior to domestic law.
The report accurately relates that free media are generally flourishing in the new Czech Republic. Czech law provides for freedom of speech and the press; new newspapers, magazines and journals were launched in 1993. The report also appropriately reflects the existence of a subtle tension between government tolerance of freedom of the press and the temptation of censorship. Although Czech media are free from direct government interference, some leading politicians attempted in February to reverse a decision by the independent Board for Czech Radio and Television to license a private Czech television company. Although the license was eventually granted, the Board's chairman resigned in protest at what he described as a growing tendency among Czech politicians to strip the Board of its independence. Nonetheless, the Board in 1993 also licensed two private radio stations to broadcast nationwide, and a number of local private stations were also licensed.
The report's discussion of other important issues is appropriate and thorough. A notable improvement over last year's report is the effort to integrate the discussions in each section through the use of internal references and citations. The 1992 edition of the Critique drew attention to the disjointed and mechanical
80
CZECH REPUBLIC
approach of last year's report. The 1993 report's useful discussion of women's issues in the Czech Republic includes discussion of the growth of prostitution and the fact that Czech law does not expressly protect prostitutes against trafficking and sexual exploitation. The report correctly notes that, despite the efforts of human rights groups, there is practically no public discussion on the issue of violence against women.
The 1993 report provides a generally thorough and rich discussion of the human rights situation in the Czech Republic and represents an apparent effort to cure previous deficiencies. The report largely reflects the subtlety and complexity involved in issues such as the treatment of the Roma minority and the process of de-Communization and democratization, while also properly acknowledging the impressive progress made by the Czech Republic in human ri^ts.
81
CRITIQUE 1993
