GERMANY
The State Department's 1993 report on Germany gives an accurate, detailed and balanced picture of the human ri^ts situation in Germany. Overall, it correctly describes the German legal system, including the rights guar^teed in the Basic Law, as well as specific incidents that raised legal and human rights coQcems. Like its predecessor, the 1993 report deals extensively with the increased violence against foreign, religious and ethnic minorities.
According to the figures for 1993 published by the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution, there were 1,814 violent crimes with xenophobic motivation by rightists in the first eleven months of 1993 ( compared to 2,283 in the corresponding period in 1992); 122 attacks on political opponents (93 in 1992); 46 attacks on Jews (63 in 1992); and 324 other incidents of right-wing extremist violence, including attacks on homeless and handicapped people (145 in 1992). The number of attacks on lodgings of asylum-seekers fell to 120 from 381 in 1992. Eight people lost their lives in assaults listed as racially motivated, compared with 17 in 1992. According to the German Federal Police, 8,109 right-wing incidents occurred in 1993, including both violent and non-violent crimes, including racial slurs and so-called propaganda offenses, such as painting swastikas on buildings or the display of forbidden symbols. That is an increase of about 14 per cent from the 7,121 recorded in 1992.
As the report says, one of the worst attacks happened in the western town of Solingen, where four men, aged 16 to 24, are accused of having set fire to the home of a Turkish citizen during the night. Four girls aged four to 18 died, and a 27-year-old woman died later of injuries she suffered in jumping from a window. All suspects are in custody and charged with five accounts of murder, attempted murder and arson.
Another incident that attracted international attention was a racially motivated attack on two members of the US Olympic luge team by skinheads in the winter resort of Oberhof Duncan Kennedy, who is white, suffered a concussion, a broken nose and bruised ribs when he tried to protect a black teammate from a gang of neo-Nazis who were shouting racial slurs.
While the total number of right-wing incidents increased during 1993, violent crimes by rightist extremists declined by about 40%. One reason may be the increased efforts by the German government to fight such extremism, despite provisions in the Basic Law that limit the activities of the Federal Government in key areas that are in the jurisdiction of the federal states, such as the courts, police authorities, the educational system, vocational training, youth work and the cultural domain. The report did not take adequate account of these efforts.
122
GERMANY
The German Government — more specifically the Federal Office of Criminal Investigation — has enlarged its divisions responsible for curbing right-wing extremism, and the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution has e?q5anded sections responsible for observing groups with an extreme right-wing orientation. Moreover, a federal state information clearing-house was founded in 1993 to monitor violent acts committed by right-wing extremists. The federal states have also established special investigative units to combat offenses against foreigners. For the first time since its existence, the upper house of parliament {Bundesrai) decided to ask the Federal Constitutional Court to ban a right-wing party, the Freiheitliche Deutsche Arbeiterpartei. A positive decision by the Court would lead to the dissolution of the party, a ban on its activities and the confiscation of all its assets.
The govemment has also launched a number of public education initiatives in this area, including television spots and instructional materials against violence for use in schools. Through its "Action Drive against Aggression and Violence," the Govemment has tried to draw groups inclined towards violence into specific youth-work projects. The Federal Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs spent around DM 92 million (approximately $140 million) to encourage the integration of foreigners living in Germany. The original eleven federal states contributed a further DM 52 million (approximately $79 million) to this effort. Finally, the Federal Govemment is seeking to amend a number of existing laws to combat right-wing crime more effectively. These amendments include:
•	Augmenting Section 86(a) of the Criminal Code on the use of insignia by unconstitutional associations to include symbols differing only sligiitly from those barmed;
•	Extending the definition of incitement to racial hatred, as laid down in Section 131 of the Criminal Code, to have it cover all forms of discrimination. This amendment would be coupled with stronger punitive sentencing;
Increasing the punitive threat in instances of criminal offenses involving bodily harm.
In addition to the incidents that are mentioned in the report. Amnesty International received a number of allegations in 1993 that foreigners had been the victims of ill-treatment by police officers or that officers had failed to intervene during racist attacks. In one such case, according to statements by a number of asylum-seekers, residents of a refugee hostel in Granitz were punched, kicked or struck with batons without reason by police officers during a raid. The Ministry of Justice of Saxony admitted to Amnesty International that one man had been struck by a police baton during the raid when he obstructed an officer who was searching
123
CRITIQUE 1993
the hostel for stolen goods and checking the residents' papers. The Ministry denied any other violence by police, but told Amnesty International that a judicial investigation into the allegations had been launched and that Amnesty International would be informed of the outcome. No final information has yet been made available. In most of the other cases reported, no disciplinary measures have been taken against police and no charges have been filed after internal investigations, mainly because of a lack of evidence.
As stated in the report, German prosecutors and judges have been criticized for excessive leniency toward right-wing crimes. For instance, critics say, two men accused of setting a fire at the former Sachsenhausen concentration camp were found not guilty, although both had confessed to the crime, but later claimed that their confession had been extracted under pressure. In another verdict that caused public outrage, two defendants found guilty of killing a Mozambican laborer were given probation and fines, while a third was sentenced to two-and-a-half years in prison.
German courts have now begun to hand down stiifer sentences against racist violence. One defendant, 26-year-old Michael Peters, was sentenced to life imprisonment for arson, attempted murder and murder of five Turks in the western town of Mölln, while his accomplice, 20 year-old Lars Christiansen, received ten years, the longest prison term allowed under laws for juveniles. In the Duncan Kennedy case, meanwhile, a court in Suhl sentenced Silvio Eschrich, 21, to two years and eight months in prison and Tino Voelkel, 16, to one year in juvenile detention. Almost 70% of the suspects in rightist hate crimes were juveniles or young adults under 21, whose sentences are limited by law. Offenders under 17 may be sentenced to a detention center; young adults (between 17-21) may receive up to ten years imprisonment.
On July 1, 1993, Germany's Asylum law was amended to restrict severely the right of asylum seekers, in line with an agreement between the governing coalition and the opposition Social Democratic Party. The State Department report discusses the new law, but avoids giving is own opinion of the measures.
Although it seems that the individual right of asylum is still granted in Article 16(a)(1) of the German Basic Law, authorities are now allowed to exclude all asylum seekers who pass through any country considered "safe" from political persecution, a category that includes all of Germany's neighbors. All member states of the European Community, as well as any other state that guarantees the application of the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees and the European Convention on Human Rights, is considered to be a "safe third coimtry." Moreover, the amended law has also created a list of countries deemed safe fi"om political persecution, whose nationals as a rule cannot apply for asylum in Germany. The claim of an applicant fi"om one of these "safe countries of origin" will be considered "manifestly unfounded," unless he or she presents facts to rebut
124
GERMANY
this legal presumption. An appeal does not have suspensive effect. In addition to all member states of the European Union, Finland, Norway, Austria, Poland, Sweden, Switzerland and the Czech Republic have all been legally determined to be "safe countries of origin."
As the report correctly points out, the new Asylum Law has prompted criticism from major human rights groups as well as from the UNHCR. The law shifts the reftigee problem unilaterally to Germany's border countries. By declaring several countries to be free from political persecution, the law also violates Article 33(1) of the Reftigee Convention, which gives a reftigee the right to have his case individually considered. Finally, there is also the risk of a reftigee later being deported from a so-called "safe third country" that fails, for whatever reason, to comply with the Convention. Furthermore, the concept of the political reftigee under Germany's Asylum Law is not identical with the term "reftigee" under the Geneva Convention.
The new law ended one of the most liberal asylum laws in Europe and a postwar tradition of allowing anyone claiming political asylum to enter and remain in Germany at public expense as long as their applications were being considered. Although fewer than five percent were eventually accepted, the review process often dragged on for years, and many of those rejected were allowed to stay on "humanitarian grounds." Figures released by the Federal Interior Ministry confirm a sharp decline in applicants since the new law went into effect, with 322,842 reftigees seeking political asylum in 1993 as against 438,191 in 1992.
The asylum compromise also allowed for the creation of a special status for international and civil war refugees, who can be allowed to stay in Germany for a certain period outside of the regular asylum procedure. During this period, these refugees can obtain residence and work permits.
At the same time, the German Parliament enacted a law making foreigners eligible for compensation for acts of violence committed against them since July 1, 1990, if they have been legally resident in Germany for at least three years. Those with fewer than three years residence are entitled to limited compensation. Under previous German law, compensation could only be claimed by European Community nationals living in Germany and nationals from those countries with which the principle of mutuality was guaranteed, The East German Alliance 90/Green Party has criticized the law as too resfrictive, citing the fact that asylum-seekers and refugees from countries affected by civil war, such as the former Yugoslavia, are entitled to only limited state compensation. They are also denied compensation for crimes related to their political activities in their countries of origin.
The report should also have mentioned one further important development related to the status of foreign nationals in Germany. This is the amendment in 1993 of Article 28 of the German Constitution, in accordance with the Maastricht
125
CRITIQUE 1993
Treaty, to allow all nationals of European Union countries to take part in local elections, both as voters and as candidates.
On a separate matter, the report fails to address issues related to the legal reconsideration of East Germany's past. Given the severity of human rights violations in East Germany, and the political, legal and social significance of the efforts to punish those responsible, this omission is frankly astonishing.
A number of important government officials from the former German Democratic Republic were put on trial in 1993, charged with the killings of East Germans attempting to cross the border to the West. The accused included Erich Honecker, former General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party (SED), Erich Mielke, head of East Germany's secret police (Stasi), former Prime Minister Willi Stoph, and East German spymaster Markus Wolf. The terminally ill Honecker was released on humanitarian grounds and allowed to travel to Chile after the Berlin Constitutional Court ruled that his detention and trial violated his right to human dignity in view of his terminal illness. Mielke, who was tried for a murder committed in Germany in the 1930s, was also released on health grounds, as was Stoph, whereas Wolf was convicted for treason and sentenced to six years in prison.
In addition to these leading political figures, several East German border guards were also prosecuted for shooting fugitives. In one case, a border guard received a six year sentence for killing a fugitive who was already under arrest. Several other defendants were also convicted, but given only short, suspended sentences.
The trials were widely criticized both within Germany and abroad. Among East Germans especially, the sympathetic treatment given to Honecker and other leaders has contributed to the impression that the "big fish" were allowed to go free while low-ranking soldiers were made to stand trial. Others argue that the trials were politically motivated and that the legal system has been abused as an instrument of political revenge. The legal basis for some of these trials is indeed questionable. The murder charge against Mielke was based on Gestapo documents, and Wolfs conviction for treason is dubious, since he was not a citizen of West Germany and treason can only be committed against one's own country. In general. West German criminal law is not applicable to acts committed by former East Germans, unless it provides for a lighter penalty. The defendants, therefore, must be prosecuted for breaches of former East German law. In cases against former border guards, the highest Federal Court held, inter alia, that the East German border law violated Articles 6 and 12 of Section 2 of the ICCPR, to which the former GDR became a state party in 1974. Article 6 of the Covenant says that every human being has the inherent right to life and that no one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his life. According to Article 12, everybody shall be free to leave any country, including his own. Some legal scholars, however, argue that the
126
GERMANY
convictions violate the principles of "no crime without a law" and "no retroactive law."
The legal reconsideration of East Germany's past is extremely difficult and the criminal courts cannot possibly oifer justice to all victims of the former communist regime. Some court rulings may appear quixotic in view of the severity of the human rights violations that occurred in the GDR. Yet the obligation of the judicial system to consider humanitarian factors must be respected, even in the case of defendants responsible for grave violations. So far, the German courts have made a fairly impressive display of fairness in dealing with East German defendants. For example, the highest Federal Court upheld the acquittal of two former East German labor law judges accused of Rechtsbeugung — the misuse of their authority to apply the law. The courts have also acquitted former Stasi officials prosecuted for stealing money out of private letters on state orders and for state benefit. Former Prime Minister Hans Modrow, accused of election fi"aud, received a reprimand. All in all, the judicial system has operated more fairly than many of its critics charge.
Given these legal problems, as well as the argument that the two Germanies need reconciliation, some say that an amnesty is required to unify a divided country and relieve the overloaded judicial system. But an amnesty would have to be proposed by the federal and all sixteen state justice ministers, and then be approved by the lower house of parliament. That is unlikely to happen, especially since the parliament has just extended by two years the statute of limitations for former East German officials accused of minor crimes, and by four years for more serious crimes.
The 1993 report on Germany generally complies with the revised State Department instructions on the treatment of discrimination, with subsections on women, children, national/racial/ethnic minorities, religious minorities and people with disabilities. But in its discussion of discrimination against women, the report fails to address new proposed legislation designed to guarantee equal rights for woman and abolish discrimination.
First of all, a joint constitutional commission of the upper and lower houses of parliament, appointed to revise the Basic Law, suggested amending Article 3 Section 2 of the Constitution by adding the following phrase: "The State promotes the actual implementation of equality between women and men and tries to abolish existing disadvantages." The German government also proposed a comprehensive statute designed to guarantee equal rights in the workplace and specifically intended to protect employees fi"om sexual harassment on the job. The proposed regulations would require federal agencies to create and implement a plan to advance women in each department, with ihe flexible goal of eliminating the underrepresentation of women in hiring and promotion. Larger government departments would be required to appoint an ombudsman for women's issues.
127
CRITIQUE 1993
Gender-specific hiring would be outlawed and restrictions on part-time work in the public sector would be loosened in an effort to aid working mothers. The sexual harassment clause would give both government and private sector employees the legal right to file a complaint with their superiors, who must take appropriate measures against the perpetrator, including dismissal. If the employer fails to act, or acts inappropriately, the victim may stop working without loss of pay and without losing the right to bring the matter before a labor court.
According to one recent survey, Germany's 626 biggest companies have 2,286 men and only 12 women on their boards. In middle management, women occupy just 5.9 percent of all jobs, although they account for 41.6 of the total work force, according to the Ministry for Women and Youth. The proposed new law is meant to rectify this situation, yet it creates no new enforcement mechanism and includes no new budget allocation to monitor compliance. The government also intends to amend section 611(a) of the German Civil Code, which would enhance women's rights in cases of job discrimination. Critics say the proposed statute would be a step backwards in comparison with the former law created by the labor courts, since damages would be limited to three times the monthly salary, and since women still bear the initial burden of proof
In its discussion of children, the report fails to mention that the criminal code was amended in 1993 in order to protect children more effectively against sexual abuse and child pornography. Mere possession of child pornography is now illegal and can be punished with up to one year's imprisonment. At the same time, the maximum prison sentence for distribution of child pornography has been increased to five years. Moreover, in order to combat sex tourism, the sexual abuse of children by German citizens abroad can now be punished under German law, even if the action is not illegal in the child's own country. Justice Minister Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger has proposed a statute against the ill-treatment of children that will expressly forbid all forms of physical, mental and other forms of abuse.
The report also fails to address the issue of inequality between legitimate and illegitimate children, especially in the German law of inheritance, maintenance and custody. In 1992 the German Government ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child, which in some cases is in contradiction to German law. For instance, according to Article 2(2), states parties shall take all appropriate measures to ensure that the child is protected against all forms of discrimination or punishment on the basis of the status of the child's parents. Article 9(3) of the Convention guarantees the child who is separated from one or both parents the right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis. Under German law, the fathers of illegitimate children, and/or those living apart from their children, are denied custody and have only limited visiting rights. The Convention makes no distinction between legitimate and illegitimate children.
128
GERMANY
Article 18(1) provides that all signatory states recognize the principle that both parents have common responsibilities for the upbringing and development of the child. According to the federal justice minister, the German government is now drafting reform proposals that would abolish the unequal treatment of illegitimate children under German law.
The discussion of discrimination against people with disabilities is correct as far as it goes. However, it should have mentioned the current political controversy over a plan to extend state-financed nursing-home care for the very old and/or disabled. The report should also have noted that no reform proposals exist that would grant people with disabilities a fiill range of guarantees of the sort given to women, although this has been demanded by every major organization representing the disabled.
Finally, according to the 1993 World Labour Report, Germany continues to violate the conventions on forced labor, which provide that prisoners must be asked for their consent to work for private enterprises, and, in the event that they choose to do so, must be offered salaries and benefits comparable to those of fi"ee workers. German prisons, which are run by the federal states, use over 90% of the revenue fi-om prisoners' earnings to pay for maintaining the prisons. The German government justifies this practice with logistical and financial arguments.
129
CRITIQUE 1993
