DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
The 1993 report on human rights in the Dominican Republic is most accurate in its identification of police and military abuses and of the prolonged and arbitrary pre-trial detention of suspects, as well as of violations of workers' rights to organize. The report also contains good expanded sections on women's and children's rights. It is strongest where it follows State Department instructions to show the disparity between law or policy and practice. It is weakest when it makes sweeping statements of fact, minimizes violations or refers to "improvements" despite ongoing violations, particularly with regard to Haitian workers in the Dominican Republic.
The report points out the recurring gap between policy and practice on several occasions, beginning with its first paragraph, which stresses that the judiciary is "only nominally independent." This theme is further developed in the section on denial of fair public trial. The report also accurately points out violations of constitutional provisions in its section on arbitrary arrest, detention and exile, and violations of the 1992 Labor Code in the section on work conditions. The report lists several cases of police abuse and gives examples of cases in which police officials received little or no punishment for their violations. It also follows up on the case of a human rights lawyer killed by security forces in 1992, although it fails to conmient on the govenmient's sluggishness in punishing the guilty parties.
In other areas the report minimizes or misstates rights violations. For example, while it correctly identifies abuses of Haitian workers as a principal rights problem in the Dominican Republic, its assertion that conditions for itinerant Haitian sugar workers have improved leaves an inaccurate impression. Despite recognizing that conditions for Haitian workers are generally worse than for others, the report downplays the effective restriction of movement of Haitians working on the plantations, where they continue to be subject to a militarized regime that amounts to indentured servitude. The report contradicts itself. It asserts that restrictions were "less onerous" in 1993 than in the past, but then goes on to describe the presence of armed guards in and around the plantations and the sequestering of the belongings of Haitian workers, as well as the Dominican government's failure to implement written agreements to solve workers' problems and the continued use of vouchers for payment in violation of international norms.
Labor Minister Rafael Albuquerque does seem to have made some effort to improve conditions, as the report suggests. However, his creation of a specialized force of 25 inspectors to monitor work conditions on the sugar plantations has not led to perceptible improvements. The report fails to address the findings of the Brussels-based International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) on this issue. In its Annual Survey on Violations of Trade Union Rights, the ICFTU reported no improvement in conditions of Haitian workers, who make
82
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
up 75% of the workforce in the Dominican sugar sector. With the state-owned sugar production company, CEA, now confronting a decline in production levels, there have been reports that work conditions have actually deteriorated in the face of financial pressures.
The report is incomplete when it merely lists statistics on the one-year temporary work permits issued in past years, and avoids any critical analysis. These work permits confer no permanent legal status on Haitian workers, and cannot be used by Haitian children bom in the Dominican Republic who are legally citizens under the Dominican Constitution — to gain educational benefits. They are primarily confined to the sugar industry. Some of the cards are site-specific, empowering the state to further restrict the free movement of workers, as those who stray from their worksite can be considered illegal.
The report correctly states that forced recruitment has diminished, but fails to point out that this reflects the increased availability of labor rather than any significant change in government policy. As conditions in their country have deteriorated, more Haitians have crossed the border into the Dominican Republic. In addition, declining sugar production has reduced somewhat the need for foreign workers. Even so, there continue to be cases of forced recruitment, such as Haitians removed by security services from buses en route to the capital, Santo Domingo, and sent to sugar plantations.
The report neglects an incident in December 1993 that is particularly revealing of the Dominican govenunent's attitude toward Haitian workers. In the course of rounding up and transporting recent Haitian arrivals to sugar plantations in the interior, Dominican authorities apparently concluded that some 170 men, women and children were not needed for the harvest. They then forcibly deported the Haitians, dumping them in an empty barracks at a plantation near the border and leaving them without food and sleeping on cement floors.
The report mentions the mass repatriation of Haitians in October 1993, but fails to place the event in the context of the thwarted return to Haiti of elected President Jean-Bertrand Aristide that month. By ignoring the implications of the policy, this creates a misleading impression. Fleeing both repression and economic crisis, many Haitian workers had gone voluntarily to the Dominican Republic in search of work. As conditions grew more brutal in Haiti, Dominican officials continued to return Haitians, often handing them over directly to the Haitian military. There have been reports that some of these refugees were tortured and disfigured by the Haitian military to serve as "examples" for others,
The report's suggestion that planning for refugees has made little progress since the 1991 coup in Haiti is accurate, but does not go far enough. In fact, the Dominican military has actively disregarded international norms of refugee policy, opposing UNHCR processing at the border and trying to return Haitians to their country before they can reach processing centers in Santo Domingo, In 1993 the
83
CRITIQUE 1993
military entered at least one safe house set up by the Catholic diocese and the UNHCR in San Juan de Maguana, forcibly removing some seven Haitians who had already applied for refugee status and repatriating them to Haiti.
The report accurately states that the Dominican government has done little to acknowledge or combat discrimination against those with darker skin, in violation of the ICCPR and the International Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Racial Discrimination. Yet while recognizing a Dominican tradition of prejudice against Haitians, the report appears to validate this attitude by noting that "most [Haitians] are illegal immigrants." This implicitly assigns responsibility to the victims, ignoring the fact that the Dominican government has actively encouraged illegal immigration for years, taking part in the clandestine recruitment, transportation and employment of Haitian workers to do the work that most Dominicans refuse, such as cutting cane. The use of undocumented Haitian workers in the Dominican Republic has become institutionalized, and forced repatriation to Haiti has traditionally occurred only when the cane cutting season has ended.
While the report correctly sets forth the divergence between the provisions of the Dominican Constitution and violations of human rights by the security services, and correctly condemns lengthy pre-trial detention, it minimizes the importance of some cases of illegal detention. In 1993, rights organizations condemned the illegal detention of at least 30 people in contempt of judicial orders as an "affront to democracy" and a flagrant violation of universal rights. While the report acknowledges that a total of 54 persons remained in j ail at the end of 1993 despite judicial release orders, it concludes that the security forces are generally responsive to civilian authority. This claim is unjustified, given the widespread practice of ignoring judicial release orders, some of which have been belatedly obeyed only after the personal intervention of President Joaquin Balaguer.
Dominican security forces, cooperating with the US Drug Enforcement Administration, have increasingly empowered themselves to suspend detainees' rights in drug trafficking cases, often detaining a suspect's family until a fugitive surrenders, disallowing appeal of sentences or refiising to respond to judicial orders for release. By accepting at face value the Dominican government's explanation that judicial orders are sometimes ignored because of corruption, the report appears to be justifying the undermining of judicial authority.
As the report accurately states, illegal detention is not confined to drug cases. The report commendably follows up on the case of Luis Lizardo Cabrera, whose judicial order for release fi"om prison was refused three times. At the same time, its emphasis on his alleged crime tends to minimize and tacitly accept governmental justifications for interference with the judiciary. The report fails to mention that in 1993 Lizardo Cabrera was hospitalized for intestinal problems and knee injuries following beatings by the Policio Nacional after a hunger strike
84
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
involving several prisoners protesting illegal detention at the Penitenciaria Nacional de la Victoria.
While the report correctly identifies the ongoing use of excessive force by police, it is ambiguous in assigning responsibility, citing "intoxication or romantic interest" as the typical "causes" of extrajudicial killings, but not including an underlying pattern of abuse of power and of firearms by police personnel. In one example of abuse of power, a peasant named Juan Diaz Ulerio was badly beaten by police, then drenched in gasoline and set afire by a civilian accompanying the police, receiving first, second and third degree bums over 40% of his body. The incident followed a police attempt to evacuate peasant families fi"om their homes without a warrant.
The report accurately points out the substandard conditions in Dominican prisons but makes no comment on reports fi"om some sources of a decline in levels of abuse. Since the report makes no suggestion that the police have modified their behavior, it should have addressed the credibility and significance of such fmdings.
The report states that no human rights workers were harassed in 1993. However, in a case that demonstrates both interference with the independence of the judiciary and harassment of human rights activists, the Dominican Supreme Court ordered the transfer of Judge Somnia Vargas Tejada, formerly legal adviser to the Union for the Defense of Human Rights. Judge Vargas has claimed that the transfer order was motivated by critical remarks she had made about the Dominican criminal and judicial systems at a September human rights seminar. She had criticized the police for corruption and for using physical coercion to extract confessions, and had condemned judges and police investigators for accepting bribes fi"om drug cartels and allowing a partisan appointment process for new Dominican judges.
The section of the report on worker rights is most comprehensive in dealing with violations of the right to organize and bargain collectively. But the report errs in emphasizing de jure rights under the 1992 Labor Code, instead of actual practice. Despite its presumably good intentions, the new code lacks adequate enforcement mechanisms and widespread labor violations continue. In May, Labor Minister Albuquerque criticized the justice system for failing to punish companies that violate the code, saying that of 222 firms cited for violations, only two had been subject to a court decision in the past year. He complained that labor judges do not apply sanctions when the Labor Minister brings a case and that companies continue to violate the code with impunity. Most violations were against freedom of association, minimum wage and overtime pay.
In June, the AFL-CIO submitted a petition to the US Trade Representative to deny trade benefits to the Dominican Republic on the basis of violations in the country's fi-ee trade zones, noting that, "There is still not a single functioning trade union, nor a single collective bargaining contract, in any of the approximately 420
85
CRITIQUE 1993
firms in the 26 free zones employing 140,000 workers." Dominican business leaders have denied the AFL-CIO charges, accusing the organization of interfering with Dominican sovereignty and trying to reduce investment and employment in the Dominican Republic, and denouncing the Labor Minister for "promoting the creation of trade unions in the free zones." The State Department should have assessed the validity of the claims made in petitions such as the AFL-CIO's, as it has done in other Country Reports.
The report does not follow up on some violations reported in 1992. For example, the section on freedom of speech and the press omits the case of Radio Enriquillo, ignoring the continued ban on that station's Creole-language broadcasts. The Dominican government suspended the broadcasts in 1992, claiming that they interfered with Haiti's internal affairs. In January 1993, the United States Information Agency received clearance from the Dominican government to broadcast in Creole a speech by President Clinton aimed at potential asylum seekers. The ban was then reimposed. Despite this, the report states misleadingly that speech and press freedoms are respected, and that privately owned stations broadcast all points of view.
The report asserts that journalists operate in a "relatively tolerant" environment, but brushes off governmental checks on freedom of expression, saying merely that journalists engage in "a certain amount of self-censorship for fear of offending prominent persons." While journalists may not be openly threatened, and some may be more easily corrupted than others, it is misleading to absolve the government of responsibility. The government not only promotes, but encourages this "self-censorship" with gifts, favors and even tax breaks. The "fear of offending prominent persons" has proved to be justified in certain cases. As the report correctly notes, the Dominican government refused to bestow the award for best novel of the year on a winner chosen by a jury of prominent writers and literary critics. The decision was clearly taken because the book parodied President Balaguer. At least one Dominican newspaper compared the incident to censorship under the brutal dictatorship of Generalísimo Rafael Trujillo.
The report is also misleading in its discussion of official responsibility for the education and documentation of Haitian children. According to Article 11 of the Dominican Constitution and Article 7 of the Dominican Civil Code, children bom in the Dominican Republic of Haitian parents are considered Dominican; the parents' legal status has no bearing on the child's right to schooling. In practice, however, Haitian parents find it extremely difficult to register their children's births, often because they do not have either Dominican or Haitian passports. Some Haitians who have lived in the Dominican Republic for a decade or more can only, as a last resort, obtain documentation from the Haitian Embassy, with Haiti still considered as their place of domicile. These documents are not accepted for school
86
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
registration or nationality or residence papers. The report implies that the fault lies with the parents, ignoring the government's role in discouraging documentation.
Finally, a general weakness of the report is its tendency to make sweeping statements, often stating unequivocally that certain violations do not exist instead of saying that there are no reports of a particular abuse. The report does state that there were no known cases of politically motivated "disappearances," but this is an exception; elsewhere, the norm is to make unwarranted blanket statements: "no political killings occurred in 1993"; "no exile of citizens took place in 1993"; "the Dominican Republic has no political prisoners"; "there were no instances of killings, beatings, or harassment of human rights monitors in 1993"; etc. While the first two statements may be accurate, the latter two are questionable. The lack of reported abuses may be attributable in some instances to limitations on reporting rather than to an absence of incidents.
In summary, while the report on the Dominican Republic addresses most of the significant human rights concerns in 1993 and contains some good expanded sections, its greatest weaknesses are a tendency to exaggerate improvements in human rights practices and to minimize governmental misconduct, as well as its failure to assess and assign responsibility for ongoing violations.
87
CRITIQUE 1993
