EGYPT
The 1993 State Department report on Egypt is generally accurate and comprehensive. There is a marked improvement in its method and tone, which attempts to be more balanced and fair than last year's report. Nonetheless, the tone of the report continues to show bias in favor of the Egyptian government and to understate its pervasive human rights abuses, Egypt continues to be held hostage by a violent group of extremists and an even more violent and abusive government, ^^le the State Department's instructions on preparing the Country Reports states, "We seek to apply a single worldwide standard to the reporting of human rights abuses", one cannot avoid the impression that the Egyptian government is shown some indulgence because of its close relationship with the United States.
The report correctly notes that Egypt continues to be governed under Emergency Laws which have continuously been in effect since 1981. This comment appears only in the section on arbitrary arrest, detention or exile, however. Considering that the report acknowledges the State of Emergency, a "continuous flow of new arrests and releases from detention", and that most human rights abuses are committed under the emergency regime, this fact is integral to any assessment of the Egyptian political system. Consequently, according to the State Department's instructions, this information should be clearly set forth in the introduction. This is not simply a pedantic matter of organization. Rather it provides a crucial understanding that whatever liberties Egyptians do enjoy are a matter of government license, which could be withdrawn at any time.
The report frankly states that the human rights situation continued to deteriorate in 1993, The Egyptian Government perpetrated a variety of abuses including the arbitrary arrest and detention of thousands of detainees. The report admirably and honestly repeats last year's conclusion that, "The NDP [National Democratic Party], dominates the political scene to such an extent that, as a practical matter, Egyptians do not have a meaningful ability to change their government." Nevertheless, the assertiveness and candor of these statements is compromised by the tone of the report, which often fails to reflect the gruesome political reality prevailing in Egypt.
For example, while frankly stating that Egyptians do not have the ability to change their government, the report notes dispassionately that President Hosni Mubarak was elected unopposed to a third 6-year term by the People's Assembly. The re-election, according to the report, "was submitted to the public in a national referendum in which 96 percent of the voters approved it". The report fails to comment on widespread allegations of vote fraud during these elections. Furthermore, it fails to note that several months before the referendum Egyptian streets and newspapers were filled with pledges of allegiance to Mubarak. Egyptian
88
_EGYPT
television, especially during September and October, broadcast a daily parade of officials, institutions, citizens and even children exalting the virtues of Mubarak with no time whatsoever given to the opposition. The report could have called attention to Article 76 of the Constitution which makes it almost impossible for anyone to be nominated to run against the President. Ultimately, it leaves the unfortunate impression that it regards Mubarak's third term as a genuine re-election, and not as a pre-determined reappointment.
In similar fashion, the report objectively states that the "Constitution provides for various human rights, including a multiparty political system, regular elections, the rule of law, an independent judiciary, freedom of opinion and the right to peaceable assembly; a number of them are limited in practice, and there are many other serious abuses". This is an improvement over last year's claim that "many of these rights are freely practiced". Nonetheless, one is left with the impression that a number of these rights are not limited. As the Critique observed last year, after reading the list of human rights abuses in Egypt, one wonders which of the enumerated rights is freely practiced. The very existence of the draconian Emergency and Terrorism laws, and the prevalence of arbitrary mass detentions and torture, transforms rights into privileges subject to the indulgence of the security apparatus.
As past editions of the Critique have noted, the regime of exceptional laws that has governed Egypt for the last 50 years has contributed to the radicalization and polarization of Egyptian politics. The Egyptian government should not be allowed to justify its human rights violations by citing the violence perpetuated by extremist elements in society. The report notes that, "Egypt's security services and terrorist groups continued to be locked in a cycle of violence". Consequently, the "human rights situation continued to deteriorate in 1993". But the report ascribes the deterioration in the human rights situation fu"st, to the actions of terrorist groups, then to the government and fmally to the actions of nonviolent Islamic activists.
By contrast, Amnesty International has concluded that there was a serious deterioration in the human rights situation after March,. 1993 when the security forces killed 28 people after the adoption of a shoot-to-kill policy. In July, the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights (EOHR) called 1993 an especially bad year after a sharp rise in the number of detainees dying under torture, the increase in detentions, the implementation of terrorism laws and the execution of several people after trials in military courts. In placing violence by terrorists and the actions of non-violent Islamists on the same level as abuses by the government, the report continues an unfortunate recent trend. Perhaps inadvertently, it lends credence to the view that the Egyptian government's human rights violations are an unfortunate but necessary response to a volatile situation. Furthermore, the report's reference to non-violent Islamists, without further elaboration, tends to lend support to the Egyptian government's recent position of no longer distinguishing between
89
CRITIQUE 1993
Islamists who espouse violent means and the vast majority who do not. This has the unfortunate result of augmenting the government's feeling of being under siege from an Islamic threat, which is bound to lead in turn to further polarization of Egyptian politics.
Despite its vagueness on non-violent Islamists, the report should be complimented for a generally more balanced approach this year. Last year's Critique criticized the report for its apparent hostility towards Islamists and their publications. The 1993 report deletes its predecessor's statement that the opposition newspaper al-Sha'ab only covers human rights abuses against other Islamists. Additionally, the report is careful to note that although most torture and detentions are perpetrated against suspected terrorists, the Egyptian security forces also victimized non-violent Islamists and ordinary citizens. One should note, however, that a suspected terrorist is an ordinary citizen until found guilty after a fair judicial process. The essentially arbitrary nature of mass detentions should be made clearer in future reports.
The report assertively slates that at least 12 persons died under torture, and that "the government has not adequately investigated or publicly explained these deaths." Seven of the 12, it notes, were accused of being Islamists, while five were believed to have no cormections to Islamist groups. The report, however, should have highli^ted more strongly the case of Ahmed Farouk Ali, who died after one day in custody. It records the government's claim that Ahmed died of a heart attack and notes the final fmding of the Ministry of Interior that the death was due to natural causes. The General Directorate for State Security Investigations (SSI) arrested Ahmed's parents and 12 other members of his family, held them hostage and tortured them, in order to force Ahmed to surrender. Ahmed surrendered on September 2 and died in custody the very next day. He was held in the infamous Lazoughly, the Cairo headquarters of the SSI, where reports of torture have been rampant. This particularly egregious case deserved a firm stand in the report. The report also cites the cases of four individuals who, according to the Egyptian government, committed suicide in police custody. Unfortunately, it merely cites the Egyptian government's explanations without reaching any conclusion of its own about these cases.
The report is equally equivocal about a massacre that took place on March 9, 1993 at the Rahman Mosque in Aswan. It states non-committally that security forces surrounded the mosque and opened fire after the worshippers inside refused to leave. It states that nine people were killed in a "reportedly one-sided exchange of fire." But the report fails to note that several news reports said the unarmed worshippers were at prayer when security forces attacked without warning with tear gas and automatic weapons. The report wrongly implies that adequate warnings were given when it states that worshippers "refused to leave". It ignores the fact that 87 people were arrested after the raid, including ten children under 13.
90
_EGYPT
In discussing the Egyptian government's responsibility for human rights abuses, the report at times borders on apologetics. For example, after discussing what it terms "retaliatory motives" behind police raids and killings of suspected terrorists in March, the report states that, "After assuming office in April, Minister of Interior Hassan Al-Alfi deemphasized mass arrests and large-scale police raids on alleged terrorist strongholds". The implication is that the abuses of March are not likely to be repeated because the Ministry of Interior is now under new leadership. This is a particularly curious statement, since mass arrests have continued unabated after Alfi's appointment. For instance, on August 18, security forces arrested 245 suspected Islamists; those arrests were unrelated to the August attempt on Alfi's life. In another instance, on November 3, security forces arrested 400 suspected Islamists and detained another 1,350 for suspected "common law offenses."
The report's section on torture, generally, is excellent; it documents the widespread and systematic use of torture by the security forces. It describes the frequent detention and torture of relatives in order to force fugitives to surrender, and remedies a deficiency alluded to in last year's Critique by mentioning the detention of minors. The report, should however, have clearly stated that those detained as hostages and tortured are sometimes as young as eight years or 12 years old. In one particularly egregious case a sister was tortured and forced to testify against her brother who was subsequently sentenced to death by a military court. Despite the fact that sexual abuse has been widely reported, the report continues to show a reluctance to acknowledge this fact. It notes that some victims, including females, reported being threatened with rape. In fact, sexual abuse against males and females has been a problem in numerous cases. Nevertheless, despite these omissions, the report adopts a clear position on torture.
Unfortunately, however, the report contains one sentence that tends to dilute this clear position. After noting that the government does not adequately investigate torture complaints in political or religious cases, the report states: "There is no public record that offending officers in such cases are punished, thus suggesting that the government tacitly condones the mistreatment of those it considers to be opponents". The impact of this statement is to distance the government somewhat from the abuses committed by its security forces. No perpetrator of torture has been brought to court in Egypt in more than 7 years, despite numerous human rights reports describing the abuse the court acquittals of defendants because of torture. One can reasonably conclude, therefore, that the government does more than "tacitly condone" torture.
Interior Minister Hassan al-Alfi has insisted that reports of torture by human rights organizations are "mere purposeful rumors that seek to distort Egypt's image", that such reports are "fabricated and groundless", and that there is a "general plan" by human rights organizations to denigrate Egypt. Despite such
91
CRITIQUE 1993
declarations, the report quotes without comment the Egyptian government's argument that the "human rights record of any country should not be based on exceptional cases but on a comprehensive study of the coimtiy's social, cultural, political realities".
As successive Critiques have stated, this kind of equivocation by the State Department is bound to aggravate the worsening human rights situation in Egypt, When the report covers abuses by armed and violent groups, it is assertive, decisive and unequivocal. It flatly states that terrorists killed members of the security forces, murdered Coptic Egyptians and burned churches. The rationalizations and justifications of these organizations are not cited, and qualifiers such as "reportedly" or "allegedly" are not used. The same assertiveness is notably absent when dealing with governmental abuses.
In a welcome addition this year, the report mentions that security forces have subjected whole villages to collective punishment. Once again, however, the report fails to mention that security forces demolish houses of suspected terrorists. Additionally, the report states that no new cases of disappearance were reported in 1993. This is incorrect: Amnesty International reported that an Egyptian national was arrested at his place of work in the govemorate of Aswan in May 1993, and that his whereabouts remain unknown. The report also fails to mention the December disappearance in Cairo of Mansur Rashid al-Kikhya, a former Libyan diplomat and a member of the secretarial council of the Arab Organization of Human Rights, even though the overview to the Country Reports by Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, John Shattuck, specifically singles out this case for comment.
Also conspicuously absent from this year's report is any mention of prison conditions in Egypt. It should have noted that Human Rights Watch has reported on the abysmal conditions in Egyptian prisons, which led to rioting in 1993. The report's silence on this issue is regrettable.
The report's optimism about free speech in Egypt is misplaced. It argues that the Egyptian Constitution protects the freedom of speech and press and that "to a large extent the government refrains from curtailing political expression". The report goes on to state that "Egyptians openly express their views on a wide range of political and social issues, including vigorous criticism of the government, without fear of retribution", conceding only that there are "some limitations on the freedom of speech and press". Yet just a few sentences later, the report states that, "In 1993 there was a pattern of government interference with freedom of expression". The report goes on to document accurately the various incidents of harassment of writers, banning of books and censorship. These references are contradictory and confusing.
The Egyptian Penal Code is replete with laws that enable government to punish writers, defming offenses so broadly and vaguely as to give the government
92
_EGYPT
enormous discretion. When Adel Hussein, a journalist at the opposition paper al-Shaab was arrested, he was charged with publishing reports that may cause confusion in public opinion, offending state symbols, insulting the President by calling for constitutional reforms and encouraging terrorist and extremist thinking. Various other journalists were arrested and tortured, among them Abd al-Mun'im, a journalist for al-Sha'ab. Fundamentally, anyone who exercises the right to free speech in Egypt does so at considerable risk.
Another serious restriction on freedom of speech, also ignored by the report, is the mass expulsion of students from the state-owned universities or dramitories for expressions that the government deems offensive. During the 1993-1994 academic year 1,000 students have been expelled from universities because of their religious or political beliefs. Effectively, this means the denial of the right to an education for many people. Hence, the report's optimistic statement that people may express themselves "without fear of retribution" is, to say the least, naive.
Perhaps the most significant human rights development in Egypt in 1993 was the implementation of the Terrorism Laws under which 39 people were sentenced to death and at least 17 executed. Surprisingly, the report contains only one short paragraph on these laws. It merely notes the provisions of the Penal Code broadly define terrorism to include "spreading panic" and "obstructing the work of authorities." Last year's Critique criticized the 1992 report for inadequately covering the Terrorism Laws. Considering the role these laws played in human rights violations in 1993, the report's continued ambivalence is puzzling. In July 1993 the UN Human Rights Committee expressed concern that provisions in the new laws violate the ICCPR and described the new measures as "severe." Amnesty International also expressed grave concern over the vagueness and broadness of the definition of terrorism. These laws not only impose the death penalty for ill-defmed offenses but also for those who attempt these offenses.
In 1993 civilian defendants charged under the Terrorism Laws were tried in military state security courts. The report competently reviews the system of state security courts, military and civilian, and concludes that "military courts do not afford the defendants due process before an independent tribunal." Among other defects, the right to an attorney is limited and there is no right to appeal. There is a right to petition the president, and the president may cancel an acquittal and order a person retried or, alternatively, cancel a conviction and order a person free.
While the report's comments are accurate as far as they go, its reserved tone does not adequately represents the gravity of the situation. The law in Egypt permits the establishment of an array of exceptional courts including morality courts, revolutionary courts, security courts, military courts and emergency courts. Trials by the military courts in 1993 were described by Amnesty International as "grossly unfair." In fact, Amnesty International commented that the death
93
CRITIQUE 1993
sentences carried out "after unfair trials constitute summary or arbitrary executions". An observer from the International Commission of Jurists (ICJ) described the proceedings as "dubiously swift and conducted in a hasty manner." The observer also expressed concern over the trial of minors in these courts, one of whom was hanged. The report does note the fact that defense attorneys were not given adequate time to prepare but it does not mention the harassment, at times violent, of defense attorneys. In one particularly egregious case, Radwan al-Tuni, a defense attorney, found himself added to the list of defendants he was representing, arrested as he walked out the court room and tried for the offenses with which his clients were charged. He was later acquitted by a military court. An extremely disturbing trend of arresting and torturing defense attorneys continued in 1993, and the report should not let such a fact pass without comment.
On balance, the State Department report is accurate and generally comprehensive. But it continues the trend, evident in earlier reports, of appearing to understate the human rights abuses committed by a fiiendly government. As the political climate in Egypt becomes increasingly polarized and radicalized, human rights conditions are steadily worsening. This obligates the State Department to be more candid in reporting and documenting violations.
94
