ERITREA
The State Department report on Eritrea gives a generally accurate picture of human rights conditions in that cotmtiy during 1993. However, like many of the other Country Reports, it tends to stop short at an accurate recounting of the facts, and avoids any broader analysis of context or dynamic underlying the abuses that it describes. The report fails to discuss the ramifications of certain actions of the Eritrean government, and also fails to point out a number of areas of concern.
Although President Isaias Afwerki publicly stated in 1993 his commitment to establishing a multi-party system of government in Eritrea, the government has yet to demonstrate any significant movement in this direction after three years in power. The report does not emphasize this point. The government, which is dominated by former rebels of the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF), currently enjoys strong support and, as the report acknowledges, it has moved to broaden the participation of the population in local government. At the same time, however, the government claims to be a broad "front" representing all segments of Eritrean society, and is reluctant to give up the control it now enjoys. President Isaias has stated: "We are for democracy, but not in its familiar style." He has flirther explained that democracy in Erifrea will not be practised through political parties.
At first, the government postponed the transition to multi-party government until after the April 1993 referendum. However, by a decree dated May 20,1993, it announced that the provisional government would remain in place for another four years until Eritreans ratify a constitution and establish a permanent government. Moreover, although 1993 saw local elections, the formation of a constitutional commission, and the first steps toward developing a legislative body, the government and the EPLF continue for now to be virtually indistinguishable.
At least one opposition group, the Eritrean Liberation Front-Revolutionary Council (ELF-RC), has complained that the transitional government does not allow it or other opposition groups to operate freely and, further, that opposition groups have been banned from participation in the drafting of a provisional constitution. The ELF-RC has also stressed that members of the Eritrean legislative body were chosen from the central committee of the "front" headed by President Isaias, thus eliminating any role for the opposition in the legislative process. The report fails to address the government's position or actions with regard to opposition groups.
The report portrays Eritrea's April referendum as free and fair, a conclusion with which the UN observer mission concurred. However, the educational campaign run by various offshoots of the EPLF in the three months prior to the referendum lacked neutrality in subtle, and not so subtle, ways. For example, blue posters represented independence, while red posters with pictures of
102
ERITREA
skulls and bones represented unity with Ethiopia. Nevertheless, the EPLF deserves credit for having organized and run the referendum, a technically difficult feat.
Aside from the delays in moving towards a multi-party system, the EPLF government's actions and statements regarding freedom of assembly, freedom of association and freedom of the press raise some serious concerns that are not discussed in the report. While the report notes that the Eritrean press is govermnent-financed and does not criticize the authorities, it is an exaggeration to say that the issue of an independent press has not arisen in Eritrea because it is not yet economically feasible.
At least one Eritrean non-governmental organization, the Regional Center for Human Rights and Development, has attempted to publish a private newspaper, in April 1993. (The report refers incorrectly to the group as the Regional Committee for Human Rigiits and Development.) The Regional Center operated prior to this time, but was closed down by the government on the pretext that there was no law in place to register and regulate NGOs other than those oriented toward development issues. Although there is no such law in place to date, the government once again allowed the Regional Center to resumes its operations unofficially in late 1993. The government's arbitrary treatment of the Regional Center raises disturbing questions about press freedom and the right of free association.
The report ignores some additional indications of official restrictions on press freedom. In a June 1993 radio interview, for example. President Isaias stated that while there is no law to prevent Eritreans from expressing their views, the freedom to write "does not mean that you can insult others or just accuse for the sake of accusing." In this regard, it is significant that the government refused to allow certain Ethiopian journalists to observe and report on the 1993 referendum, based on the fact that they were known opponents of Eritrean independence. In addition, Eritrea has not so far enacted any laws regarding press freedom.
The government's view of the ri^t to assembly is illustrated by President Isaias's statements at a May 21 news conference, held the day after a protest in Asmara by former EPLF fighters who had worked for two years without pay. Although he recognized the severe economic difficulties that this group faced, and acknowledged its right to hold demonstrations, President Isaias nevertheless characterized the blocking of the airport and other government institutions as "illegal" and "shameful," and called it a "[demonstration of] a bad character in front of the people."
The closing of Asmara University in June of 1993, under circumstances that remain unclear, raises questions about the government's commitment to academic freedom. While an Eritrean Embassy source in Addis Ababa claimed that the university was not operating as of December 1993 because of work on a new syllabus and the completion of various departments, an ELF-RC source reported
103
CRITIQUE 1993
that 30 teachers had been expelled, two Executive Committee members arrested, and the teachers' union disbanded when the goveniment closed down the university. The report fails to mention this event or its ramifications.
In summary, while the 1993 report on Eritrea is accurate in most respects, it does not always make sufficiently explicit its concerns in the areas of multi-party government, freedom of the press, and freedom of association and assembly in Eritrea.
104
