		ESTONIA
The comprehensive coverage of Estonia in the 1993 State Department report depicts a country whose record on human rigiits reflects its government's effort to leave behind the Soviet legacy during a time of great change. Estonia declared its restored independence on August 20, 1991, during the Moscow coup attempt. The Soviet Union recognized the independence of Estonia and the other Baltic states on September 6, 1991. Estonia then entered the United Nations and the CSCE, and became amember of the Council ofEurope inMay 1993, OnJune 28, 1992, citizens voted by referendum for a new Constitution with a comprehensive bill of equal rights, and on September 20, 1992, in national elections, voted for a renewed Riigikogu or State Assembly. The Riigikogu elected Lennart Meri President of Estonia and affirmed Mart Laar as Prime Minister.
This review begins with a recapitulation of the state of individual rights in Estonia. It then takes up laws on language, citizenship and alien registration, with a focus on the legislation's conformity with international human rights standards, and fmally considers the steps that Estonia has taken toward intercommunity cooperation. Perhaps because of its narrowly mandated format, the State Department report omits any suggestion on how issues of non-citizens' rights in Estonia might be resolved. Some suggestions of this sort are included in this year's Critique.
On the economic side, continued scarcities of capital and other resources hamper progress toward remedying deficiencies in the protection of economic and social rights and in Estonian language training to help meet requirements for employment and for naturalization. The 1992 report mentioned Estonia's successful currency reforms, introducing the convertible kroon. This year's report touches again on the reorientation of trade patterns toward the West, and the resultant difficulties in iliel supplies and in fmding markets. The average monthly income of 1,200 kroons ($88), a shght increase in real terms over 1992 levels, marked Estonia as a still poor, developing country. Life is especially hard for pensioners and others on fixed incomes, while farmers suffer from a lack of credit as well as from foreign competition.
The report repeats its predecessor's fmding that rising unemployment remains at a "manageable" level. It does, however, acknowledge the impact of unemployment on state-owned enterprises. Russian speakers are concentrated in the capital Tallinn (comprising half the city's population), where unemployment is lowest, and the northeastern rust belt, where unemployment is relatively high. Russian speakers make up 80% of the population in the northeast, clustered in towns like Narva, Sillamae and Khotla-Jarve. Growing unemployment is not confmed to the northeast. But the potential for unrest associated with wide layoffs
105
CRITIQUE 1993
in that region, and the tensions that were apparent there in 1993, point to the urgency of resolving such issues as language requirements and citizenship rights.
As the report notes, civil and political rights were generally respected during 1993. The Estonian Constitution, directly enforceable in the courts, recognizes the equal, universally recognized human rights of all persons, and the precedence of international treaties over conflicting domestic legislation. Defendants' rights of due process, including prohibition of arbitraiy arrest and detention and an immediate right to counsel, are recognized in law. Judicial reforms continue. The Minister of Justice, Kaido Kama, announced on August 13 the abolition of the death penalty. Among lingering problems are the harsh and insanitary prison conditions. Reports of police brutality in 1993 included the beating of criminal suspects from an ultra-nationalist paramilitary unit after a firefight in downtown Tallinn. The media are free, diverse, struggling financially, and vulnerable to libel suits. The amended law on the cultural autonomy of minorities gives their members extensive rights to act to preserve "ethnic identity, cultural traditions, native language and religious beliefs."
The political rights of non-citizens do not include the ri^t to vote in national elections, to run for any elected office, or to belong to a political party, although they may join non-profit associations or leagues. Non-citizens do have the right, however, to vote in local elections, under the Constitution and the law of May 19, 1993. The government bestowed citizenship on about 100 non-citizens to enable them to run for office in the October 17 local elections. There is freedom of religion, assembly and association, and prisoners of conscience are a thing of the past.
Ethnic Estonians made up nearly nine out of ten inhabitants in 1939, but only about six out of ten in 1989 as a result of Soviet-era deportations and the Soviet-era immigration of a mainly industrial labor force. This population shift was particularly dramatic in the industrial northeast: for example, Estonians made up 64,8% of inhabitants in the hortheastera town of Narva in 1934; today the town is 95% Russian-speaking. In Narva, approximately one person in 12 is an Estonian citizen — about 7,000 out of a population of 85,000, In Sillamae, about one person in 35 — 600 out of a population of 21,000 — is an Estonian citizen. During the Soviet period, these immigrants tended to form a separate community within Estonia, Their schools did not teach Estonian. They enjoyed favored access to housing, concentrated in the industrial sector implanted by Moscow.
The separation of Russian-speakers from the rest of Estonian society is far from complete, however. Part of the Russian-speaking population supported Estonian independence in the March 3, 1991 referendum, which garnered 78% of votes favoring independence. An estimated 100,000 ethnic Russians out of 475,000 in Estonia automatically retained Estonian citizenship, along with other preoccupation citizens and their descendants.
106
_	ESTONIA
Most immigrants today face unclear and difficult citizenship choices. About 38.5% of the total population of some 1.566 million, being immigrants from the Soviet period, do not automatically qualify for citizenship. Of that population, Russians make up about 30.3% (eight percent before the Soviet occupation); Ukrainians 3.1%; Belarusians 1.5%, Finns 1.1%, and other groups, including 3,000 Jews, 1.5%. The UN human rights mission to Estonia in 1993 found no evidence of discrimination on direct ethnic or religious grounds. But it confirmed the impression of prior observers that there is, on the part of Russian, Belanisian and Ukrainian communities, "considerable anxiety about the future and, on the part of some members of the Estonian community, the desire to turn back the clock to the pre-1940 years, notwithstanding the fact that in the intervening period two generations of residents of non-Ethnic Estonian origin have grown accustomed to living in Estonia and perceive Estonia as their homeland." Many Russian speakers and other immigrants failed to qualify for automatic citizenship under the February 1992 citizenship law, which restored and amended the 1938 law on the principle of legal continuity from the former Estonian Republic, founded on February 24, 1918. The law continues to grant Estonian citizenship to pre-occupation citizens and their descendants, and grants citizenship by naturalization to other residents not otherwise disqualified. Estonian citizenship is automatic for (a) those who held it on June 16, 1940, the date of the Soviet occupation; (b) their descendants through the male or female line; (c) spouses of Estonian citizens and their children; (d) illegitimate children of non-citizen mothers if the father is a citizen and recognizes them; (e) children who are adopted by Estonian citizens; and (f) children bom of stateless (and not formerly Soviet) persons in Estonia.
For the immigrant population since 1940, there is the path of naturalization. Naturalization requirements, stipulated in the law of Febmary 26, 1992, include two years of residence before applying and an additional one year of residence in a waiting period before citizenship is granted, and written and oral proficiency in the Estonian language, as outlined in the Law on Estonian Language Requirements for Citizenship passed on Febmary 10, 1993. That requirement is made less onerous for persons bom before 1930 and for the disabled, and waived altogether for persons who received primary, secondary or higher education in the Estonian language, or have a certificate of employment-related language competence at one of the two top levels, E or F. Swearing an oath of allegiance to the Republic of Estonia and the Constitutional State Order is the final step to Estonian citizenship.
The starting date for residency under the citizenship legislation was March 30, 1990. Hence, the earliest that aliens might apply for citizenship was April 1, 1992, and the earliest they might receive it was April 1, 1993 — in other words, after the voting for a new Constitution and parliament. No Russian speakers were elected to parliament.
107
CRITIQUE 1993
Applicants are exempted from the language and residency requirements if they are found to have performed exceptional services to Estonia, as are stateless persons (not formerly Soviet citizens, in the Estonian meaning) who have permanently resided in Estonia for 10 years. The February 1993 amendments also exempted applicants who had registered for citizenship with the unofficial but influential Congress of Estonia (the body elected and filled by pre-occupation citizens and their descendants) by Februaiy 24,1990.
Estonia's citizenship law denies citizenship to foreign military personnel on active service and their families, a reasonable break with the Soviet era. It also denies citizenship to former employees of the security and intelligence organizations of the USSR; those convicted of serious crimes against the person or repeated felonies; and individuals lacking a steady legal income. Since the law does not provide for appeals, such exclusions appear to be in violation of the right to due process in the judgment of individual circumstances. The exclusion from citizenship of persons lacking a steady income adds another potential barrier to citizenship for Russian speakers, given their increasing rate of unemployment. Depending on when unemployment benefits expire, the unemployed are deemed to have a steady income only if their spouse does, or if they are dependants of persons who do.
The UN mission to Estonia in February 1993 expressed the expectation that "a great number of ethnic Russians, Ukrainians and Belarusians will have become naturalized citizens and will participate in the elections" scheduled for March 1995. At the present rate of naturalization this is unlikely. By October 15, 1993, only 19,316 persons had applied for citizenship and received it, out of about 500,000 non-citizen permanent residents, the vast majority exempted from language and residency requirements. The UN mission reiterated the widespread opinion that "the main obstacle to naturalization has been the language requirement."
The report understates the restrictive impact of the cost and limited availability of language instruction, despite the conscientious efforts of overtaxed workers at ill-equipped government language centers. In 1993, the language requirement was yet to be adequately publicized, and language instruction was yet to be made reasonably accessible on a low-cost or free basis. Conceding this, representatives of the Estonian government have cited lack of funds. Another inhibiting factor is that the applicant has nine months after applying for citizenship in which to pass the language examination; failure means waiting another year. Retired persons are as a rule allowed two attempts.
The Russian parliament and government have complained to Estonia and the United Nations that these citizenship and language laws violate the human rights of the Russian-speaking minority, or even amount to "ethnic cleansing," The Estonian government maintains that it has acted not on ethnic but on national-political grounds, over issues of trust, loyalty and the survival of Estonian language.
108
_	ESTONIA
ethnicity and statehood. It argues that its citizenship requirements are hberal by international standards. The February 1993 UN mission found no violation of human rights in the citizenship and language laws as such, but did find problems in their implementation in such matters as the language requirement and statelessness. (Sergei Kovalev, a longtime human rights champion and head of the Human Rights Committee of the former Supreme Soviet, told the visiting UN mission of its fear of Estonia's policy aimed at pressuring Russian speakers to leave. His committee found that considering 38% of Estonia's permanent residents as foreigners or stateless persons humiliated them and denied them their dignity, violating Articles 6 and 15 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, as well as Articles 2, 25 and 26 of the ICCPR, which concern a person's rights to nondiscrimination, equality before the law, the vote, and democratic participation.)
Other international human rights missions have not pinpointed outright violations of specific international standards. They have, however, criticized the exclusionary nature of the citizenship law for non-citizens, especially its language requirements, citing the same demographic changes that prompted passage of the 1992 naturalization requirements. A December 1992 CSCE mission expressed concern also that those rules might create social unrest and conflict. Himian Rights Watch/Helsinki has found that the language requirement as presently administered and interpreted contravenes the prohibition against discrimination in citizenship requirements against any particular nationality contained in the 1965 International Convention on the Elimination of All forms of Racial Discrimination. Overall, though, its August 1993 mission "uncovered no systematic serious abuses of human nghts in the area of citizenship. Non-citizens in Estonia are guaranteed basic rights under the Estonian Constitution, including the right to unemployment benefits and social services." The State Department report does not adequately consider the findings of missions such as these.
According to Article 24 (3) of the ICCPR, "every child has the right to acquire a nationality." That means, as the 1992 CSCE mission pointed out, the right of a child not to be left stateless at birth by the country in which it resides, as may happen in Estonia under the present application of the citizenship law, until and unless the parents resolve questions of their own citizenship status.
Non-citizens have equal rights to participate in the privatization of housing and commercial and agricultural property, except for the ownership of certain categories of property as specified by law. Thus, non-citizens may not take part in the privatization of state enterprises as individuals or as members of a corporate body with preponderantly non-citizen ownership. Only citizens may own land.
The drafting of the Alien Registration Law, which the report mentions, illustrates the contending influences of nationalist sentiment and European legal opinion. The draft law of June 21 intensified insecurity among non-citizen residents by denying them both guaranteed and permanent registration. President
109
CRITIQUE 1993
Lennart Men sent the bill to legal experts of the Council of Europe and the CSCE for their legal opinion. Their views caused the president to refuse to sign the June 21 draft and send it back to Riigikogu. He signed the resulting amended bill into law on July 8, 1993. The Law on Aliens gives persons permanently residing in the Estonian SSR as of July 1, 1990 and retiring before August 20, 1991 — the date on which Estonia declared its restored independence — the right to permanent registration and employment permits, provided they have applied within a year after July 12, 1993, the date on which the law went into effect, and provided they do not fall into one of seven categories of disqualification for residency permits, including foreign military career personnel (active or retired) and their families. The law permits registration of retired military officers only for those bom before January 1, 1930 or with spouses or minor children who are Estonian citizens and residents, or whose stay in Estonia is deemed to serve state interests. Alien residents are free to travel abroad and return, provided they possess valid passports. By July 12, 1995, aliens residing in Estonia must have passports issued by their country of citizenship, or Estonian-issued aliens' passports. Unlike the Citizenship law, the Law on Aliens allows for adverse decisions to be appealed.
Estonia's language legislation meets international human rights standards insofar as it protects the right of ethnic minorities to their native language and culture. So far this is the case in education, where proportional funding for Russian schools continued. At the same time, under the language law of February 1, 1989 and the decree on its application, issued on July 14, 1989, a wide range of jobs in both public and private organizations involving communication with the public are conditional on passing a test in the Estonian language within four years, at a level depending on the job. Both the government of the Estonian SSR and the Russian-speaking local authorities appear to have neglected on-the-job training in Estonian. Only about 14% of the population of non-Estonian origin can speak Estonian fluently, whereas 90% of ethnic Estonians currently speak Russian. As the present generation of schoolchildren grow up, and to the extent that the government and private efforts promote Estonian language training, knowledge of Estonian will spread. Meanwhile, the potential for widespread dismissals under the 1989 language law has created anxiety among Russian speakers over possible disqualifications and disruptions of business. As an exception, where more than half the local population speak a language other than Estonian, inhabitants may receive official information in that language, and local government may be conducted in that language.
Estonia does not deny that its language laws create issues of concern on human rights grounds. It has welcomed numerous international human rights missions and organizations and has discussed the matter with experts including representatives of the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights. International observers monitored Estonia's September 1992 elections, which a committee of
110
__ESTONIA
observers from the Council of Europe unanimously pronounced to be fair and free. On December 10, 1992 President Men established a Human Rights Institute. Its purpose, according to its bylaws, is to monitor human rights inside Estonia and abroad, to foster conformity of Estonia's domestic and foreign policies with international human rights standards, to provide information and expertise concerning human rights, and to study and promote knowledge about human rights. One promising initiative in 1992 was the new dialogue between the government and Russian-speaking leaders of the economically troubled and disaffected northeast. But tensions rose again in 1993 during discussion of the new Law on Aliens. The response of the city councils of Narva and Sillamae was to conduct referenda on autonomy without government approval, and these resulted in majorities for autonomy. The Supreme Court upheld a government annulment of the referenda, finding them unconstitutional. Officials in Narva and Sillamae accepted these rulings, and the storm over the controversial Law on Aliens abated. In the face of repeated charges by the Russian Federation that Estonia violates the human rights of Russian-speakers, Estonia agreed with the CSCE on February 15, 1993, to set up a human rights mission in Estonia. The mission began its work of mediation, conflict resolution and observation in March through offices in Tallinn and the northeastern cities of Narva and Kohtla-Jarve. The mission began a second six-month term later in the year. A Russian-speakers' Representative Assembly came into being at a congress on January 30, 1993. A virtual political party, the assembly fielded candidates in the October 17, 1993 elections to local government councils, and sent representatives to another body created by President Meri, the Roundtable. Formed on June 25, 1993, this brings together in monthly meetings members of the Assembly, the Union of Estonian Nationalities (for citizens from various minority groups) and deputies from various political parties.
The number of Russian troops in Estonia continued to fall in 1993, with only 3,000 troops remaining by late November, compared with 9,000 reported at the end of 1992 and 50,000 af^er the attempted coup of August 1991. International assistance could reduce tensions in the country by speeding the construction of housing in Russia for repatriated troops and their families.
If a far larger part of the population is not to be excluded from the next elections, called on an accelerated timetable for March 1995, then language requirements for citizenship should be made clearer to the populace and less severe, and facilities for instruction in Estonian fiirther increased. These recommendations were made by Max van der Stoel, CSCE High Commissioner for National Minorities, on April 6, 1993. Government and civic leaders should keep their constimencies better informed on issues of minority rights and continue their efforts at increasing inter-communal cooperation.
Children who were bom in Estonia and educated there should be allowed to apply without the one-year waiting period after application. Children bom of
111
CRITIQUE 1993
voluntarily or involuntarily stateless parents on or after January 21,1992 — when the ICCPR entered into force for Estonia — should acquire Estonian nationality at birth in keeping with Article 24 (3) of the covenant.
To sum up, the State Department's report describes Estonia's new course in helpftil detail. On the other hand, it falls short in its analysis of the implications of language and citizenship laws for human rights, national unity and social peace. The potential for the rights of Estonia's non-indigenous population to be infiinged results from the struggle of a well-intentioned democratic government to shake off the trappings of occupation and to protect Estonian ethnicity and statehood from extinction. Future reports should be more attentive to the frill significance of these developments.
112
