ETHIOPIA
The 1993 report on Ethiopia is commendable for its thorough and critical review of the deteriorating human rights situation in that country. It is particularly strong on the restrictions on press and academic freedoms by the Transitional Government of Ethiopia (TGE). However, the report contains somewhat vague references to many significant incidents, repeatedly cites unconfirmed reports without any apparent attempt at independent verification, and focuses on the government's stated goals without always examining actual practice. It shares with the report on Erifrea (see above) a tendency to restrict itself to a narrow accounting of the facts.
The report should have emphasized and provided more details of the continued detention of many individuals without trial after more than two years. Although the Special Prosecutor's Office (SPO) was established in August 1992 to investigate individuals accused of having committed violations under the Dergue government, it did not begin operating until February 1993, at which time many former Dergue officials had been detained for more than a year without charge. By the end of 1993, the SPO still had not charged more than a thousand detainees, nor had any policy been established on how the prosecutions would proceed. The SPO's claim that these delays reflect a lack of resources, insufficient evidence, unavailability of experts, and unsettled issues of law and policy, do not adequately justify this serious human rights violation.
In its discussion of the judicial system, the report pays greater attention to the TGE's stated goals than to the actual structure and operation of the court system to date. The TGE, by proclamation, established a three-tier court system at the central government level. This system was introduced in February 1993 and is still in its initial stages. The proclamation also provided for the creation of a Judicial Administration Commission (JAC), an allegedly independent administrative organ empowered, among other things, to select judges.
The report fails to discuss several inherent problems in the structure of the Ethiopian judiciary. First, because they must submit budgets to the Council of Representatives, the courts do not enjoy financial independence from the government. Second, because the JAC is made up of individuals from outside the judiciary, with close ties to the government, there is a widespread perception that the judiciary lacks independence. In addition, the TGE proclamation expressly prohibits former members of the Dergue-WPE regime from appointment as judges; this has deprived the bench of some of its more experienced former members, without examining judicial candidates on an individual basis.
More significantly, there have been reports of disregard of Central Court orders. According to the non-governmental Ethiopian Human Rights Council,
113
CRITIQUE 1993
seven individuals have remained in detention despite the issuance of Central Court orders for their release.
There have been similar questions about the independence of the regional court system. The regional JACs, which appoint regional judges, work closely with regional councils; in many areas, judges are actually elected by the regional council. In most cases, this has resulted in the selection of regional judges loyal to the ruling Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) or its local affiliates. According to the Ethiopian Human Rights Council, one judge in the Amhara region, reportedly a member of a local development association opposed to some EPRDF policies, was summarily dismissed by the regional council in 1993.
Like their central counterparts, some regional executive authorities have refused to execute court orders. In one instance, the police refused to free a suspect whose release had been ordered by a regional high court in the Amhara region. In addition, the government wrote to all regional courts in the Amhara region, removing their jurisdiction in cases involving the Ethiopian Relief Organization, which has close political affiliations with the EPRDF.
As the report notes, defendants have the right to a defense attorney under Ethiopia's Criminal Procedure Code. This right only exists on paper, however; in practice, no such legal services are available. In most parts of Ethiopia, m fact, there are no private lawyers at all. And even where lawyers are available, they are reluctant to handle capital cases for indigent defendants, since the government has been unwilling to reimburse even minimal costs mcurred during representation.
One final concern that should have been noted in the discussion of the legal system was the summary dismissal of a Justice Ministry official in 1993. Her fuing appears to have been in retaliation for her cooperation with the International Human Rights Law group, since it occurred after the group released a report on the Ethiopian judiciary and the legal profession.
The report takes note of improvements in the professionalism and effectiveness of Ethiopia's regional police forces, while at the same time noting two incidents where they were guilty of using excessive force: once at the university and once at the Gondar municipality. However, the report does not comment adequately on the police's failure to utilize proper crowd control procedures, which led to the deaths and injuries in these two demonstrations. As the report mentions, at least one student was killed during the university demonstrations of January 1993. However, it should also have noted that approximately 140 students were injured and several hundred jailed, according to a statement by Foreign Minister Ato Seyoum Mesfin.
The report's description of the incident at Gondar is inaccurate. On September 7, 1993, a crowd gathered in the city of Gondar to pray with Abba Amiha Eyesus, a hermit, and to protest the government's attempts to arrest him for allegedly instigating religious and inter-ethnic conflict. Security forces attempting
114
ETHIOPIA
to arrest Eyesus opened fire on the crowd. According to the Ethiopian Human Rights Council, 18 people were killed and 17 wounded. Police reports put the figure at 13 dead and 24 wounded. In addition, numerous demonstrators were arrested, as was Eyesus himself on September 13. The incident and its aftermath illustrated not only a failure of police procedures but also a complete disregard for religious freedoms and the right of peaceful assembly. The State Department report should have emphasized these points.
The report provides only scanty information about restrictions on the activities of opposition groups, and plays down the extent of these activities during 1993. While it mentions the expulsion of five parties from the TGE Council of Representatives, it does not explain the disturbing justification offered by the government for the suspension: that the parties had taken part in a Paris conference at which they supported a resolution critical of the transition process. There were also reports of the detention of two officials of the opposition All-Amhara People's Organization (AAPO), who were apparently engaged in nothing more than the expression of opinions critical of the government; of the arrest and alleged beating of some supporters of the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF); and of the arrest of some individuals participating in an allegedly illegal demonstration by the Citizens' Economic Rights Coordinating Committee, a purportedly "illegal" organization. These incidents all demonstrate the TGE's intolerance of opposition, an issue that the report mentions but does not adequately emphasize.
In its discussion of politically motivated "disappearances," the report merely cites without comment the allegations that have been made by a variety of political actors in Ethiopia, but fails to note whether any attempt has been made to verify these charges. In particular, the report should have referred to the investigations of the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, which asked the Ethiopian government for details of thirty outstanding cases of disappearances pending as of 1993. By the end of the year, the government had given the working group information on only two of these cases; in both cases, it stated that the missing individuals had left the country. This matter clearly requires further investigation, and future State Department reports should not ignore it.
The report gives a good summary of restrictions on press freedom during 1993. A number of additional incidents should have been mentioned, however, to illustrate the government's ongoing violations in this area. In September, for example, the editor and publisher of an Amharic-language newspaper were detained and charged with "incitement to war," based on an article about rumors of unrest outside the capital. Although they were released on bail, they were arrested again in November for "inciting people against the goyemment" and for "disseminating false rumors."
115
CRITIQUE 1993
In summary, the 1993 report does a good job of highlighting some of the more serious threats to human rights in Ethiopia, notably the absence of academic freedom, restrictions on freedom of the press, and the suppression of groups opposed to the government. Additional attention to such issues as judicial independence, the unjust detention of prisoners, and the frequent divergence between official statements and actual government practice, would have further strengthened a basically sound report.
116
