UNITED KINGDOM
The State Department report on the United Kingdom again suffers from its failure to treat separately the three legal jurisdictions within the nation — those of England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. Although the government and parliament in London exercise "direct rule" over all parts of the United Kingdom, the laws, legal procedures and legal institutions (including court structures) are different in each of the constituent areas. Until the jurisdictions are made the focus of discrete reports there will continue to be a danger that a false impression is given of the human rights situation in any one area.
Criminal justice issues have dominated the human ri^ts agenda of the United Kingdom for several years. Nineteen ninety-three saw the culmination of a two-year critical review by the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice, and resulting legislation introduced by the government. The Commission's terras of reference permitted it to advise on reform of any aspect of the system, but its report, published in July, was widely criticized for succumbing to pressure from the police and prosecuting authorities by recommending the removal of certain procedural safeguards for the accused. The Commission did, however, recommend retaining a suspect's right to remain silent in the face of hostile police questioning, a right that had been removed in Northern Ireland in 1988. The original object of the review was to strengthen protections against wrongful convictions in the wake of a series of highly publicized miscarriages of justice. However, by the middle of 1993, the political agenda had shifted, and when the government framed its legislative proposals, it borrowed selectively from the Royal Commission. The resulting package of criminal justice reform, xmveiled in December, raises a number of important human rights concerns, which the State Department report does not fully reflect. Foremost among these is the government's proposal to proceed with the abolition of the right to silence throughout the UK despite the objections of its own Royal Commission.
In general, the report incorporates some significant improvements over previous years, particularly in relation to prison overcrowding and its comprehensive section on worker rights. However, in other respects the analysis remains superficial, and the report shows an undue willingness to adopt government perspectives without qualification. This is notable in the coverage of arbifrary arrest and detention, interference with privacy, and in the sections devoted to freedoms of speech, association and movement.
For the first time in several years, the report's review of extrajudicial killings mentions one instance involving the use of lethal force by police in England. But otherwise the State Department continues its practice of
376
UNITED KINGDOM
concentrating exclusively on allegations of unlawful killing by the security services in Northern Ireland. In 1993 there were three reported fatal shootings by police officers outside Northern Ireland in the course of their duty, as well as 18 deaths in police custody, 15 of which occurred in police stations. While these figures do not necessarily reflect unlawftil killing, the information justifies mention and assessment.
The one case which the report correctly identifies is the death of Joy Gardner, aged 40, on July 28, 1993 in North London. Ms.- Gardner, a Jamaican national had overstayed her six-month visitor's permit. The report describes Ms. Gardner as "an illegal alien subject to a deportation order," but omits to mention the fact that at the time of her death she had lodged an appeal, the outcome of which had not been communicated either to her or to her attorney. Five police officers came to her home, together with an immigration officer, to enforce the order. In the course of a struggle, Ms. Gardner was overpowered and gagged. She collapsed and was taken to a hospital where, after a period of unconsciousness, she died. A number of post mortem examinations found that she had died of asphyxiation (the report incorrectly refers to this merely as an "allegation" made by her family), and three of the officers involved were suspended from duty, In early 1994 the Director of Public Prosecutions announced that they were to be prosecuted. Shortly after Ms. Gardner's death, the Home Office and the Metropolitan Police began a joint review of procedures for dealing with deportations, in part due to uncertainty over authorization for the use of body belts and gags.
The report entirely fails to mention other cases of concern. In May, an inquest jury found that Leon Patterson, aged 31, who died in police custody on November 27, 1992, had been unlawfully killed. The Court heard that Mr. Patterson had been naked and delirious for more than 20 hours, and that his body was badly bruised. A Home Office toxicologist admitted that he had falsified scientific data to support a finding that Mr. Patterson had died of a tranquillizer overdose.
In July 1993 an inquest jury returned an unlawful killing verdict in respect of Omasese Lumumba, a political asylum seeker from Zaire. Mr. Lumumba was the nephew of the first elected prime minister of Zaire, Patrice Lumumba, who was assassinated in 1961. Omasese Lumumba fled Zaire after being detained there for 18 months and ill treated. He came to England seeking asylum in September 1991, On his arrival he was initially detained in a police station for four days before being transferred to Pentonville prison in London. He was held there, locked in a cell for 20 hours each day. Since he was an asylum seeker, he had no legal right under United Kingdom law to a judicial review of the lawfulness of his detention, or to apply for bail. On October 8, he was killed in the segregation unit of the prison whilst being stripped of his clothes. The Court found that-he died as a result of the use of "improper methods and excessive force in the process of control and
377
CRITIQUE 1993
restraint". In November 1993, Amnesty International issued a report about the case, recording its "concern about the ill-treatment and resulting death in custody" of Mr. Lumumba, and concluding that the case illustrated "serious deficiencies in the procedures applied to asylum-seekers in the United Kingdom."
The report's section on the use of torture and inhuman or degrading treatment also focuses almost exclusively on Northern Ireland. In a brief reference to wider UK practices, the report draws attention to the new police code of practice on detention, treatment and questioning of suspects, which came into effect on January 1, 1993. As the report notes, the code is designed to implement "greater standardization of police interrogation procedures and strengthen oversigjit requirements." However, the report overlooks the mounting body of evidence that such safeguards are routinely ignored. Research commissioned for the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice, and published in July 1993, reported that in an average of 400 cases per year, police violations of the code were considered serious enough to warrant exclusion of evidence by a court.
The report does not, however, repeat the assertion made in previous years that "prison facilities in the UK are generally good" It is notable that this year, the State Department has given a limited measure of recognition to problems of overcrowding and lack of sanitation in the UK prison system. However, the report continues to underestimate the scale and gravity of the problem, and inaccurately suggests that concerns are confined to remand prisons rather than permanent facilities.
The impact of the 1990 prison riots, the worst and most widespread prison disturbances in British history, was still being felt during 1993. A report issued after an inquiry under the chairmanship of Lord Justice Woolf, referred to extreme overcrowding and lack of sanitation as "uncivilized symptoms of an archaic system", and pointed out that the Prison Service failed to treat prisoners "with humanity and fairness."
The Woolf Report made a number of important recommendations, many of which had still not been implemented by the end of 1993. The government similarly failed to acknowledge a series of specific recommendations in the 1992 Helsinki Watch report. These included the prompt elimination of insect infestation, the urgent improvement of sanitary conditions and the implementation of immediate measures to ease overcrowding. The Chief Inspector of Prisons, Judge Stephen Tumim, during 1993 also published highly critical reports following inspections at a number of prison establishments.
None of this data is reflected in the State Department's report, which does refer briefly to overcrowding problems but fails to highlight the problem or to give details. Home Office figures revealed that in March 1993 there were at least 20 prisons holding in excess of their "certified accommodation", and over 7,000 prisoners (17.5%) sharing three to a single cell, A significant number of those
378
UNITED KINGDOM
detained on remand awaiting trial are held in police cells. As previous editions of the Critique have noted, these cells are designed to be used for detention for hours rather than days or weeks. The facilities are generally worse than in the most overcrowded prison.
Prison suicides became a focus of concem during 1993, but the report makes no mention of this. Forty-six inmates killed themselves, 27 of them during the second half of the year, when overcrowding was at its worst. Lack of care by prison staff was found to be a contributory factor in a number of cases. In its 1993 report on prison suicides {Dying Inside), the highly respected Howard League for Penal Reform pointed to an inconsistent approach to suicide prevention across the many different penal establishments where this phenomenon was a problem, and to the lack of training provided to prison staff. Certain prisons have consistently high rates of suicide and self-harm.
The report's commentary on arbitrary arrest, detention and exile states the principles of law goveming the exercise by police officers of their powers of arrest and detention, but makes no attempt to analyze how these provisions operate in practice.
A particularly serious shortcoming is the report's failure to acknowledge the large number of reported instances involving abuse by police officers of their powers. These cases have undoubtedly undermined public confidence in the integrity of the police. In April, the BBC broadcast a television documentary in which three Chief Constables admitted that forces in which they had served had used physical intimidation, planted evidence and fabricated statements. The broadcast followed the disclosure of a series of cases of systemic abuse. The most serious allegations of such abuse are supervised by the civilian Police Complaints Authority (PCA), a statutory body established under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act of 1984, which is intended to introduce a measure of independence from the police. Though nominally separate from the police, PCA investigations are always carried out by police officers, who often work in close conjunction with the force under investigation.
There are widespread doubts as to the PCA's independence and effectiveness in dealing with serious malpractice. This arises in part from statistical data as to its performance. Despite a marked overall increase in the number of official complaints over the past five years, action is taken against the officers involved only in a very small proportion of cases. During 1993, of 17,991 complaints considered by the Authority, formal disciplinary charges were preferred in only 227 cases (1.26%), Over 90% of the investigations completed during the year resulted in no disciplinary action of any kind being taken ~ for complaints of racially discriminatory behavior by police officers, the figure was 99.6% according to the PCA's Annual Report. Even where cases are referred to the Director of Public Prosecutions, the number of cases which are successfiilly prosecuted is
379
CRITIQUE 1993
extremely low. Of 3,696 cases referred to the DPP during 1992, a decision to prosecute was taken in only 108 (2.9%). And when the remaining cases are brought to trial few result in a conviction.
On January 14, 1993, the PCA approved the disciplinary outcome of an investigation into allegations against officers of the former West Midlands Serious Crime Squad. This brought to an unsatisfactory end a major corruption scandal that began in 1990 when the squad was disbanded. A total of 17 convictions for grave offenses had been quashed by the Court of Appeal as "unsafe and unsatisfactory" following allegations of assault, perjury and fabrication of documents by detectives. These allegations were supported by credible scientific evidence, and a number of officers were suspended as a result, Despite the seriousness of the charges, no police officer was prosecuted over the affair. Instead, a total of 28 internal disciplinary charges were brought for "falsehood or prevarication", and 102 officers were given "formal warnings." The failure to press criminal charges was widely criticized, both by civil liberties groups and by senior police officers. During the inquiry, 10 of the officers under investigation left the police, thereby frustrating disciplinary action against them. In the absence of criminal charges, many of the most serious allegations were left unresolved.
In February the PCA announced the results of a separate investigation into abuse of detainees by officers at a South Yorkshire police station. Disciplinary charges were recommended against five officers, but a fiirther four who would have faced charges were retired on medical grounds. And throughout the year the PCA continued to supervise "Operation Jackpot", described by the Metropolitan Police as "the most wide-ranging corruption inquiry in the Met for 20 years." The investigation focuses on a central London police station, and involves allegations of theft, drug dealing, fabrication of evidence, perjury and conspiracy to pervert the course of justice. By the end of 1993,11 criminal convictions had been overturned on appeal because police officers involved in the investigation of the cases had been discredited. Because the PCA is prevented by statute from publishing its findings about an investigation, the community association representing those whose cases are under investigation has made a number of formal requests to the Home Office for an independent judicial inquiry into the policing of the area. These have been rejected by the Home Secretary.
The report places emphasis on the frequency with which defendants are held in detention pending trial. It notes that in cases involving "crimes of violence" some have spent up to three years in custody awaiting trial, but repeats the bald and incorrect assertion that "generally persons charged with what British law defines as 'non-serious' offenses may be released on bail." There is in fact no statistical correlation between violent crime and the length of pretrial detention. The numbers of prisoners detained on remand during 1993 increased by 43%, rising from 8,272 at the beginning of the year to 12,000 at the end of the year (nearly a quarter of all
380
UNITED KINGDOM
people in custody). A report published by the Prison Reform Trust found that during 1993,1500 people were detained for more that six months, and 400 for over a year. On average, six out of 10 men remanded in custody are subsequently acquitted or received non-custodial sentences. For women, the figure is seven out of 10. UK law affords no right to compensation, even where the person detained is subsequently acquitted.
The Howard League for Penal Reform has described the continuance of the UK's practice of detaining large numbers of unconvicted people in custody as a "gross violation of human rights", but the UK government does not recognize this as a human rights question. In December, the Home Secretary announced the introduction of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Bill, which contains provisions further restricting the availability of bail. If enacted, the legislation will prohibit any Court fi"om granting bail to a person charged with a second offense of manslaughter, murder or rape, and will abolish the presumption in favor of bail for any person who "appears to be" on bail for another offense. Liberty, the National Council for Civil Liberties, has criticized these proposals as constituting a threatened violation of Articles 5 and 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, on the grounds that the presumption of bail is an important constituent of the presumption of innocence.
In a notable improvement, the 1993 report had given appropriate coverage to the deepening crisis of confidence in the British criminal justice system. The report correctly refers to "intense public pressure" following a series of appellate court decisions which reached "troubling conclusions" about the fairness of trial procedure. However, despite clear rulings by the Court of Appeal, the report unfortunately continues to refer to these cases as "apparenf and "perceived" miscarriages of justice.
The most widely reported examples were the cases of the Birmingham Six, the Guildford Four, the Maguires and Judith Ward — all imprisoned for terrorist offenses on unsound evidence involving coerced or fabricated confessions, unreliable forensic evidence and the withholding fi"om the defense of material evidence. The report recognizes the importance of these appeals, but makes no reference to the much greater number of non-terrorist convictions where similar issues have emerged, such as the cases of the Tottenham Three (wrongly imprisoned for the murder of a police officer on unreliable confession evidence), Stephan Kizko (a man of borderline intelligence who spent 15 years in prison for the murder of an 11 -year-old child), or the Cardiff Three (whose conviction for the murder of a prostitute was quashed after it was revealed that confessions were obtained following intimidation of a vulnerable suspect. By confming its attention to terrorist cases, the report contributes to the misleading impression that human rights concerns in the UK are confmed to the govermnent's effort to combat terrorism.
381
CRITIQUE 1993
As the State Department correctly records, the report of the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice received a "mixed reception" when it was published in 1993. Although wrongful convictions were the impetus behind the appointment of the Commission, its terms of reference permitted a thorough review of all aspects of the criminal justice system. During the period of its appointment, there was intensive lobbying by the Home Office, the police and the prosecuting authorities, who sought to redefme the term "miscarriage of justice" so as to include the acquittal of the guilty as much as the conviction of the innocent. In its final report, the Commission attempted to "strike a balance", between the prosecution and the defense. It recommended the abrogation of a number of important defendant's rights, but offset this by retaining and, in some cases strengthening, others, However, legislation introduced by the government in December fails to reflect the fiill range of the Commission's recommendations, substantially undermines the protections for an accused person, and threatens to violate the UK's international human rights obligations.
Of the Commission's original recommendations, three were considered most damaging by human rights groups — the introduction of a requirement for the defense to disclose its case in advance of the trial, the failure to introduce safeguards against convictions based purely on uncorroborated confessions, and the removal of the defendant's right to elect trial by jury for less serious offenses. Two proposals that were widely welcomed, however, were the introduction of a body independent of the executive to review miscarriages of justice and refer cases to the Court of Appeal (a "Criminal Cases Review Authority"), and the recommendation that a suspect's right to remain silent in the face of questioning be retained.
As long ago as December 1992 the Home Secretary indicated that the creation of a statutory review body had Home Office support. There has been a broad consensus within the legal establishment in favor of such a move for several years. It was therefore a matter of concern that in framing a new legislation, the government further delayed the creation of the agency. At present, where ordinary avenues of appeal have been exhausted, cases involving potential miscarriages of justice may be referred to the Court of Appeal by the Home Secretary. The Home Office Department which discharges this fimction receives an average of over 500 new allegations of wrongful convictions each year, but because of serious understaffing is able to give full consideration to only a small proportion. Research conducted by the National Association of Probation Officers (NAPO) suggests that there may be as many as 700 defendants serving prison sentences for crimes of which they are not guilty. During 1993, the government resisted opposition attempts to incorporate the creation of a new review body into the current round of criminal justice legislation.
Perhaps most seriously, the government's Criminal Justice and Public Order Bill proposes the abolition of the right to silence in the police station and in
382
UNITED KINGDOM
Court. Similar legislation was introduced into Northern Ireland in 1988. In pointing this out, the State Department report repeats without qualffication govemment claims that the change in Northem Ireland was "intended to deal with a Provisional IRA tactic of advising members not to say anything under interrogation." As subsequent developments illustrate, the abolition of so important a procedural right has implications that extend far beyond terrorism. The Royal Commission had found that such a move would not lead to any obvious advantage, and would involve the loss of an important safeguard. The government's proposal is strongly opposed by the Bar Council and the Law Society, and by a range of human rights groups. In November 1993, Amnesty Intemational published a report condemning the change, and concluding that "the right to remain silent in the face of police questioning is an essential safeguard in accusatorial legal systems of two fundamental rights guaranteed by intemational standards — the presimiption of innocence, and the right not to be compelled to testify against oneself or confess guilt." If implemented, the new law is likely to put the UK in contravention of its intemational obhgations. In Febmary 1993, the European Court of Human Rights ruled that Article 6(1) of the Convention included a "right [of an accused person] to remain silent and not to contribute towards incriminating himself" And in December, the Commission accepted as admissible a complaint from the UK that similar provisions in serious fraud legislation are contrary to the European Convention. Any further extension of this principle may bring the UK into direct and embarrassing conflict with its Council of Europe partners. Liberty, the National Council for Civil Liberties, has pledged to take the issue to Strasbourg as soon" as the new proposals become law.
In commenting on this development, it is regrettable that the report fails to draw any parallel with the Northern Ireland legislation. The report makes forthright criticism of the position in Northem Ireland, saying that it "substantially erodes the presumption of innocence and the right not to be compelled to testify against oneself or confess guilt." However, in relation to the proposed UK legislation, the report attributes all such criticisms to 'human rights monitors' and "civil liberties groups."
The report's review of interference with privacy, family, home or correspondence, again limits discussion of violations to Northem Ireland. The statement that, "The right to privacy is generally respected in both law and custom" is simply wrong. The UK has no law of privacy, and during 1993 there were several important developments that undermined legal protection against violations of privacy. A record number of warrants for telephone tapping and the opening of personal mail were issued in 1993. The report of the Commissioner for the Interception of Communications recorded 893 telephone interception warrants, and 105 warrants for interference with mail, His report also cast doubt upon the level
383
CRITIQUE 1993
of ministerial scrutiny over such warrants, confirming that the Secretary of State refused security service applications on "very few" occasions.
In relation to arbitrary interference with correspondence, the Court of Appeal in May held that the UK's rules for reading and intercepting prisoners' letters are invalid because they make no exception for correspondence with legal advisers. The court held that the right to read such letters should be limited to establishing that they are genuine (R v Secretary of State ex parte Leech). This followed a decision of the European Court of Human Rights in March 1992, in which the UK was held to be in breach of its obligations under the Convention by conducting a process of routine screening of prisoners' mail (Campbell v UK).
In a move that has major privacy implications, the Home Office announced in December that the government's Forensic Science Service is to proceed with plans for the establishment of a national database of DNA samples. The bank is to be compiled from material supplied during the course of a criminal investigation, even where the suspect has been eliminated from police inquiries. This is to be supplemented by new police powers contained in the Criminal Justice and Public Order Bill. Under the provisions of the Bill, introduced in December, the police will be able to take samples (including hair and mouth swabs) without consent from any person arrested for a recordable offense, "whether or not DNA is relevant to the particular offense". Under separate provisions, the right of a suspect to have samples destroyed on acquittal is to be severely restricted.
The UK laws governing the use of personal data in the private sphere are unsatisfactory. Where information is held on computer, this is subject to the Data Protection Act, which affords limited procedural rights for citizens to check and correct inaccuracies. In July, it was revealed that two major banks were holding data recording the political opinions and affiliations of its customers, and one had reserved the right on the data protection register to hold information on the sex lives of its employees. In September, the government circulated a consultation paper proposing that the compilation of criminal data, including criminal records, and the national collation of fmgerprint and DNA profiles, be privatized. Such records would fall wholly outside the protection of data protection legislation. The government's paper also proposed to expand the list of occupations in respect of which prospective employers should be able to pay for a criminal record search on job applicants.
In its discussion of free expression, the only limitations mentioned in the report are those that restrict the expression of support for paramilitary activity in Northern Ireland. Otherwise, the report asserts that free expression is secured by a sfrong tradition, an independent press and a democratic political system. The report thus overlooks the widely held view that in recent years there has been a disturbing erosion of press and media freedom in the UK, a growth in the use of censorship and an increase in state restrictions on freedom of information. As
384
UNITED KINGDOM
Human Rights Watch/Helsinki pointed out in November 1993, "Britain has no Bill of Rights, and is the only Council of Europe country which has not secured the right to freedom of expression in its law, either throu^ inclusion in its constitution, or by incorporating into domestic law the European Convention, Article 10 of which protects free speech."
Once again the report makes no reference to the inhibiting effect of UK libel laws, which are unusually favorable to the plaintiff UK laws requires a defendant to prove the truth of any printed allegation and British juries have tended to make awards of excessive damages. The continuing excesses of the UK libel laws have generated a substantial movement for reform, both within the UK and abroad.
The judiciary was responsible for the one positive development in this field during 1993. In February, the House of Lords unanimously upheld a decision of the Court of Appeal recognizing that UK libel laws represent a serious potential breach of the right to free speech and an effective obstacle to the publication of critical comment. {Derbyshire County Council v Times Newspapers Ltd) The House refused to extend the law to enable a local government authority to maintain a civil suit for libel, holding that "it is of the hi^est public importance that a democratically elected governmental body, or indeed any government body, should be open to uninhibited public criticism". Although the House of Lords did not follow the Court of Appeal in giving effect to Article 10 of the European Convention on Human lights. Lord Keith acknowledged the influence of the First Amendment to the US Constitution, and declared the existence of an equally strong comrtion law guarantee of free speech.
The report fails to mention two other important developments in press freedom during 1993. In July, the government proposed legislation to create a new privacy tort. This followed an,inquiry, under the chairmanship of Sir David Calcutt, into the conduct of the press in reporting on private misconduct of public figures. Its object was to consider the adequacy of self-regulation, and the need for the imposition of external constraints. The new cause of action would arise where conduct of the press or media infringes on another's privacy and causes substantial distress. "Privacy" will be defined widely, to include health, personal communication, family and personal relationships. The proposal has been criticized by Human Rights Watch/Helsinki on the grounds that it makes no provision for a public interest defense and draws no distinction between the position of public and private figures.
The forced disclosure of journalistic sources has been the subject of contention in the UK in recent years. In a positive development, the European Commission of Human Rights accepted that in applying British contempt of court laws to a journalist the High Court breached Article'10 of the Convention, guaranteeing free expression. The case involved a freelance journalist who was
385
CRITIQUE 1993
fined £5,000 by the High Court after he refused to obey a court order to reveal the source of information for a routine article in a trade journal. Following a hearing in September, the measure was found by the Commission to be "disproportionate" {Goodwin V UK).
Despite its expressed commitment to "open government", which has included the first official recognition of the existence of M16, the secret intelUgence service providing foreign intelligence, the British government remains committed to enforcing restrictions on the disclosure of official information that may generate criticism of state agencies. The best known restriction is the Official Secrets Act of 1990. The State Department attributes all criticism of this legislation to "human rights and civil liberties organizations," commenting that "The Act is seldom invoked and has not prevented the disclosure of numerous internal government documents." However, the wider impact of the government's restrictive approach to the disclosure of official information is impossible to gauge. During 1993 the government continued to sanction the use by the National Health Service of "gagging clauses," by which it is a dismissible offense for Health Service employees to reveal mal practice to the press. And a recent survey among Whitehall departments has revealed over 150 separate secrecy clauses, many with criminal penalties. Examples of classified information include the results of health and safety tests, the findings of fu"e brigade inspections of public railway stations, and the names of slaughterhouses that have been refiised licenses on the grounds of hygiene. In the face of this official secrecy, a growing body of opinion favors the enactment of fi^eedom of information legislation.
The State Department correctly describes the govemrrient's broadcasting ban, under which radio and television companies are prohibited from broadcasting direct speech of those who are members of, or who are thought to "solicit support or invite support" for proscribed terrorist organizations. For the fu-st time, the report notes the absurd result of the ban, whereby all national television broadcasting companies frequently show footage of the speaker, dubbed by the voice of an actor with a similar accent. In July 1993 the Court of Appeal gave leave for a judicial review of a decision by the state broadcasting company (BBC TV) to subtitle a broadcast interview with the former Northern Ireland MP Bemadette Devlin McAliskey. She is not a member of the IRA, or Sinn Fein, and she publicly condemned the IRA's use of violence. However, after the program had been recorded, a BBC editor judged that her words fell within the terms of the broadcasting ban, and without her consent directed the use of subtitles. Mrs. McAliskey called the decision "defamatory, derisory and dangerous".
The report's review of freedom of assembly is once again poor, stating merely that police powers to restrict or ban marches and demonstrations are broad but "seldom invoked." Not only does the State Department fail to reflect the nature of the present powers, and the extent to which they are used, but it inexplicably fails
386
UNITED KINGDOM
to note that in December 1993 the government introduced proposals which will very significantly extend police powers, and restrict freedom of movement for the UK's substantial itinerant population.
Under Section 11 of the Public Order Act 1986, organizers of any demonstration are required to give notice to the police. The police then have the power to impose conditions on the demonstration if they reasonably believe that it will result in "serious disruption to the life of the community" or if its object is "to compel others to do an act they have a right not to do" or vice versa. If these powers are considered insufficient then the chief officer of police may apply the ban. It is simply not correct to say that the authorities do not exercise these powers. Conditions and bans are frequently imposed on political demonstrations and pickets. It is common practice, for example, for the police to require marchers to take a route away from focal areas such as the Houses of Parliament.
These powers are to be very substantially extended under the Criminal Justice and Public Order Bill, introduced in December. The government proposes the introduction of a range of new offenses e?q)ressly aimed at three groups; "new age fravellers" and others who live an itinerant lifestyle; anti-hunt protesters who use non-violent (and currently lawful) means to sabotage bloodsports; and environmental and road protesters who "occupy" prospective development sites. But the breadth of the proposals makes it likely that the new powers will be used against other groups as well.
The report's section on freedom of movement lacks detail and, as in previous years, it is over-sympathetic to the position of the government. In July the Asylum and Immigration Appeal Act 1993 came into force, which is aimed at effecting a substantial reduction in the numbers granted political asylum in the United Kingdom. Its key provisions include the abolition of a right of appeal for visitors, and the introduction of an expedited rejection system for asylum applications judged to be "unfounded". The report attributes criticism of the Act to "human rights groups" which "claim the legislation would undermine Britain's commitment to provide haven for legitimate refrigees." But by infroducing a procedure for summary rejection of applications, the new law unquestionably places significant obstacles in the path of those seeking asylum, however genuine their claim.
The report echoes government claims that the legislation was a necessary response to "an e?q)onential rise in asylum applications," but then goes on to report that in the twelve months prior to the introduction of the Act the number of such applications dropped by almost 50%, from about 44,000 in 1991 to 24,000 in 1992. This sharp decline is attributable to a number of factors. First, the UK has substantially increased the number and amount of "carrier penalties," fines imposed on airlines and shipping companies who carry asylum seekers into the UK without appropriate documentation. These presently stand at £2,000 per person
387
CRITIQUE 1993
carried, and according to Home Office figures, a total of £25.6 million in fines has been paid since 1987. Secondly, the UK's increasing resort to the so called "third country rule", has undoubtedly had an affect. This rule prevents asylum seekers from requesting asylum in the UK on the grounds that the application should have been lodged in the first safe country through which they transited. In 1992, 300 applicants were refijsed admission on this basis, but it is impossible to gauge the extent to which this practice has had its intended effect in deterring potential applicants from seeking asylum in the UK. The "third country rule" has been heavily criticized, both by Amnesty International and by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Even before the legislation was introduced, fewer than five percent of applicants were granted asylum. In a report published in February 1993 the Home Affairs Committee, a parliamentary body, described delays in dealing with naturalization claims as "intolerable and morally wrong," and described delays of up to five years in the granting of asylum as "unacceptable." The Committee commented that such delays ' may give rise to a suspicion that delay is a means of control." Against this background, the State Department's assertion that "the government makes generous provision for political refiigees" is highly misleading.
According to figures released in February 1993, nearly 6,500 people were held in detention for more than seven days under the Immigration Acts during the previous twelve months. Detainees were held in airports, immigration detention centres, prisons and police stations. In October 1993 the Court of Appeal upheld a controversial decision to deport Karamjit Singh Chahal, a Sikh separatist who had been detained and tortured in India. He was able to produce documentary evidence fi"om Amnesty International that confirmed that he was actively being sought by the Indian authorities, and that he was likely to be detained and subjected to further torture if returned there. The Home Secretary's decision to deport him was founded upon an untested allegation that while in the UK he had been involved in fimd raising for terrorist organizations. This important case should have been mentioned in the report.
The report also fails to mention two instances of mass deportation at the end of 1993 which gave rise to allegations of racial discrimination by the immigration service. On December 15 and 21, two groups of non-British or European Union passengers from Jamaica were detained at Gatwick Airport and deported. Concern that Jamaican passengers are targeted by immigration officials appears to be borne out by statistical data on refusal of permission to enter. In 1989 one in 40 Jamaicans was refused permission to enter; by 1993, after a lengthy campaign, the rate had improved to one in 67. This compares with a refusal rate for US citizens of one in over 2,000.
In its review of respect for political rights, the report asserts that "participation in the political process is open to all persons and parties." While
188
UNITED KINGDOM
technically correct, this states the formal position without reference to the limitations that operate on the franchise. Voting in the United Kingdom relies on a system of registration that relies on a citizen having a stable home address. The numbers of homeless and of those living in temporary or "squatted" accommodation effectively disenfranchises a growing proportion of the electorate. There are currently an estimated 148,000 households in the UK without settled accommodation.
In addition, there is compelling evidence that many of those with the very lowest incomes have not been entered on the electoral register in order to escape liability for the "poll tax." This was a flat rate of several hundred pounds annually imposed on all citizens regardless of their ability to pay, and enforceable with up to three months imprisonment in default of payment. The widespread unpopularity of the tax, which caused urban riots, ultimately resulted in its modification, but not before many potential voters had "disappeared" from the electoral register. In September 1992, the results of a census prepared in 1991 by the Office of Population, Census and Surveys, confmned that 1.8 million voters had vanished from the electoral register.
The report's review of discrimination on the grounds of race, sex, religion, language, disability or other social status overlooks a number of key events which occurred during 1993. In August the UK made its periodic report to the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, which monitors compliance with the International Convention for the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, to which the UK is a signatory. Members of the committee called for greater efforts to recruit ethnic minority officers into the police and armed forces, more detailed monitoring of the increased numbers of racial attacks and murders in the UK, and the application of a strengthened Race Relations Act in Northern Ireland.	'
The State Department's report correctly identifies substantial unofficial discrimination within the criminal justice system against those of African and South Asian origin, but should have provided a more detailed analysis of this important subject. A government study recently concluded that there was clear evidence of "differential treatment" of Afro-Caribbean defendants. Even allowing for age, economic and other social differences, Afro-Caribbeans were more likely to be the victims of crime, were "significantly more likely than whites to be stopped by the police" and were proportionately more likely to be arrested and charged. The Royal Commission on Criminal Justice found evidence that Afro-Caribbeans were more likely than whites to be remanded in custody pending trial, despite the fact that they represented a higher proportion of those subsequently acquitted. According to a study sponsored by the government-funded Commission for Racial Equality, Afro-Caribbeans were 17°/o more likely to receive a custodial sentence than white defendants facing the same charge. So far as prison conditions are concerned.
389
CRITIQUE 1993
ethnic minority prisoners are 50% more Ukely to serve their sentences in closed rather than in open prisons.
On the other side of the criminal justice system, the pattern is reversed. A recent study published by the National Association for the Care and Resettlement of Offenders found that all ethnic minority groups were significantly under-represented in the main criminal justice agencies, making two percent of solicitors, and just one per cent of police and prison officers. A report issued in May 1993 by the Inspector of Constabulary, suggests substantial racial discrimination in police recruitment procedures. Only six percent of black applicants are accepted to join the Metropolitan police as compared with 14% of whites. In total, two percent of this irmer city force is black (the target is 20%). Ethnic minority representation among the judiciary is poorer still. There are only three ethnic minority judges in the entire judicial system, and none at all among tiie top levels of the senior judiciary (the High Court, the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords). Ethnic minorities make up two percent of magistrates.
Home Office statistics issued in May 1993 confirm a sharp rise in the number of racial attacks in the UK. A spate of racial murders in the London area coincided with the rise to local prominence of the openly fascist British National Party (BNP). Allegations that the Crown Prosecution Service show a lack of commitment in dealing with prosecutions for racial crime have been denied by Barbara Mills, the Director of Public Prosecutions.
The report's discussion of discrimination on the grounds of sex reflects the fact that women continue to earn 25% less than men, and refers to evidence of sexual harassment within the police force. It does not, however, address discrimination against women as victims and as perpetrators of crime. Home Office research published in 1993 demonstrates that only one in every four rapes or attempted rapes reported to the police result in a conviction. Conviction was most likely if the victim was a young single woman who was otherwise injured in the attack and was not known to her assailant. Cases involving married or cohabiting women, victims who were not otherwise injured or who had met their assailants previously were "far less likely".
Another contentious issue during 1993 was the rule under UK law by which a woman who has killed a violent spouse may only plead provocation (and thus reduce the sentence fi"om life imprisonment) if she can show a sudden and temporary loss of self control. In a series of cases the UK Court of Appeal has reaffirmed the strictures of this doctrine, rejecting the argument that since women are less likely to react with sudden violence, the law is discriminatory. In June the government rejected proposals from a cross-party group of MPs and the Law Commission for the law to be changed to provide a defense for battered women.
Finally, the report's review of worker rights is comprehensive and thorough, save in one respect. The State Department asserts that forced or
390
UNITED KINGDOM
compulsory labor "is prohibited and is not practiced." In fact, the UK has a substantial problem involving the physical abuse of unpaid domestic servants employed by foreign visitors. In 1992 the Court of Appeal recognized a new tort of intimidation, reflecting the difficulty of bringing such cases within the existing law. The new tort applies where a domestic servant had been "reduced to semi-slavery" (Godwin V Uzoigwe). In 1993 the Anti-Slavery Society published a report entitled Britain's Secret Slaves which found that 90% of the UK's 20,000 visiting domestic servants had suffered some form of abuse, 30% -of them had been physically assaulted and eight percent had been sexually abused. These facts should have been mentioned in the report.
391
CRITIQUE 1993
UNITED KINGDOM/HONG KONG
For Hong Kong, 1993 will be remembered for its intense political conflict between China and Britain and among local political groups over the evolution of a system of democracy and human rights. The 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration promised Hong Kong a high degree of autonomy, democratic elections, maintenance of human rights and the rule of law and a continuation of Hong Kong's existing common law legal system and way of life. China has historically characterized these promises with such phrases as "one country, two systems" and "Hong Kong people ruling Hong Kong." The 1990 Basic Law of the Special Administrative Region (SAR), enacted by China's National People's Congress (NPC) after several years of consultations, ostensibly aimed to implement these commitments. In fact, it was marked by its provision for a slow pace of democratic development as well as by its ambiguity in several areas relating to human ri^ts. Concern over these areas has now given rise to conflict over law reform and democratic development in the latter period of the transition to full Chinese sovereignty, which will take effect on July 1, 1997.
While the State Department report is generally accurate and highlights most areas of current concern, it demonstrates reluctance to assess the importance of current developments and is neglectful of China's role in events in Hong Kong. This reticence is surprising, given China's increasing official presence in the territory. The 1992 report was marked by a similar reticence, and nothing has been done to correct it this year.
There was a virtually complete breakdown in 1993 in the implementation of the promises of the Joint Declaration. The year got off to an icy start, with vociferous Chinese attacks on Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten, following his October 1992 legislative proposal to increase the pace of electoral reform in Hong Kong, In April 1993 the parties at last embarked on what would eventually became seventeen rounds of negotiations over the conduct of the 1994/95 elections. China insisted that it would make no concessions to the Patten proposals and remained true to its word. By year's end, the negotiations had collapsed altogether and the two sides prepared to go it alone. As the report notes, while the Hong Kong Government announced that it would propose to the Legislative Coimcil (Legco) a faster pace of democratic change for the 1994-95 elections, China vowed to reverse these steps in 1997.
Hong Kong's liberal democrats faced political isolation in 1993, as they were excluded from appointment to the growing list of official advisers to Beijing on Hong Kong affairs. They were likewise excluded from what is commonly referred to as China's "second stove," the newly established Preliminary Working Committee (PWC) for the Preparatory Committee for the SAR. The PWC, which
392
UNITED KINGDOM/HONG KONG
is not mentioned at all in the report, has increasingly functioned as a govemment-in waiting, and has been widely criticized for its unrepresentative composition and the secrecy of its deliberations. Members of the PWC and its five sub-groups have in turn raised doubts about the suitability of leading liberal politicians to serve in any future government and about the acceptability under the SAR Basic Law of the Hong Kong Bill of Rights and other proposed human rights legislation.
These attacks notwithstanding, the Bill of Rights, as the report observes, continues to be actively enforced in the courts, with an especi^ly large number of cases relating to criminal procedure. However, the report should also have mentioned calls to set up an independent Human Rights Commission by legislators who have pointed out that judicial review is often too costly for aggrieved parties. So far, the Hong Kong Government has rejected this request, and under Hong Kong law, submission of such private members' bills requires the Governor's approval if they involve public expenditure.
The most glaring deficiency of the report is its failure to discuss several important human rights issues relating to the evolution of the Hong Kong legal system. The most important of these concerns the establishment of a Court of Final Appeal, as provided for in the Basic Law, to play the role that is currently performed by the Privy Council in London. While the Basic Law provided for foreign common law judges to sit on this court, in line with the tradition in Hong Kong, Britain has agreed to China's request to limit such presence to no more than one judge. Fearing future interference with the independence of the courts, both representatives of the legal profession and the Legislative Council have objected to this agreement as violative of the Basic Law. The matter has now reached an impasse, with no action taken during 1993 to rectify the situation.
The provision of legal services has also received considerable attention during the past year. A debate betweeii barristers and solicitors on whether to unify the legal profession has focused attention on the high cost of legal services in Hong Kong. Concern over the future of justice in Hong Kong further increased in July, when numerous firms of solicitors declined to handle a libel case by liberal legislator Martin Lee Chu-ming against a leading member of China's PWC. The report should have noted this case, as well as the widespread public concern that those who become involved in legal disputes with Chinese or pro-Chinese interests may not in the future be able to obtain legal representation.
The report also neglects to mention that the mammoth task of localizing laws and treaties for application in the fiiture SAR has been seriously slowed down by China's refusal to grant its approval in the Joint Liaison Group (JLG). This threatens a legal vacuum, undermining the rule of law.
Meanwhile, the Legal Sub-group of China's PWC has indicated that it is prepared, on behalf of the NPC, to review (or advise on revjew of) all the laws of Hong Kong for conformity with the Basic Law, Earlier, assurances had been given
393
CRITIQUE 1993
that such review power in the NPC would rarely be exercised. But in 1993 China's official representative in Hong Kong, the New China News Agency, began to indicate that such wholesale review is necessary. As the Hong Kong Bill of Rights is often prominentiy mentioned as a deficient law, firequent recent statements of this nature have caused concern for human rights. The report makes no mention of these ominous developments.
The report only superficially touches on several concerns in the area of criminal justice. It properly points out the failure of the government to set up an independent body to review complaints against the police. The report merely notes that "some legislators" have called for an independent body, but in fact the Legislative Council passed a motion to this eifect in April. The report might also have noted that the courts have failed to adopt an exclusionaiy rule for consistent application.
The report says very little about arrest and detention and omits to mention legislators' complaints about fi^equent use of "holding charges" and excessive jail time for those awaiting trial (usually months, sometimes over a year). The Hong Kong Law Reform Commission has recommended reform of the laws on arrest and detention but no action has yet been taken. In addition, concern has been expressed over the fact that the Hong Kong Prison Rules assign prison officials extraordinary power to punish inmates, even for criminal oifenses committed while in jail. The Government has indicated its intention to reform the Prison Rules to conform to the Bill of Rights but action is still awaited. A number of human rights groups, including the Lawyers Committee, have also expressed doubts about the continued need to detain in prison-like conditions some 30,000 people who have fled Vietnam.
The report might also have mentioned the Law Reform Commission's recommendation of reform of the privacy law, including the creation of a Data Protection Authority headed by a Privacy Commissioner. The Government has not so far submitted a bill on privacy to Legco.
The report properly mentions several threats to civil liberties. It notes the gathering by the Chinese Ministry of Public Security of information on Hong Kong residents who are opposed to the Chinese government. In other respects, however, the report minimizes the extent to which fi-eedom of expression is threatened in Hong Kong. It omits, for example, any reference to media reports in June suggesting that the Bank of China has blacklisted "unfriendly" newspapers by withholding advertizing by China-fimded companies. While the Bank of China denied the reports, a New China News Agency official was reported to have said that preferential treatment for "friendly newspapers" was justified. These developments could have a chilling effect on press freedom.
The well-publicized arrest in late September in China of Hong Kong reporter Xi Yang, which drew widespread international attention and protests from
394
UNITED KINGDOM/HONG KONG
a number of free expression and human rights groups, is inexpUcably omitted from the Hong Kong report, and is only briefly mentioned in the report on China. Xi, who was accused by the Chinese government of revealing state banking secrets, was reportedly tried in secret and convicted. He remains in jail. The above events and the arrest of mainland Chinese journalists who have supplied information or columns to Hong Kong newspapers have contributed to the increasing climate of self-censorship that is noted in the report.
The Hong Kong Journalists Association has called for reform to Hong Kong's media laws, including the abolition of censorship laws with inadequate or inappropriate standards and laws against cross-ownership. However, the government has been slow to respond, despite Governor Patten's promise of cooperation.
Freedom of expression is generally understood to include the ri^t to receive information. However, the government continued to ignore (as does the report) legislative demands for an Access to Information Ordinance, and to cling to laws that emphasize secrecy. Legislators are currently preparing a private member's bill in this area, which will require the Governor's approval for submission to the Legislative Council. The bill is supported by the Hong Kong Journalists Association, the Society for Community Organizations, the Human Rights Commission (a private group) and the Hong Kong affiliate of the International Commission of Jurists,
The report accurately reports the persistence of the Vietnamese refugee problem and the associated closed camps policy during 1993. However, it fails to discuss the severe criticisms leveled at the UNHCR screening process, in which insufficient numbers of lawyers were available to serve the tens of thousands of asylum seekers. The vast majority of claimants are denied refugee status, and the forced detention of nearly 30,000 people still in the camps has been severely criticized by international human rights organizations. In April 1993 International PEN expressed concern that those denied refugee status included several writers who had criticized the Vietnamese government.
The report covers at length the right to travel and emigrate. Yet while it correctly notes China's expulsion to Hong Kong of Chinese labor leader Han Dongfang, it fails to highlight the significance of this event for those Hong Kong citizens who fear a similar policy of expulsion after 1997, as well as the current revocation of mainland home fravel permits. Some activists have already been denied permission to visit mainland China. In 1993, Hong Kong legislators requested assurances of British nationality, should problems develop, but these requests have not yielded results.
British nationality policies have come under severe criticism during 1993, but this is omitted from the report. It appears that the British Nationality Act, which proposed to grant full British nationality to 225,000 people (50,000 heads of
395
CRITIQUE 1993
household with an expected 4.5 dependents each), will likely serve only about 150,000 people, given small family sizes. After China's severe reaction to Governor Patten's democracy proposals, public opinion (even in Great Britain) seems to favor expanding this safety net, as the security offered by the Sino-British Joint Declaration has become increasingly suspect.
Although the report does not mention it, the question of Chinese nationality is also of concern, as China has appeared to drag its feet in the Joint Liaison Group over resolving the residence rights of Hong Kong people with foreign passports. This problem affects up to 400,000 people. Although such rights appear to be assured in the Basic Law, the problem has arisen from restrictions on dual nationality under Chinese law. Delay in clarifying the issue has brought complaints from legislators concerned with freedom of movement and maintenance of political rights after 1997.
The report's analysis of the right of citizens to change their government is accurate as far as it goes, but again fails to reflect the full flavor of the Sino-British dispute. When negotiations over the 1994-95 elections began in April 1993 (with the idea that an agreement would permit those elected to remain in office, on a so-called "through-train," until 1999) China insisted that it would retain ultimate veto over those who stayed on the "through-train," and that it would retroactively exclude those considered "subversive." During seventeen rounds of negotiations Chinese officials insisted on this position. Legislators such as Martin Lee Chu-ming and Szeto Wah, who led demonstrations in Hong Kong in support of the 1989 democracy movement in China and burned previous drafts of the Basic Law, have frequently been mentioned as among those to be expelled from the "through-frain." Ultimately the Chinese side appeared to make no substantive concessions on the pace or scope of democratic development.
China has failed to set forth coherent criteria either for the composition of the "through-train" or for the legal definition of "subversion." From its many public statements during the negotiations the Chinese side appeared determined to employ a vague loyalty criterion, with individual cases to be determined by the Preparatory Committee that China will set up in 1996. With the breakdown in talks on December 28, 1993, China announced that all three tiers of government would be disbanded and a new government established established under the Basic Law upon the transfer of sovereignty in 1997.
An additional electoral concern is the Government's intention, under the Electoral Provisions Ordinance, to exclude from electoral participation any candidates who have served more than three months in jail "in any country." The Secretary for Constitutional Affairs has interpreted this to include those who have served time in China for counter-revolutionary activities, such as the well known activist, Mr. Lau Shan-ching.
396
UNITED KINGDOM/HONG KONG
The report notes the potential under the Societies Ordinance for a fiiture government to restrict investigations by international human rights groups. But it fails to note that Article 23 of the Basic Law requires the SAR to enact laws to "prohibit foreign political organizations or bodies from conducting political activities in the Region, and to prohibit political organizations or bodies of the Region from establishing ties with foreign political organizations or bodies." There is real concern that this requirement may be invoked against international human rights organizations.
The report addresses the problems of localization of the civil service, including the fine line between localization and discrimination against expatriate civil servants. Additionally, Chinese officials have warned that local high-level civil servants not show "excessive enthusiasm" in implementing politically sensitive policies. This implied threat has caused concern about the security of the civil service guaranteed in the Basic Law.
The report omits key issues of concern in regard to the rights of women. Public debate in 1993 focussed especially on the request by women's groups for an amendment to the New Territories Ordinance, which denies inheritance rights to indigenous women in the New Territories. While initially supporting the proposed amendment, the Government backed down in the face of objections by the rural body Heung Yee Kuk. This group cites Chinese custom for support but such custom has already been abolished by legislation in China. Women's groups have likewise insisted that Hong Kong adopt the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), which has already been adopted in China. Despite issuing a Green Paper on Equal Opportunities for Women and Men in 1993, the Hong Kong government had taken no fum position on these demands by the end of the year. The report also fails to say that women's groups and a Legco resolution have pushed for the creation of a Women's Commission and an Equal Opportunities Law, again without government support. Ultimately government approval will be required to submit legislation on these issues.
Although the report touches on most issues of concern to workers, it may suffer from understatement. It properly points out that the 17-day Cathay Pacific strike sparked a review of the right of employers to dismiss strikers. Labor unions and legislators have also been concerned about government plans to allow an increase in imported labor, fearing downward pressure on wages. A final problem ignored in the report is the conditions of Hong Kong's 70,000 Filipino domestic workers. These workers are at high risk of abuse by their employers, since they may face deportation if they are dismissed. Circumstances render these workers exfremely vulnerable and the laws to protect them are inadequate.
397
CRITIQUE 1993
UNITED KINGDOM/NORTHERN IRELAND
The report continues to show an improvement in the rigor of its assessment of the human rights situation in Northern freland. There are fewer inaccuracies than in earher reports and a greater willingness to make explicit judgments about the inadequacy of legal protection for basic rights. However, the report would benefit from a clearer contextualization of the human ri^ts picture in Northern Ireland. It should have mentioned that the govemment continues to refuse to incorporate into the law of Northern Ireland (as well as into the law of any part of the United Kingdom) the European Convention on Human Rights. In 1993 the govenmient had the opportunity to support an opposition MP's Private Members' Bill on this topic but chose not to do so. When the State Department says that human ri^ts throughout the United Kingdom are "residual" — that is to say, assumed unless limited by statute — it neglects to add that the statutory limitations are now so great in number and extent that what is left in the way of rights is quite meager in Northern Ireland; the only rights that are not unduly restricted are the state's ri^ts to interfere in people's lives,
The report should have also acknowledged the notorious "democratic deficit" in Northem Ireland, which arises fi"om the refusal of the London-based authorities to bestow any meaningful executive power on elected politicians in Northem Ireland. The 26 district councils have much less power than their counterpart bodies in Great Britain; there is a proliferation of "quangos" (quasi-autonomous non-governmental organizations) whose members are appointed by the Secretary of State rather than elected by the people; and the process by which Orders in Council are made for Northem Ireland at Westminster allows no opportunity for draft legislation to be amended as it is debated.
The lack of political accountability is particularly noticeable in relation to the Royal Ulster Constabulary. Although there is a Police Authority for Northem Ireland it comprises members appointed by the Secretary of State, Its current chair argued in September 1993 that the Chief Constable of the RUC should be made more accountable to the community and called for better legislation to improve police-community relations.
It was of course a welcome development that no person was killed at the hands of the security forces during 1993, Likewise, human rights organizations were glad to see an increase in the number of prosecutions relating to such killings or attempted killings. In addition to the prosecutions mentioned in the report, a soldier was charged with the attempted murder of a civilian when he fired on a moumer outside the home of a deceased IRA bomber in October. As regards those deaths occurring prior to 1993, it remains deeply disturbing that reforms have still
398
_UNITED KINGDOM/NORTHERN IRELAND
not been introduced either to the coroner's inquest system or to the prosecution system.	"
The coroner for Greater Belfast has made determined efforts to get to the bottom of incidents involving the use of lethal force by members of the security forces, but he continues to be thwarted by the lack of cooperation from the police and the government. When he refused last year to accept the so-called Public Interest Immunity Certificate, signed by the Secretary of State for Defence in relation to an incident in 1990 when three men were killed by Undercover soldiers outside a betting shop in Belfast, the government sought judicial review of his decision in the High Court. Similarly, the Chief Constable is challenging the coroner's decision in April 1993 to issue a subpoena concerning information affecting three deaths that occurred as long ago as 1982 but have still not been properly investigated at an inquest.
The effectiveness of inquests continues to be undermined by the absence of legal aid to allow the family of the deceased to be legally represented and by a prohibition on the coroner's jury issuing a verdict of unlawful killing. As the report mentions, at the January 1993 inquest into the 1987 killing of Seamus McElwaine, the jury found that he had not been given a chance to surrender before being shot and that he was shot again some five minutes later as he lay injured on the ground. At the inquest two months later into the deaths of the Harte brothers and Brian Mullin, the jury found that it was impossible to conclude from the evidence who fired first. The soldiers suspected of causing the deaths in these incidents did not appear at the inquest at all, thus avoiding cross-examination on their statements. Again the Secretary of State signed an Immunity Certificate requiring certain "security matters" to be hidden from the coroner and jury. In June 1993, at the inquest into the 1991 death of Gerald Maginn, the RUC officer who fu-ed the fatal shot was also absent from the hearing and the coroner had to tell the jury that the statutory rules governing inquests prevented him from compelling the officer's attendance.
The report states that there have been approximately 340 killings by the security forces in Northern Ireland since 1968. In fact the most thorough analysis yet undertaken, by a researcher at Queen's University in Belfast, puts the figure at 351. From 1968 to 1990 there were 22 prosecutions arising out of these deaths, while between 1991 and 1993 there were a ftirther 11. Although the number of security force personnel convicted since 1968 was doubled in 1993, from two to four, the fact remains that the authorities in Northern Ireland — police, prosecutors and judges — seem very reluctant to pursue such cases, certainly in comparison with killings carried out by members of paramilitary organizations. In November 1993 the Director of Public Prosecutions, who is not obliged to give reasons for his decisions, announced that there would be no prosecution in relation to the death of Pearse Jordan a year earlier, even though Mr Jordan was unarmed. This is one of
399
CRITIQUE 1993
three cases which a Belfast-based NGO, the Committee on the Administration of Justice (CAJ), has referred to the UN Special Rapporteur on Summary or Arbitrary Executions. The other two cases concern the deaths of the solicitor Patrick Finucane in 1989 and the car thief, or "joyrider," Gerard Maginn in 1991.
The report suggests that five soldiers were judicially reprimanded in 1993 for their part in the killing of four IRA men at Coalisland in 1992. In fact these reprimands related to less serious incidents and to date no prosecutions have been brought in connection with the 1992 deaths. In January 1994 a judge acquitted a police officer of the murder of Kevin McGovem, the 19-year-old student whose death is referred-to in the report. The judge concluded that the shooting was "a tragic error of judgment" and the police officer is now back serving in the Constabulary. Coming just a month after the acquittal of two soldiers for the murder of Feargal Carraher in 1990, a neutral observer may be excused the feeling that as far as the use of lethal force is concerned there is one law for the security forces and another for the rest of society.
The report acknowledges that during 1993 the standards set by the European Convention on Human Rights in relation to the use of lethal force by police or army personnel were applied in two cases emanating from Northern Ireland. Not for the first time, the European Convention has been found to be an insufficient protector of the basic non-derogable right to life in Northern Ireland, and many human rights observers, including the government-appointed Standing Advisory Commission on Human Rights, now believe that its incorporation into the law of Northern Ireland would not by itself be enough to make the security forces more accountable for their actions.
A worrying feature of some of the deaths, and of numerous other incidents in Northern Ireland, is the possibility that there has been collusion between members of the security forces and Loyalist paramilitaries. According to a February 1994 report by Amnesty International, allegations of collusion "range from direct involvement of security force personnel in Loyalist 'death squads,' complicity by authorities in such killings, to the aiding and abetting such actions through the passing on of intelligence information". The authorities do not seem able to get to the bottom of these allegations. In March 1993 six soldiers arrested as a result of an inquiry into alleged collusion won damages for being unlawftjlly arrested. Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch/Helsinki have each urged the UK government to set up a wide-ranging public inquiry into the allegations of collusion. The State Department report notes neither these recommendations nor the proposal that a new category of the manslaughter offense be created in order to facilitate the prosecution of members of the security forces who cause deaths through misuse of their weapons.
The report rightly highlights the limited powers of the body created to deal with complaints against the police. At one point it misleadingly suggests that the
400
_UNITED KINGDOM/NORTHERN IRELAND
Independent Commission for Police Complaints always supervises investigations by police into RUC and Army killings, whereas in fact supervision occurs only if there has been a complaint in the case or if the Chief Constable or Police Authority refer the case to the commission. In its Triennial Review for the years 1991 to 1994, published in March 1994, the commission admits that there were perhaps six cases of fatalities during those three years when it could have supervised investigations if only the cases had been referred to it. The commission's latest annual report again reveals that for the fourth year running not a single one of the complaints lodged by persons arrested under the emergency laws in Northern Ireland was substantiated by a police investigation. In four years there have now been 1,126 allegations from persons arrested under the emergency laws that they have been assaulted during the course of an interview with the police. The complaints system is such that not one of these allegations has been upheld; yet the commission does not think this remarkable statistic is even worthy of comment in its Triennial Review.
While the commission has asked the government to give it expanded powers, it remains unconvinced that the system cries out for non-police officers to undertake investigations. Nor has it insisted that police investigators in Northern Ireland should abide by a ruling of the Court of Appeal in England (in the IViley case, 1993) that information obtained during the course of an investigation should be treated as confidential and not used by the police in later civil or criminal proceedings involving the complainant.
The work of the RUC in the so-called "designated" police stations in Northern Ireland, where persons arrested under the non-emergency laws are held if they are detained for longer than six hours, has been commended as excellent by the independent lay visitors who are empowered to enter the stations at any time to check on the welfare of detainees. But these lay visitors have been denied access to the holding centres, where persons arrested under the emergency laws are held. As the report notes, a senior barrister from England, Sir Louis Blom-Cooper, QC, has been given this privilege instead. His first report recommends the decommissioning of the main holding center at Castlereagh because of its substandard conditions, which the State Department also criticizes. Blom-Cooper also joins the chorus of other reviewers who have recommended that interviews between police officers and detainees should be audio- and video-recorded, a reform which would obviously safeguard not just the detainee against abusive treatment but also the police against contrived complaints. Regrettably the Chief Constable of the RUC, and the government, continue to set their face against this recommendation, even though audio-recording is now compulsory in the designated police stations.
Controversy continues over police procedures during interviews with detainees and the report is fully justified in describing the methods for monitoring
401
CRITIQUE 1993
police interrogations in Northern Ireland as inadequate. Although the government has introduced a Code of Practice for the exercise of powers under the Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act 1991 — effective January 1, 1994 — this differs significantly fi"om the code issued for persons detained under the nonemergency law, There continues to be no statutory requirement that persons arrested under the emergency laws must be detained in separate centres rather than in "designated" police stations, yet the police and government continue to insist that this should occur. The emergency laws are being operated today much as they were prior to the radical reforms of non-emergency police powers and procedures brought about by the Police and Criminal Evidence (NI) Order 1989.
Unfortunately the Blom-Cooper report agrees with the Chief Constable that a person being questioned by the police in a holding center should not be entitled to have his or her solicitor present during the interview, even though this is allowed in England and Wales when persons are detained under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA), In October 1993 a High Court judge in Belfast threw out the case against Kevin Lynch because the only evidence against him consisted of statements he allegedly made after the police had denied him access to a solicitor for more than 48 hours.
Equally unfortunate is the Blom-Cooper report's proposal for a "legal advice unit," which would be comprised of goverrmient-approved solicitors attached to the Castlereagh Holding Centre, Although the proposal has the laudable goal of speeding access of detainees to lawyers, the current version would curtail and even deny individuals the right to counsel of their choice, in violation of, among other standards, the UN Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers,
Some prisoners who want to challenge their conviction on the ground that their alleged confessions were concocted by the police have been told that it is not possible to subject the police interview notes to examination by electro-static detection apparatus (ESDA) because the notes have gone missing. This seriously impedes the chances of a successftil appeal. In November 1993 the High Court held that the Chief Constable was acting unreasonably in refiising to release notes for ESDA-testing in the case of William Gorman, who was convicted in 1980 of murder and possession of firearms and explosives. In view of irregularities that came to light following ESDA analysis in the case of Barry Murray, serving 18 years on explosives charges, CAJ views his conviction as not proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
It is apparent that the report has omitted to present a full and accurate picture of police practices and procedures in Northern Ireland. It also downplays the serious allegations of harassment made against the police and army, especially by young people on both the Nationalist and Unionist sides. The British government has yet to publish the report of the European Committee for the
402
_UNITED KINGDOM/NORTHERN IRELAND
Prevention of Torture, which visited Northern Ireland in July 1993 and which is expected to be critical of police practices.	.
The report neglects to deal with the ongoing campaigns around alleged miscarriages of justice in Northern Ireland. Three men are serving life sentences for their involvement in the killings of two British soldiers in 1988, yet the way in which the judges in their case applied the "common purpose" principle to the facts has been the subject of widespread criticism. An April 1993 BBC program highlighted one of these men's position and showed film evidence that cast doubt on the court's construction of the events; in June 1993, 18 Members of Parhament tabled a motion in the House of Commons expressing grave concern at these convictions. Amnesty International has also called for a review of the sentences and claims that some of those prosecuted may not have received a fair trial. Similarly, the continuing imprisonment of Neil Latimer, one of the so-called UDR Four, has provoked considerable dissatisfaction. In June 1993, the Secretary of State refiised to refer Latimer's conviction for murder back to the Court of Appeal, yet a month later it was announced that three serving police officers and two former police officers were to be charged in connection with the alteration of interview notes at the time of Mr Latimer's interrogation. This case is not mentioned in the report.
The report fails to highlight the deficiencies in the PTA in Northern Ireland. Only one quarter of those arrested imder the PTA in Northern Ireland are charged with any offense. In the past human rights groups have levelled criticism against the annual reviews of the act conducted by Viscoimt Colville QC. Unfortunately the 1993 review, undertaken by John Rowe QC and published in February 1994, is an even feebler document, which glosses over some of the key issues and was compiled solely fi"om information supplied by government officials or the security forces.
The review of the operation during 1992 of the Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act 1991 was written by Viscount Colville and published in June 1993. This, too, failed to provide a balanced critique of the effects of the act on civil liberties in Northern Ireland. The closure of border roads under the act has been particularly resented in various localities. Despite the comparative slackness of the EPA test for admitting in evidence confessions made by detainees (oppressive questioning or the offer of incentives will not automatically rule out their admissibility, as they would for non-emergency detainees), it is correct to observe that there has been an improvement in the relationship between acquittal rates in the ordinary Crown Court and in the "terrorist" Dip lock Courts. In 1992 the acquittal rate for persons pleading not guilty in the Diplock Courts (where there is no jury) was 53%, while the acquittal rate for the Crown Court (where there is a jury) was 50%. Nevertheless, such statistics do not tell the whole story, and the two sorts of trial are not equally fau". Whatever the rate of acquittals, convictions in the
403
CRITIQUE 1993
Diplock Courts might never have been obtained in the ordinary courts, where safeguards for the defendant are stronger.
The changes to the law on the right of silence, introduced by the Criminal Evidence (NI) Order 1988, have been applied in more than 40 cases during the past five years. All of these were cases brought before the Diplock Courts. The judges now interpret the 1988 order in such a way as to allow a defendant's silence to tip the balance in favor of a guilty verdict. The conformity of the 1988 order with the standards laid down in the European Convention on Human Rights is to be examined by the European Court of Human Rights, following a fmding by the European Commission of Himian Rights in January 1993 that the application by Mr John Murray on this point was admissible. The report is correct to characterize the 1988 order as substantially eroding the presumption of innocence and the right not to be compelled to testify against oneself or confess guilt.
The report fails, however, to allude to the issue of long remands in Diplock Court cases. Although Viscount Colville, QC recommended the introduction of statutory limits on remands, the government has responded only by setting an informal target of no more than 38 weeks between first remand and committal to the trial court. Between July 1, 1992 and June 30, 1993, six out of 63 cases failed to meet this target. In March 1993 it was revealed during a court hearing that several defendants had been waiting for two years or more for their trial.
Nor is the report any more illuminating vis-à-vis prison conditions in Northern Ireland. The Chief Inspector of Prisons for the United Kingdom, Judge Stephen Tumim, has recently published a report making 76 recommendations for change in the Maze prison, the main prison establishment in Northern Ireland. He proposes the abolition of the category of "top risk" prisoner and an end to the disparity between prisoner privileges at different prison establishments in Northern Ireland. It appears that the Northern Ireland Prison Service is already relaxing its use of the so-called "Red Book" categorization, which entailed substantial invasion of privacy with daily searches of the prisoner and his or her cell. The issue of Northern Ireland prisoners forced to serve their prison sentences in Great Britain also remains a veiy live one. Despite a government report in 1992 recommending the greater use of "extended temporary transfers" for these prisoners, no such transfers under the new criteria occurred during 1993.
The report should have provided more informed comment on a range of other matters affecting privacy. The broadcasting ban, which is described but not critically evaluated, is not being altered or lifted by the British government despite the removal in January 1994 of the even more wide-ranging ban in the Republic of Ireland. Although telephone wiretaps and mail surveillance continue to occur in Northern Ireland, the British government will not even disclose the nxmiber of such authorized interferences with privacy, as it will in Great Britain. The law regarding house searches is apparently not to be amended despite the challenge being
404
_UNITED KINGDOM/NORTHERN IRELAND
mounted against it in the European Commission of Human Rights by the Murray family, and notwithstanding the bill of some $4.5 million which the govemment faced in 1992 for the damage caused during such searches. The authorities do not publish statistics on the results of house searches and civil liberties groups continue to receive many complaints of unnecessary property damage during searches.
By contrast, the goverrmient has refused to provide fimds for the protection of some individuals whose lives have been threatened by paramilitaries, the reason being the applicants' membership in Sinn Fein). Such "political-vetting", which has been a general feature of British govemment funding guidelines since the Home Secretary's announcement in 1985, was enshrined in legislation in 1993 when the National Lotteries Etc. Act was passed at Westminster. Section 24 of this act permits the Secretary of State to direct that money from the new national lottery will not be distributed to a person if this will directly or indirectly benefit any organization which promotes or encourages terrorism. Likewise, the mles on state compensation for victims of crimes continue to discriminate against persons with a particular type of criminal record, regardless of its antiquity. Moreover, the govemment has proposed altering the compensation scheme in Northem Ireland in such a way as greatly to reduce the amount of money payable to some severely injured victims.
On remaining matters the report is accurate and generally balanced. The Fair Employment Act 1989 has enabled many people to obtain compensation for religious discrimination, although a govemment survey published in September 1993 indicates that private sector employers are much less enthusiastic about the act than those in the public sector. The section on children should have noted that Northem Ireland does not yet have legislation equivalent to the Children Act 1989 in England and Wales; a proposed draft was published in Belfast in 1993 but implementation is still some way off. Nor has the govemment shown any urgency in introducing legislation on racial discrimination, which at the moment remains lawful in Northem Ireland. In 1993 all 17 Northern Ireland MPs at Westminster were in favor of a Private Members' Bill outlawing discrimination against disabled persons in Northem Ireland, but the govemment refused to endorse the proposal and the draft bill therefore failed to become law.
405
CRITIQUE 1993
