GEORGIA
The State Department's 1993 report on human rights in Georgia, its second such report, accurately reflects all the critical events affecting human rights during 1993. Like its predecessor, the 1993 report describes the breakdown in internal political stability, the complete destruction of the economy, and the ongoing armed conflicts, all of which have engendered widespread disrespect for the rule of law and human rights. In general, however, the report may not adequately portray the profound effect the increasingly anarchic situation has had on general human conditions for the entire populace. In addition, the report seems to understate the problems created by the Shevardnadze government's reliance on paramilitary forces to guarantee internal security and suppress armed conflicts. This has caused widespread concern that a takeover by the Mkhedrioni, the most powerful of the paramilitary groups, might be imminent in the event Shevardnadze were in some way indisposed. One also has the sense from reading the report that it is based on inadequate information. This may reflect both insufficient investigation into local conditions and the government-imposed state of emergency, which has made it difficult to ferret out all the facts.
The unusual complexity of the political situation in Georgia makes it difficult to give a clear picture of the state of human rights abuses. This problem is unfortunately aggravated by the uniform structure of the Country Reports. In the case of Georgia, this inflexible organization does not lend itself well to the characterization of abuses arising from three distinct armed conflicts, as well as the more systemic abuses affecting the entire population.
The three armed conflicts that contributed to the overall chaos in Georgia in 1993 were 1) the civil war in Abkhazia, which originated in a drive for independence for the Abkhaz minority, supported by the Russian military; 2) the ongoing struggle for independence in South Ossetia, which was generally brought under control by peace-keeping forces in 1993, but which generated reports of periodic attacks on civilians; and 3) the continuing conflict between the Georgian government headed by Eduard Shevardnadze and forces loyal to the former president Zviad Gamsakhurdia. Each of these conflicts generated human rights violations against military, paramilitary and civilian populations, with widespread terror and atrocities committed by both sides in each conflict. In contrast to the previous year, the 1993 report seems to accept that the conflicts in Abkhazia and South Ossetia have ethnic origins predating by centuries the conflict between the Shevardnadze ovemment and the forces supporting ousted president Gamsakhurdia, but a better organization of the report would make these distinctions clearer.
The fourth context in which human rights abuses occur is the use of government powers to suppress basic human rights such as press freedom, as part of the authorities their attempt to protect themselves against being undermined by their enemies. There is clear evidence of such abuses, both before and after the
117
CRITIQUE 1993
imposition of the state of emergency in September in response to the "Zviadist" uprising and the loss of the Abkhazian capital, Sukhumi, The comments that follow deal with each of these four categories in turn.
Probably the most significant source of human rights abuses during 1993 was the continuing armed conflict in Abkhazia. The State Department report is generally accurate in this regard and in no way understates the extent of the extrajudicial executions, torture, atrocities and degrading treatment and punishment inflicted by both sides. Prior to the July ceasefire, both sides were reported to have engaged in widespread terror against the civilian populations, with arbitrary detentions, ill-treatment in custody, and executions of prisoners. After Abkhaz forces broke the Russian-brokered cease-fire in September, they captured Sukhumi, and drove Georgians from the region. Reports of widespread violence toward civilians, including torture and summary executions, in addition to looting and other crimes against property, were carried in the Western press, verified by Amnesty International, and are reported in detail in the State Department report.
The report does not note, however, the apparent good-faith efforts on the part of the new government of Abkhazia to try to bring to trial individuals associated with atrocities against the Georgian civilian population. According to Amnesty International, the head of the Abkhaz parliament has claimed that measures have been taken to combat reprisals against civilians, and that 40 people have been taken into custody in the newly independent Abkhazia.
It is also not clear that the report recognizes the connection between the conflict in Abkhazia and a law enacted by the Georgian parliament on June 8, permitting the death penalty for genocide. Although this law is in violation of the Georgian Constitution, adopted in 1921 and restored in December 1992, its intent is presumably to punish Abkhaz military units, which had been reported to have been killing ethnic Georgians in the region for many months prior to their victory in late September.
Although the report notes that the Georgian and other non-Abkhaz population have fled Abkhazia, it makes no mention of the living conditions of the refugee population. The size of this group, estimated by international relief organization at between 230,000 and 250,000, creates problems of shelter and food that flie Georgian government has found difficult to solve, even with sustained international help. The report gives no sign of any attempt to investigate the conditions in which these refugees live, despite the clear violation of human rights associated with their current status.
The report tends to understate the role of the Russian military and its support for the Abkhazian separatists. Although it does state that Chechens and other troops from the north Caucasus joined the local Abkhaz troops in the commission of atrocities, there is little emphasis on the use by the Abkhaz forces of the Russian Navy, which reportedly shelled Sukhumi, causing numerous civilian
118
GEORGIA
deaths. It is clear from widespread reports in the Western press that the Russian military may have played a very active role in supporting the armed uprising against the Georgian majority population in the region (47%) on behalf of the Abkhaz minority (17%) in large part to undermine the Georgian government and secure for Russia another Black Sea port (Sukhumi) over which it can exercise dominance. This role of the military of a foreign country in Georgia's internal affairs has human rights implications that should have been mentioned in the report.
The conflict in the South Ossetia region subsided considerably during 1993, although not entirely. The presence of peacekeeping forces has, as the report notes, tended to reduce the active conflict even though isolated instances of killings on each side are reported. However, the report fails entirely to deal with human rights and humanitarian law issues raised by the large refugee populations of native Georgians and native Ossetians who have been displaced by the conflict and are fearful about returning to their homes. The long-existing ethnic conflicts between Georgians and Ossetians may well preclude any early peaceful solution to these problems, a fact that is not mentioned in the report.
The death, purportedly by suicide, of Zviad Gamsakhurdia in late December may have ended most of the conflict between his followers and the Shevardnadze government. However, this conflict ebbed and flowed throughout 1993, breaking into open warfare in western Georgia (Mengrelia) during the summer, before it was quelled by Georgian military and paramilitary forces in late fall. Unlike the fighting in Abkhazia and South Ossetia, this conflict has been essentially political, as opposed to ethnic, in nature. The principal source of human rights violations within the context of this conflict were the Zviadists, on the one hand, and the Georgian paramilitary force Mkhedrioni and Kommandatura organizations, on the other. Russian troops who surprisingly supported the efforts of the Georgian military and paramilitary units in this case are believed to have engaged in similar kinds of violations.
The report adequately captures the flavor of the conflict and the catalogue of abuses committed by both sides, including intimidation, terror, and atrocities against civilians, frequent detentions without trial, summary executions of military prisoners, and widespread crimes against property, including looting, stealing of cars and other vehicles, and destruction of homes and burning of crops.
Despite the accuracy of the report, there seems to be a subtle bias in favor of the Georgian government. It recounts investigations by the Georgian parliament into claims by Zviadist detainees about abuses while they were in custody. Although it is important to recognize that the Georgian government is attempting to distance itself from those who have violated the rights of Gamsakhurdia's followers, it appears that there was little investigation by the State Department (or by any other reporting agencies, for that matter) into possible attempts by the Zviadist leadership to stem unwarranted violence against the supporters of President
119
CRITIQUE 1993
Shevardnadze.
It is also clear that despite the attempts to reduce violations of the rights of detainees, the Georgian President issued a decree, directed in part at the Zviadists who were fighting against the government forces, authorizing summary executions for banditry and looting. Amnesty International reports that at least nine people were shot pursuant to this decree, which was entered in early November. The decree remains a potent weapon for the government, and for the military and paramilitary units supporting it, to quell any future disturbances they fmd alarming.
Supporters of Gamsakhurdia were subject to repeated instances of harassment during 1993. The report somewhat underplays the extent of this harassment, although it does note some rather violent instances of it. For example, private meetings of supporters were repeatedly broken up; many demonstrations were stopped by police, who clubbed the participants; and some Gamsakhurdia supporters were detained and tortured, while numerous others were summarily fired from university and other government employment. The general sense that the Zviadist supporters did not enjoy the rights enjoyed by other Georgians was also followed with respect to the pro-Gamsakhurdia opposition press. The report notes the arrest, detention and torture of the newspaper editor Irakli Gotsiridze, but downplays the repeated attempts to force his paper to cease publication.
The non-Zviadist opposition press also suffered some persecution during 1993, much of which is discussed in the report. Other observers have reported the killings of reporters in combat as well as widespread detentions of journalists throughout the country, some of which are combat-related. The impact of all these restrictions on press freedom was clearly felt by the civilian population, which did not have access to independent reporting of events.
The multiple armed conflicts have served to virtually paralyze the government and have allowed the Mkhedrioni, the Kommandatura and the paramilitary police to obtain considerable power over the population. Indeed, the power of these elements has been reinforced by presidential decrees and laws passed by the parliament, as well as by the state of emergency declared by Shevardnadze and accepted by the parliament in September. It is widely reported that the police, military and paramilitary forces engage in all forms of violations, including detentions without trial and the beating, torture and other forms of cruel treatment of detainees. In addition the conditions widiin Georgian prisons are appalling, a fact that the report notes but does not discuss in adequate detail. Despite these harsh tactics, the government has been unable to reduce crime, which has grown explosively. Indeed, the police seem willing to ignore certain forms of crime, permitting mob violence and the lynching of petty criminals, thus permitting the populace to think that lawlessness will be tolerated in many instances.
The report correctly notes that some aspects of a normal life continue in Georgia and that some rights, including certain speech, association and religion
120
GEORGIA
rights, as well as rights to free and public trials in some instances, continue to be respected. Thus, there is a sense that the government of Georgia understands what it means to respect human rights but is powerless to do so under current circumstances. With the complete destruction of the economy during 1993, after two years of multiple-front internal conflicts, and with the virtual paralysis of the parliament and the courts, the hope for a better human rights situation seems dismal. Nonetheless, it would enhance the prospects for an improved human rights situation if future State Department reports spoke more candidly about what the Georgian government should be striving to attain. The Georgian government should understand that its current human rights record is unacceptable, regardless of continuing US support for President Shevardnadze.
121
CRITIQUE 1993
