GREECE
The 1993 State Department report on human rights in Greece is an improvement over its predecessor, spelling out more clearly the significance of the violations it describes. Nevertheless, the report omits some important violations and fails to recognize the context of the overall pattern of violations. In fact, its discrete, disjointed listing of both improvements in rights in some areas and continued violations in others tends to obfuscate the underlying dynamics of Greek society, which persistently lead to restrictions on the exercise of basic human rights.
Most fundamentally, the report fails to recognize that many of the violations of human rights stem from the fact that Greece considers itself a homogenous society with no ethnic minorities other than the Muslim-Turks. This denial of the existence of minorities is not only a matter of law, but is embedded in the culture and ideology of Greek society. Only in passing does the report refer to the fact that the government denies the existence of minorities. Nowhere does it consider the chilling effect of such a denial or its consequences for the human rights of both members of these minority groups and individuals who have become their advocates.
In the past few years, with the declaration of the independence of the former Yugoslavian Republic of Macedonia (FYROM) and the Greek government's virulent opposition to its use of the name Macedonia (which it claims is exclusively Greek), the situation for ethnic minorities has deteriorated. This is particularly true of the Slavo-Macedonians in northern Greece. The report makes no reference to the fact that the government prohibits the teaching of the Slavic language (closely related to Bulgarian) even in private schools.
The report also neglects the crucial fact that ethnic minorities — most of whom had attempted to live unobtrusively until recently — have become victims of repression as foreign policy issues, particularly regarding Macedonia, have become acute. Restrictions on the linguistic and cultural rights of the Slavo-Macedonians are prevalent, while both they and the Muslim-Turks are denied the right to call themselves Macedonian or Turkish. Ethnic minorities have been subjected to increasing harassment and surveillance. The report fails to mention the intimidation and fear that prevails, particularly among Slavo-Macedonians in Greek Macedonia. As a consequence, it understates the pervasiveness of the government's restrictions both of ethnic rights and of individual freedoms. The trend toward inCTeased restrictions on ethnic group rigiits continued in early 1994, when a further revision of the electoral law of 1990, making three percent of the total national vote a requirement for election to the parliament, was extended to the forthcoming European Community elections. This requirement, as the report states, effectively disenfranchises ethnic minorities from representation in elected bodies.
Ï3Ô
_GREECE
The report correctly notes that the Greek government monitored the activities of international human rights organizations in 1993. However, it should have pointed out that such surveillance is a recent development, and that it is directly tied to the government's rejection of ethnic rights and its dislike of coming under international scrutiny. Moreover, the report omits to mention that domestic monitoring groups also face difficulties. Two domestic non-governmental human rights organizations — the Macedonian Movement for Balkan Prosperity and the Macedonian Movement for Human Rights — have also been harassed and placed under constant surveillance.
The report offers an accurate discussion of the loss of citizenship by non-ethnic Greeks who leave the country and are subject to an arbitrary government — decision that they have no intention of returning, in accordance with article 19 of the Citizenship Code. Most of the cases of this sort that occurred in 1993, the report states, involved ethnic Turks. This is not correct: in fact, the measure was also used in 1993 as it had been before — against ethnic Slavo-Macedonians, although the precise numbers are unknown. Moreover, the report ignores the restrictions on the freedom of movement of ethnic Slavo-Macedonians who wish to visit their relatives in FYROM. Those few who succeeded in obtaining permission to travel have been harassed and kept under surveillance, and this pattern continued in 1993. Furthermore, the report does not mention a 1982 Greek government decree returning citizenship to and permitting the repatriation of ethnic Greeks who had fled to Yugoslavia during the Greek civil war. This right of repatriation however, is denied to non-Greek ethnics. Although there is no estimate of the actual numbers who have been denied repatriation, this practice continued in 1993.
The overall human rights situation in Greece is mixed and contradictory. While the pressure on ethnic minorities has intensified, the situation regarding freedom of expression has improved, as the report points out. As it states, several important legal changes were made by the newly elected government at the end of 1993, eliminating restrictions on freedom of the press. The anti-terrorism law which, among other provisions, barred the press from publishing statements made by "terrorist" groups, has been repealed, as has Article 181 of the Criminal Code, which prohibited "insulting authority." As the report correctly states, most of the seven cases pending on appeal in 1993 were brought to a conclusion. It should be noted that all of these cases involved some verbal or written opposition to Greek government policy on Macedonia, as did those of publishers and editors accused of violating the anti-terrorism law. The report fails to note, however, that articles 141, 191 and 192 of the Greek Penal Code, involving the crimes of disseminating false information, inciting citizens to disturb the peace and harming Greece's foreign relations, still remain on the books. These three legal provisions, which the current government had promised to repeal, are clear restrictions on freedom of
131
CRITIQUE 1993
speech and freedom of the press, and they have been used by the Greek government to penalize dissent. It was under these provisions that two successful prosecutions were brought in late 1992 and early 1993, against defendants who had either opposed Greece's position on Macedonia or called for the recognition of Slavic Macedonia. Both cases are on appeal, but the appeals are not scheduled to be heard until 1995.
Greece's record on freedom of religion has improved somewhat, but the pattern remains inconsistent. The report's section dealing with religious freedom is a considerable improvement over the previous year. Most importantly, it recognizes for the first time that while proselytism is prohibited by the Greek Constitution, proselytism of the Greek Orthodox faith is in fact acceptable. The report should have added that the teaching of religion is mandatory, although in the past few years non-Orthodox families may petition for their children to be exempt from religious classes. The report accurately notes the decision of the European Court of Human Rights in May 1993, overturning the conviction by the Greek courts of a Jehovah's Witness for proselytism. Nevertheless, arrests for proselytism continued in 1993, But as the report implies — without explicitly stating — prosecutions seem to be on the decline, and in light of the European Court decision, many of the pending trials have been postponed.
However, thf continued restrictions on freedom of religious practice are more widespread than the report indicates. Although Greece's two highest courts, the Council of State and the Supreme Court, have ruled that the Jehovah's Witnesses are a "known religion," the State Department errs in stating that these decisions are binding on the government. In fact, they are only binding for the specific case. High court decisions are binding neither on subsequent cases nor on the lower courts, and as a consequence, religious groups such as the Jehovah's Witnesses continue to experience difficulties in establishing houses of worship. This is apparent in the State Department report, where it states that the Jehovah's Witnesses have appealed to the European Court of Human Rights as a result of the closure of two houses of worship in 1993.
Two recent actions by the Greek government are revealing of the underlying notion of "Greekness" that leads to human rights violations. One is a report by the National Intelligence Service (KYP), leaked in August 1993, stating that it maintained surveillance of non-Greek Orthodox since they were not true Greeks. Although the Greek government ostensibly disavowed the report, such attitudes are persistent. Second was the decision that the bilingual identity cards required for travel in the European Union should include a person's religion. To its credit, the report makes reference to both these cases, although it fails to draw clear conclusions about their human rights implications.
The situation of conscientious objectors in Greece remains unchanged. Despite repeated government promises that legislation will be enacted that provides
132
_GREECE
for non-military alternative service, no action has been taken, as the report indicates. It is unlikely that any such change will take place as long as Greece perceives itself to be threatened by its neighbors. The report is to be commended for its reporting of both civilian and military prison conditions for conscientious objectors. On the whole, prison conditions are deplorable as is generally true throughout the entire prison system. The government has repeatedly promised to take appropriate remedial measures, but so far with only limited success. On a related matter, the State Department accurately reports that cases of torture and inhumane treatment of detainees persist despite assurances by the government that it has looked into the matter and is taking remedial action. Unfortunately, no accurate data is available on the extent of maltreatment of Albanian refugees, both those in Greece and those who were forcibly expelled en masse in July 1993.
As the report implies, a further serious human rights concern is the religious and ethnic freedom of Muslims. In the case of the Muslim-Turks, ethnic and religious rights are inextricably interwined. Greece legally recognizes the existence of a Muslim minority and contends that it adheres to the 1923 Treaty of Lausarme, which stipulates the religious rights of this minority. However, the treaty does not guarantee the complex web of individual and ethnic rights. The majority of Muslims consider themselves Turkish, but the Greek government places other ethnic minorities, such as the Pomacks and the majority of the Romas, in the same category. While recognizing that the citizenship of many Muslim-Turks who leave the country is lifted, the report fails to mention the charges brought against Muslim-Turks who identify themselves as Turkish and publicly accuse the government of repression.
Several cases are pending against a former member of Parliament, Sadik Ahmet Sadik, two of which are scheduled to be tried in April 1994. In both of these cases, he was charged with publishing an article and issuing a tract in which he alleged discrimination and repression of the Turkish minority. Greece, however, recognizes only a Muslim minority, and not a Turkish one. Mr. Sadik is charged with violating the provisions of the criminal code that prohibit the dissemination of false information and disturbing the peace through inciting disharmony.
Women, as the report points out, have made considerable progress toward equality in Greece. The report is wrong, however, to state that Greek society and family structure tolerate a high degree of verbal confrontation but not violence. The sexual and physical abuse of women and children is relatively widespread, although it largely remains a cultural taboo to acknowledge it publicly. The report does not mention discrimination against homosexuals, who are labeled "mentally ill" by the Department of Defense. As a consequence, they have difficulties in obtaining public employment.
Overall, the 1993 report on Greece is accurate and, in some respects, more complete than in previous years. Its principal limitation is the mildness of its
133
CRITIQUE 1993
statements on the violations of ethnic and religious rights, and on the climate of fear that has been engendered both among minorities and among individual Greeks who defend their rights or dissent from official policy on ethnic and religious matters.
134
