GUATEMALA
The 1993 report on Guatemala provides a relatively thorough summary of human rights violations during the year, and appropriately addresses many individual cases that provide concrete examples of continuing human rights abuses. The report accurately reflects the continuing political and civil violence and oppression perpetrated by government forces, persons associated with or protected by government forces, and persons organized in opposition to the government. The report would have been improved, however, by the inclusion of contextual information about the relationship between the various actors.
Unfortunately, a high level of human rights abuses has persisted in Guatemala despite the mid-year election of Human Rights Ombudsman Ramiro de León Carpió to replace Guatemalan President Jorge Serrano, following Serrano's decision to suspend several sections of the Constitution and dissolve the Congress and the Supreme and Constitutional Courts on May 25. Serrano's "self-coup" {autogolpe) aroused intense national and international opposition, and his decision to resign in the face of mounting pressure from the political community and declining support from the military was itself seen as a positive sign for Guatemala's somewhat fragile constitutional democracy.
While de León Carpio's subsequent election by the Congress raised the expectations of many in the human rights community, the reality of Guatemala's historic and institutional disregard for human rights has thwarted de León Carpio's apparently sincere efforts at reform, and the human rights situation in Guatemala remains dismal and chaotic despite a few hopeful signs of improvement. While de León Carpió appears to bring a political will for change that had not previously existed in the president's office, his limited success has cast doubt on whether he has the political strength and support to realize his reform ambitions.
Although the report should be credited for its extensive and relatively detailed description of reported human rights abuses, both before and after President de León Carpio's election, it unfortunately echoes some of the chaos and uncertainty that characterized Guatemala in 1993. The report fails to provide sufficient context for many of the reported incidents of abuse, leaving doubt about the identity of those responsible. One obvious example is the report's treatment of Guatemala's infamous civil patrols (PACs). It clearly identifies the patrols as "especially responsible for human rights violations," and recites a number of specific cases where civil patrol members were implicated in abuses. In this sense, it is more complete than previous reports. However, by not addressing the forces organizing and supporting these patrols, either within or outside the government, the report continues to minimize the institutional problems posed by their continued existence.
The report should have alluded to the creation of the PACs by the military in the early 1980s as part of a counterinsurgency strategy to entrench military
135
CRITIQUE 1993
control over rural areas. As a study by the Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Center for Human Rights concludes, the civil patrols continue to "enforce the army's strategy and the military exercise control by proxy while disclaiming accountability for human rights abuses which civil patrollers commit." The study quotes Guatemalan Congressman Claudio Coxaj, who stated there were two types of responsibility for PAC crimes. "'One is del hecho (of the act) and the other is asesoría intelectual (intellectual assistance). The latter is from the armed forces and they are responsibile for the education of the civil patrols,'" In view of this analysis, reporting an increased number of PAC abuses without addressing the issues of material responsibility and intellectual authorship obscures the role of the military in a pattern of abuse. The report's decontextualized discussion cannot help but contribute to the misperception that the patrols are autonomous.
The report also fails to provide a clear analytical framework for judging the changes in Guatemala's human rights situation under de León Carpio's leadership. The distinction between the government's perpetration or sanction of abuses and its mere inability to constrain and punish such abuses has long been an important issue in Guatemala and has become even more important under de León Carpió, who professes a strong interest in reform. But the report does not fully explore that distinction or its implications.
In reciting the disappearances reported by the Archbishop's Human Rights Office and the Human Rights Ombudsman's office, the report simply states that, "The government did not identify or prosecute the perpetrators of any of these disappearances." Later, in recounting reports by Casa Alianza of the beating and detention of street children, the report states that, "The authorities rarely took action in any of these instances." It does not explore the identity of principal victims of the disappearances, nor the likely perpetrators. One example is the account of the abductions of trade union activists Elizabeth Recinos and Walter Manuel Najera Molina. The report gives no information about the kidnappers of Recinos and cites "four armed men" as the abductors of Najera. Human Rights Watch/Americas, by contrast, notes that the modus operandi, coordination and professionalism of the action all implicate the security forces.
The report also fails to identify which authorities were responsible for investigating and prosecuting the cases it cites, or to explore the extent of their links to governmental and nongovernmental interests within Guatemala. By providing only the basic facts, the report leaves open the question of government complicity or incapacity. It also fails to describe the timing of either the incidents or the government's reaction, thus missing an opportunity to address whether and to what extent the government's response changed with de León Carpio's assumption of the presidency,
The report does not observe, for instance, that the de León Carpió government has neglected to investigate seriously allegations of clandestine
136
GUATEMALA
detention. Indeed although the report mentions in scattered sections a few individual cases of unacknowledged detention, it does not acknowledge evidence that suggests a pattern of behavior by security forces. This concern has been raised by Human Rights Watch/Americas, Amnesty International and the UN Special Rapporteur for Guatemala, among others. President de León Carpió and Defense Minister Enriquez have repeatedly denied that the military maintains clandestine detention centers. As Human Rights Watch/Americas points out, such denial does not necessarily answer the question of whether the Army holds detainees secretly in regular military barracks. In this respect, the government's sole response in the case of URNG commander Efrain Bámaca Velásquez —the exhumation of the body of a different individual — supports allegations by rights groups and Bámaca's family that he was detained secretly, and not killed in combat.
In February, two former guerrillas, Santiago Cabrera López and Jaime Adalberto Agustín Recinos, offered written testimony regarding the Bámaca case, alleging that they had escaped clandestine detention by the Guatemalan Army. They testified that before escaping fi"om detention, they had seen or obtained information concerning 37 combatants being held in unacknowledged secret detention, includmg Bámaca, who, they allege, was seen in military custody in July 1992, four months after his disappearance. Human Rights Watch/Americas reports that Bámaca's wife filed a habeas corpus petition in February but was told that the case was closed after a judge failed to find Bámaca in public prisons in Guatemala City. Guatemalan law, however, requires that the investigation for a disappeared person continue until the victim is found. In August, the new government agreed to exhume a body in a grave in the department of Retalhuleu, but an examination found that it was not that of Bámaca. While the government has not reftited this finding, it has nonetheless ignored the evidence suggesting forced disappearance.
Human Rights Watch/Americas raised the Bámaca case and other instances of clandestine detention with representatives of the presidential human rights commission in October. The government claimed that the only reason it ever believed that Bámaca was the guerrilla buried in Retalhuleu was a detailed description of him provided by the URNG. However, as Human Rights Watch/Americas emphasizes, it was former Ombudsman de León Carpió himself who had offered the accurate description of Bámaca and reported that a guerrilla answering that description had been found dead the day after a firefight in Montúfar. There is still no explanation of how Carpió obtained this description, which corresponds with Bámaca but not with the body in Retalhuleu. Given the confusion, it is disturbing that de León Carpió has not attempted to clarity the matter by revealing his source. As it stands, his silence serves as complicity to whomever provided the physical description of Bámaca.
The government has also failed to investigate the allegations of former combatants Cabrera López and Agustín Recinos regarding other captured guerrillas
137
CRITIQUE 1993
in army detention, even though these allegations coincide with evidence of a longstanding practice of secret detention and torture. In response to an October 15 letter from the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights requesting, among other urgent measures, that the Guatemalan government investigate the Bámaca case, the others named by Cabrera López and Agustín Recinos, and the existence of secret detention centers, the government stated that "there is not one prison or detention center that is not official and public."
The government has failed to conduct adequate investigations into other unresolved cases of clandestine detention. In 1992, for instance, Maritza Urrutia was detained for eight days. The Army insisted there had been no kidnapping, despite the existence of witnesses to her abduction. Then-Human Rights Ombudsman de León Carpió issued a report declaring that Urrutia had been the victim of a forced disappearance and held the government accountable for its failure to stop repressive groups. Urrutia later "reappeared" and fmally fled the country. This case, which drew much national and international attention and continues to be cited by Human Rights Watch as representative of the use of clandestine detention in Guatemala, has not been fully investigated by either the Serrano or de León Carpió governments. In other words, neither the alleged practice nor the individual cases have been properly addressed by the Guatemalan government or the State Department report.
The report's one-line mention of "safe houses allegedly operated by security forces" does not adequately alert readers to the phenomenon of clandestine detention, particularly of captured combatants. Human Rights Watch/Americas notes the arrest in September 1993 of an injured guerrilla who was later placed under police custody. It stresses that this was the first known case of a captured combatant being released alive in 13 years. The fact that this prisoner's capture had not been reported previously, combined with the absence of known survivors among detainees captured during the war years, leads inescapably to the conclusion that the Guatemalan Army has engaged in a deliberate practice of secret detention or execution of wounded or captured combatants. In this light, the report's fmding that there are no political prisoners raises a question as to whether some political opponents are or have been held secretly.
There is little doubt that the election of President de León Carpió, in the words of the report, "raised hopes there would be a rapid improvement in the human rights situation." There is also evidence of some actual improvements. However, there is also strong evidence that in some areas the human rights situation has actually deteriorated. The report does note that, despite the new president's efforts to encourage the activities of human rights groups, investigate abuses and make structural changes, "these changes failed to reduce the actual number of abuses allegedly committed by government forces," Indeed, Guatemala's new Human Rights Ombudsman, Jorge Mario Garcia LaGuardia, reported that under the
138
GUATEMALA
de León Carpió government, "Guatemala is experiencing an escalation of all types of violence."
While the report discusses some changes made by de León Carpió, it fails to assess their actual impact, and does not comment on important areas where no efforts have been made at all. It mentions, for instance, the dismantling of the Archivos, a military intelligence unit. However, it never addresses whether the activities carried out by Archivos personnel ~ which included at least one proven political assasination, that of anthropologist Myma Mack — have actually ceased. In fact, even when he moved to dismantle the Archivos, President de León Carpió never acknowledged the role of the unit in political repression. The Myma Mack Foundation requested an investigation into the Archivos' activities and into allegations that its extensive files, which served as a basis for compiling death lists, had been transferred to military intelligence (G-2 or D-2). In response. President de León Carpió denied the existence of any documents in the defunct Archivo. He added that if particular files had ever existed, it would be logical to suppose that they had now been destroyed. As Human Rights Watch/Americas has reported. Archivos maintained more extensive computer files than any other intelligence service, including files on everyone who applied for a passport or driver's license. If its documents were indeed transferred to G-2, as alleged, the formal dismantling of Archivos might therefore represent no more than a change of name and location. As Human Rights Watch/Americas observes:
By allowing the army to take control of the files, the de León Carpió government missed an important opportunity to bring to light the abuses of the defunct unit and to prosecute those responsible, an action that would have deterred some of the violent abuses that continue to terrorize Guatemalans.
Additionally, the former police personnel of the Archivos were not screened before their transfer to the National Police, undermining efforts to cultivate a professional police force.
The State Department takes note of certain reforms to the Guatemalan criminal justice system and points to the postponement in December of the effective date of the new Criminal Procedure Code until July 1994. Under these reforms, the Public Ministry is to be transfomied into two separate entities: a prosecutor's office {fiscalía general) with an investigative unit and an Attorney General's Office (Procuraduría de la Nación). Other technical requirements include administrative and infrastructural reforms to the judicial branch, the appointment of new judges, the creation of new tribunals with specific jurisdiction, and the training of judges, prosecutors, public defenders and police in the new procedural rules. Slow progress
139
CRITIQUE 1993
on these fronts accounts in part for delays in implementing the new rules of penal procedure.
President de León Carpio's struggle to reform the highest levels of government has been slowed by a running battle with the Congress over the powers of the presidency, legislative control over the military, and the need for constitutional reform and new congressional elections.
In judging the new president's record, one significant criterion might have been his approach to the civil defense patrols. As noted above, the PACs pose a serious threat to democratic transition and effective civilian control over the armed forces. As Human Rights Ombudsman, de León Carpió consistently argued that the PACs were illegal. In their respective 1993 reports, both the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and then-UN Independent Expert on Human Rights for Guatemala, Dr. Christian Tomuschat, stressed the necessity of disbanding the civil patrols.
However, de León Carpio's public statements as president appear to signal a changed position on the PACs. For example, he has indicated that the PACs can only be dissolved when the armed conflict ends, and has asserted that participation in them is voluntary. Further, he has stated that in areas not actively threatened by armed groups, the PACs are being converted into "Peace and Development Committees" (CPD), which are independent of the military control and have no defense functions, However, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, which endorsed de León Carpio's criticisms of the PACs during his tenure as Human Rights Ombudsman, has expressed concern over his comments as president. The commission found that the patrols constitute "a genuine system of involuntary servitude," and maintains that the disbanding of the PACs, or their conversion to a new role, should be subject to the democratic choice of the civilian population, without granting the new CPDs any privileges at the expense of other civilian associations. The commission notes:
However, given the discretionary authority and record of abuses of the patrols, any conversion from the present position of power of these armed groups would entail the issuance of regulations and highly rigorous measures to ensure that the new name does not conceal and disguise a continued exercise by them of illegal power that strikes at human rights.
The report might usefully have explored significant evidence that progress in human rights advocacy is itself bringing new violence targeted at the agents of change. The 1993 edition of the Lawyers Committee's In Defense of Rights cites an alarming increase in human rights violations against lawyers and judges in Guatemala in 1993, from three incidents involving five people in 1992 to 16
140
GUATEMALA
incidents involving 37 individuals and two legal groups in 1993.) As In Defense of Rights points out, "The increasing level of attacks . .. seems to be directly linked to the inroads that human rights advocacy has made in Guatemala in recent years." De León Carpio's response to such attacks on advocates will have a profound effect on the staying power of any changes stemming from the more open atmosphere that has accompanied his presidency.
There have also been continued attacks on the press. While President de León Carpió has taken steps to open Guatemala to scrutiny by local and international human rights groups and secure freedom to report for press representatives, his government has been unable to secure the safety of journalists. Shortly after de León Carpió took office, his cousin Jorge Carpió Nicolle, publisher of the newspaper El Gráfico, was killed in an ambush. While there was no evidence to connect the publisher's murder to his reporting, as the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) notes, its chilling effect on open reporting cannot be ignored. Journalists and publishers have also been subject to threats and intimidation on numerous occasions since de León Carpió took office. CPJ reports that in late 1993, the left-wing opposition newsweekly Tinamit was targeted with repeated threats. In early December, a Tinamit delivery truck was reportedly stopped in Guatemala City by 12 heavily armed men, and copies of the publication were confiscated.
While the report adequately summarizes many of the attacks on the press, there is no analysis and no context within which to judge their true meaning. For example, the report recounts the murder of Jorge Carpió Nicolle and the subsequent killing of Victor Manuel de la Cruz, a reporter for Radio Sonora, but then repeats the government's claim that the motivation for both attacks was "criminal, not political." The report does not scrutinize this assertion and fails to provide any background on the two men's activities that might have led to political reprisals. Human Rights Watch/Americas points out that Jorge Carpió Nicolle, just prior to his murder, had infuriated Defense Minister Domingo Garcia Samayoa by refijsing to mobilize the large congressional voting bloc of his National Union of the Center (UCN) in support of an amnesty that would have shielded the Defense Minister and other military officers from possible prosecution for crimes related to Serrano's autogolpe. Furthermore, flawed police investigations, the apparent military threat to one of the alleged perpetrators, and the Army's confiision of facts and insistence on a criminal motive, all lead to suspicions of military involvment. This type of analysis might have provided a better context for understanding this and other abuses, and thus provided some insight into the possibility for real change under President de León Carpió.
Finally, the report pays little attention to the problems experienced by Guatemala's indigenous population. While it does freat the issue of discrimination separately this year, there is no analysis of the root causes of the abuse, and no
141
CRITIQUE 1993
exploration of the identity of the perpetrators. While the climate of increased public liberties has led to the formation of the Office for the Defense of Mayan Rights, a network of local indigenous groups, rural and Mayan organizations continue to work under threat. During the latter half of 1993, especially in October and November, such groups were attacked by members of the Guatemalan army, G-2, military commissioners and civil patrollers. The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights reports an apparent systematic policy of harassment against CONAVIGUA, a prominent indigenous widows' organization, for its calls for freedom of association, lawful military recruitment and the right not to join the PACs. With respect to political rights, the commission stresses the need for electoral reforms to enhance representativity for indigenous groups. According to the Electoral Law, only national parties have the right to nominate parliamentary candidates. This makes it impossible for Mayan ethnic groups, which may predominate in one or more departments but lack a nationwide presence, to nominate candidates for Congress. The commission recommends that regional parties be allowed to nominate such candidates, allowing indigenous groups to exercise their political rights more fully.
In summary, the 1993 report provides an adequate digest of many important incidents of abuse in Guatemala during the year. But the situation in Guatemala remains confiised and complex, and any real understanding of human rights conditions there requires more than a laundry list of abuses. The report should have provided more context for the incidents it described, and a stronger analytical framework forjudging the lasting impact of the abuses and the prospects for change.
142
