HONDURAS
The year 1993 saw a number of promising developments in Honduras: a move to reform the national police and wrest it from control of the military, the Valladares Commission's report on disappearances, the election of a new president who appears to be committed to reform and human rights, and civilian convictions of military officers in one high-profile human rights case. The 1993 report provides a good overview of the human rights situation, and correctly points out that:
The root cause of Honduras's human rights problems is the near-complete impunity before the law enjoyed by members of the civilian and military elite. The weak judicial system, intentionally underfunded and plagued by corruption, is unable to press cases against the wealthy and powerful. Almost no elected official, member of the business elite, bureaucrat, politician, or anyone with perceived influence or connections to the elite was tried, sentenced, or even fined in 1993.
The report is generally excellent in its analysis of these and other human rights problems, and continues the trend toward greater accuracy and candor. Unfortunately it also continues to suffer from the failing that has long afflicted the State Department's approach to Honduras: the tendency to overlook or downplay the threat posed by a bloated, corrupt, self-interested military that is increasingly indistinguishable from a mafia, and is unquestionably another "root cause" of the human rights problem. As in the past, the discussion treats the armed forces and their leader, Gen. Luis Alonso Discua Elvir, with kid gloves, despite overwhehning evidence that the military establishment is bent on converting itself into a powerful and parasitic "state within a state", hollowing out the civilian state politically and usurping large sections of the civilian economy. This obtuseness toward the military problem appears to be intentional. The Country Report on Nicaragua, for example, in dealing with a similar problem with the Sandinista-dominated armed forces, correctly treats the military's independence of civilian authority as a problem worthy of special attention.
Nevertheless, there continue to be signs that the State Department is inching away from this unseemly coddling. Several of the most egregious recent instances of a pro-military slant have been remedied. For example, this year's report states unequivocally that the militaiy "operates with considerable institutional and legal autonomy, particularly in the realm of internal security and military affairs," without attempting, as in prior reports, to convey the impression that the military sticks to this limited arena and avoids interfering with the civilian government. The report, for the first time, also takes note of the institution's
150
HONDURAS
abnormal business activities, noting that "[t]he military also plays a sizable role in the national economy, operating numerous enterprises usually associated with the private sector." This statement, while a step in the right direction, still drastically understates the reality. More important, it is completely unsupported by any analysis of the significant implications of this dangerous recent trend.
Ostensibly for reasons of "national security," the Honduran military already operates the police, the merchant marine, customs and immigration, civil aviation and the airports, and the national telephone company. It exercises administrative control of huge tracts of the country's interior. Military officers constitute a ruling elite, with their own govemment and courts, and, increasingly, their own economic sector. Using the resources of the Military Welfare Institute (IPM) — the armed forces' massive pension fund — the military establishment has accumulated an array of business assets: its own bank (which offers a credit card to the public); an insurance company; various factories, including the country's largest cement plant (which it purchased from the civilian govemment as part of a "privatization" sell-off, giving the military decisive leverage over the country's constmction industry); a car dealership; a radio station; an advertising agency; large stretches of prime coastland intended for tourist development; and — in an ironic instance of what an economist might consider "vertical integration" — a first-class fimeral parlor.
Military expansion into the economy is proceeding rapidly, frequently with the cooperation or complicity of the civilian govemment. In 1993, for example, when the armed forces coveted the stalled Sheraton Hotel project, the National Congress obligingly granted them 42% of the shares, based upon dubious assurances that the unfinished building would be converted into a hospital. The IPM then snapped up the remaining 58% from the liquidated operating entity, giving the armed forces undivided ownership of the project — which Honduran rights groups are convinced will be exploited strictly for commercial purposes. All such IPM enterprises are run exclusively by military officers or their hand-picked cronies. The cement plant, for example, is managed by Gen. Discua's brother-in-law. Individual officers personally own numerous businesses (often through civilian façades) which, given that these officers are generally on active duty and thus subject to military discipline, effectively function as part of the institutional military business empire. The IPM's president is invariably the head of the armed forces (currently Gen. Discua), and all IPM income goes directly to the military, with no civilian oversight or accounting. There are credible reports that the military exploits its ownership of the telephone company to conduct such industrial espionage as listening in on business competitors and intercepting sealed bids for govemment contracts. Civilian businessmen- in Honduras have begun to protest bitterly that the military's mafia-like business practices and access to confidential information make it impossible to compete with military-owned companies.
151
CRITIQUE 1993
The economic activities of the anned forces have a dangerous new purpose. An obvious goal is the personal enrichment of its individual officers, long an established perquisite of a Honduran military career. Much more disturbing, however, are indications of a new, strategic objective that goes unmentioned and unanalyzed in the report: institutional economic autonomy. In effect, the IPM operates like a large corporation, whose shareholders are the military elite, and whose CEO is Gen. Discua — except that this conglomerate enjoys advantages of which Sony and Coca-Cola can only dream; control of the national police, the telephone company and other useful governmental instrumentalities; unsupervised governmental funding; near total impunity for its officers before the law; and, of course, its own well-trained, well-equipped army.
The military derives substantial income from its business empire, which is estimated to generate as much $40 million annually. If it continues to increase, this off-budget business revenue will eventually minimize or even obviate the need for formal funding, mooting the growing pressure to cut defense spending and depriving the civilian government of one of its few effective levers over the military establishment. Given the deplorable past record of the military and its current —leadership, this drive for institutional sovereignty does not bode well for human rights in Honduras.
The report fails to identify this disturbing trend. Indeed, it neglects to discuss military spending at all despite the requirement that such discussion be provided for countries such as Honduras that receive US aid. The defense budget is delivered to the military as an undifferentiated lump sum, with no civilian oversight as to how the money is spent. The official military budget was some $50 million in 1993. In dollar terms this is the same as in 1992, but it represents an increase of 20% in local currency. In this desperately poor country, the huge, unnecessary military establishment absorbs a lavish one-fifth of the national budget. Moreover, taking into account commercial income from the IPM, the actual military budget is reported to be much higher, in the range of $85 million. US military aid in fiscal 1993 consisted of $1.5 million in cash and an additional $1.1 million in training assistance. A similar amount has been requested for 1994.
There are other signs that the military is attempting to develop a long-term strategy for survival and the preservation of its power and privileges. The Honduran armed forces are reported to be actively cultivating ties to the Nicaraguan military, which is headed by Sandinista Gen. Humberto Ortega and continues to be dominated by the Sandinistas — who until recently were the arch-enemies of the staunchly right-wing Honduran officers. In June 1993, the Washington Post reported that "there have been several meetings between the two sides to share experiences and investment advice." Similar efforts at coordination are reportedly taking place with the Salvadoran military. Like neighboring mafia "families", the three military establishments have begun divvying up turf, swapping tips on how
152
HONDURAS
to grab money and power, and comparing tactics for fending off troublesome civilian authorities. Despite this evidence that the Honduran armed forces have all but abandoned their oiFicial national mission in favor of pure institutional self-interest, Gen. Discua and his military establishment continue to enjoy the favor of the US Department of Defense — no doubt due in large measure to Discua's support for continued US operation of the Palmerola Air Base. Together with Guantanamo and the installations in Panama (which, under the Canal Treaties, the United States will lose by the end of this decade), Palmerola is one the US military's last remaining bases in Latin America.
Gen. Discua has demonstrated his readiness to supplement his novel economic strategy with old-fashioned political intimidation. The report omits to say that, when faced with calls for reductions in the defense budget (by Honduran congressmen and US Ambassador Cresencio Arcos, Jr.), Discua issued a public warning that the military would "pull out all the confidential documentation we have about many aspects in the country." The threat caimot be taken lightly, since its author is the former head of a military intelligence apparatus notorious for its domestic spying and wiretapping activities.
At the same time, however, there were areas of substantial progress in the effort to win power back from the military. The November election cost Gen. Discua valuable political assets: President Callejas, a long-time ally, and Discua's brother Celin Discua Elvir, Minister of Justice and head of the National Party, which lost power. The newly elected President, Liberal Party candidate Carlos Roberto Reina, has vowed to carry out a "moral revolution," making public and possibly cutting the military's budget, attacking governmental corruption and reforming the judicial system. Reina has a human rights background, including six years as a jurist on the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, and he is widely believed to be dedicated and sincere in his desire for meaningful reform. The report's discussion of the election is generally good, and it underlines the important point that "in a significant change, voters in the 1993 elections were able to split their ballot by voting for a mayor from a different party, instead of being required to cast a single ballot for a single-party slate of candidates for almost all elected offices, from the President on down." The single-ticket voting requirement remains a problem, however, since "the vote for President continued to be a vote for the entire congressional slate of that candidate's party."
The Honduran Congress finally acted to resolve the festering jurisdictional dispute between the military and civilian courts, declaring that henceforth military jurisdiction will be limited solely to crimes committed by military personnel while on active duty, and that in ambiguous cases, civilian jurisdiction will apply. The report presents this important development accurately, but could have been stronger in underlining that the "on duty" exception represents a potentially serious loophole, given the obvious incentives and opportunities for the military to manipulate
153
CRITIQUE 1993
evidence of when a soldier is "on duty." Military practice in other countries in the region suggests that such abuse is likely.
Another encouraging and unprecedented development, accurately summarized in the report, was the homicide conviction by a civilian court of two retired military officers, one a colonel, for the 1991 rape and murder of high-school student Riccy Mabel Martinez Sevilla. This appeared to mark the first time a senior member of the military has been held accountable in a civilian court for human rights abuses. However, the report mentions that "the family of the victim . . . requested that the defendants be convicted of first-degree murder," without explaining the particular significance of the request: unlike simple homicide, a first-degree murder conviction carries no possibility of pardon. The deterrent effect of the convictions would undoubtedly have been greater if the sentence had dispelled any likelihood that the military might in future be able to wrest clemency from the civilian authorities.
Concrete steps were finally taken toward a comprehensive reform of the National Department of Investigation (DNI), the secret, paramilitary national police force that has long been guilty of egregious human rights violations. Public outrage generated by public allegations of DNI criminality by ex-agent Josué Eli Zúñiga Martínez (supplemented, laudably, by some pressure from the US government) forced President Callejas to create an Ad Hoc Commission to consider reform measures. The commission, which consisted of representatives drawn from the government, major political parties, the media and the Catholic Church, recommended the creation of a new "Public Ministry", which would be headed by a civilian prosecutor elected by Congress. This new ministry would incorporate a new Criminal Investigations Department (DIC) to replace the DNI, thereby shifting the national police from military to civilian control, a critical and long overdue step. The report discusses in full the many promising aspects of this proposed reform, but fails to point out a number of practical problems that threaten successful implementation. Human Rights Watch/Americas, for example, has reported that the military is engaged in active obstructionism and is stripping DNI facilities of computers, telephones and other vital infrastructure, apparently in an effort to assure the new department's institutional failure. It is also not clear that rigorous screening of personnel will take place to ensure that the new force will not simply replicate the problem by reassigning the same corrupt and abusive officers.
The stimulus for the formation of the Ad Hoc Commission was the public outcry generated by Zúñiga's public revelations that the police and the army were responsible for numerous assassinations, carried out both for political reasons and for "personal and institutional gain." According to Zúñiga, the military's notorious Intelligence Battalion 3-16, nicknamed the "Death Battalion" for its death squad activities in the 1980s, continues to operate secretly within certain military units. This unit, which the military claims was dissolved in 1987, was proved in 1989
154
HONDURAS
before the Inter-American Court of Human Rights to have "disappeared" approximately 150 people between 1981-1984, and is widely believed to have been responsible for a total of some 250 "disappearances." Zúñiga also alleged that the DNI and the military were involved in drug trafficking, kidnappings for ransom, car theft rings and other criminal activities.
The report mentions Zúñiga's allegations primarily m the context of the murders of Edward Piña Van Tuyl and Guillermo Agurcia Lefebvre, noting that, "Despite Zúñiga's low personal credibility (he had been dismissed from the DNI for misconduct) and the fact that his information consisted almost entirely of hearsay, many Hondurans found credible his allegations that the DNI was involved in criminal activities, including murder and drug traificking." This sentence can be read as minimizing the impact of Zúñiga's allegations by emphasizing his supposed unreliability as a source and subtly implying that the Honduran public may be prone to excess credulity. Dismissal from an organization notorious for rampant corruption and egregious improprieties might tend to enhance, rather than undermine, "personal credibility." Moreover, while the report's emphasis on the hearsay nature of Zúñiga's information might be appropriate to trial testimony, in this context it ignores the reality of organizations such as police forces, whose members are often well aware of corrupt or illegal activities on the part of their colleagues without direct personal knowledge. The report also fails to mention that Zúñiga's allegations were corroborated by another DNI defector, Ricardo Amaya, and by none other than ex-military chief Gen. Amulfo Cantarero, who stated publicly in March 1993 that the Battahon 3-16 "Death Battalion" continues to operate under the name "Directorate of Military Intelligence." (Gen. Cantarero was reported to have received death threats from the military in response to his statements; Amaya too appears to have been threatened and has apparently gone into hiding.) Finally, what is the State Department's own opinion of these very serious allegations, which it concedes "many Hondurans found credible"? None is provided, despite the requirement that each post should, in the words of the State Department's own instructions, "say whether [it] believe[s] such reports are credible."
The section on extrajudicial killing reports Zúñiga's allegation that the businessman Guillermo Agurcia Lefebvre and his companion Lourdes Enamorado were killed by DNI agents involved in drug-trafficking. The reporting is accurate and makes a number of good points, such as the absurdity of the medical examiner's ruling that Lefebvre, who died from two gunshots to the chest, had committed suicide, and the fact than no investigation was conducted into claims by Lefebvre's mother that the killings were carried out by particular police agents. The discussion of the events surrounding the murder of Eduardo Piña Van Tuyl is less forthcoming, and displays the characteristic reluctance to the point the finger at the military, even when the evidence is compelling. Piña, a prominent businessman, was gunned
155
CRITIQUE 1993
down in the street. A television journalist, Eduardo Coto, happened to witness the crime, and videotaped the fleeing assailants. When the assassins were identified as members of the military. Coto was threatened by a police colonel and by the killers themselves (whom he encountered at Piña's wake). Coto fled to Spain. When he subsequentiy returned, he recanted his earlier testimony and instead accused two common criminals already in prison. The report does not mention the incriminating videotape, and fails to note that human rights organizations, who commissioned an artist to make sketches of the killers, identified them as a former member of an army death squad, an army intelligence officer and a third noncommissioned officer. Moreover, the report again fails to state the State Department's own conclusion. Once more, the effect of these omissions is to underplay the evidence of military involvement.
In reviewing the situation with respect to disappearances, the report continues to emphasize that these "mainly occurred during the early 1980's under the tenure of former armed forces Commander General Alvarez Martinez", thereby disregarding the widespread reports, discussed above, that Battalion 3-16 has operated continuously up to the present, and implying a change in the fiindamental character of the military leadership. Omitted is the important fact that the current chief of the armed forces, Gen. Discua, was Battalion 3-16's first commander, and thus almost certainly bears personal responsibility for much of the unit's "death squad" activity. The report mentions, in its introduction, that Human Rights Ombudsman Leo Valladares (who at the end of 1993 issued a book-length preliminary report of his investigations into the disappearances), "included in his report unsubstantiated material fi"om news articles dating fi"om the 1980's which claimed that US advisers . . . may have known of and tolerated the disappearances." This material may so far be "unsubstantiated", but there is no excuse for the report's failure to "say whether [it] believe[s] such reports are credible", since much of the relevant missing information undoubtedly resides in the State Department's own files. It also would have been appropriate to mention that the Honduran government has still failed to comply with a 1990 decision by the Inter-Américan Court of Human Rights, which held the government responsible for the disappearances of Manfredo Angel Valásquez and Saúl Godinez Cruz and ordered the government to pay damages to the victims' families. Finally, despite its recognition of military impunity as a root cause of Honduras's human rights problems, the report again fails to point out the untoward effects of the 1991 amnesty, which aggravated the problem.
The discussion of torture presents the case of José Efi"ain Orellano Garcia, who reportedly was beaten and nearly drowned in a water tank by police agents, and goes on to discuss the national police's Office of Professional Responsibility (ORP), which "is supposed to investigate cases of alleged torture and to recommend sanctions." The report notes that the ORP lacks the power to prosecute or punish.
156
HONDURAS
but it fails to discuss the ORP's actual effectiveness in discharging even its limited investigatory responsibilities. The discussion could have noted, for example, that formal complaints registered with the ORP in the Orellano case resulted in no action. The report also omits another case reported by the Human Rights Committee of Honduras (CODEH). In February, six national police agents in the municipality of Balfate, Colón, allegedly tortured Abrahim Mustapa Amahamad in public, in front of witnesses, beating him with a thick club while holding his head underwater in the river.
The sections on arbitrary arrest and denial of a fair trial accurately summarize the fimdamental inequity of the judicial system:
The poor are punished in accordance with the law, but the rich or politically influential are almost never held in jail, much less brought to trial or convicted. . . . Honduran society continues to rely on influence, pressure, and accommodation rather than the rule of law to resolve disputes.
The report also makes the important point that, despite the recent erosion of military exemption from civilian jurisdiction, "until improvements are made in the civilian justice system . . . military officers are no more likely to be convicted of human rights abuses or other crimes than they were under military justice." The entire report could have been greatly improved if this type of perceptive analysis had been extended to consideration of the military problem in general.
The section on arbifrary interference with privacy, family, home or correspondence reports allegations by Carlos Kellner, former president of the Honduran Telecommunications Union, that "the armed forces took advantage of its operation of the national telephone company to monitor illegally telephone lines of influential people in the Government, the military and the private sector." However, as in the 1992 report, there is a reluctance to provide the details that are particularly relevant to human rights. Kellner also asserted that journalists, opposition parties and human rights organizations are monitored. Again, the report eschews the obvious conclusion: that the operation of the national telephone company by the mafia-like military creates the near-certainty of abuse. A more rigorous analysis would have taken note of credible and widespread reports indicating that much of this monitoring of "influential people in the Government" and the "private sector" was solely for the purpose of advancing the military's own commercial or political interests. Wiretapping has also undoubtedly provided much of the material contained in the "confidential files" brandished by Gen. Discua against his political opponents.
In reviewing the government's attitude toward human rights organizations, the report concludes that, "There were no reported incidents of harassment against
157
CRITIQUE 1993
members of human rights organization [sic] in 1993." This is inaccurate. For example, CODEH, one of the most established and respected Honduran human rights organizations, was the subject of repeated harassment. Marcelino Martinez, the president of the organization's San Pedro Sula office, reported that, during his investigation of the Piña assassination, he and his wife received repeated death threats by telephone — at one point 12 calls in the space of three hours and that he had been repeatedly followed by several men, one of whom he recognized as a DNl agent. After CODEH Ombudsman Antonio Zelaya Reyes denounced the human rights situation on his regular radio program, he was repeatedly harassed by a man he believes is connected to the police, and was threatened at giinpoint in his broadcast studio by a man believed to be a police officer. The report also should have discussed the circumstances surrounding the January bombing in San Pedro Sula of a car belonging to the sons of retired Gen. Humberto Regalado Hernández while the car was parked near the CODEH offices. An anonymous group identifying itself as the "armed wing" of CODEH claimed responsibility for the attack. It is widely believed that the incident was a clumsy attempt to discredit CODEH. Finally, the discussion neglects to report on Gen. Discua's efforts to intimidate Human Rights Ombudsman Leo Valladares after the latter began to investigate the charges brought by DNI defector Zúñiga. One of several instances of this intimidation was a February telephone call in which Discua pointedly mentioned that he knew Valladares' family and urged him to avoid being "used" by Zúñiga. Such oversights are symptomatic of the report's inclination to display unwarranted deference toward Gen. Discua and the military.
In the discussion of discrimination, the section on women is excellent in summarizing the basic problems: limited career opportunities due to cultural attitudes, lower wages for equal work, and inadequate legal protection fi"om violence, in particular with respect to rape, which is considered a "private crime" for women over 12 and must be prosecuted at the woman's own expense. The new section on children points out the problem of the widespread illegal employment of minors, but is otherwise rather vague. Surprisingly, indigenous people also receive only cursory attention in this year's discussion. The discussion mentions their lack of a "formal mechanism" to aifect or participate in decisions regarding their lands, then adds optimistically that "the principal indigenous groups have succeeded in establishing organizations to focus governmental and public attention on their wishes." The 1992 report, by contrast, presented a comprehensive summary of the problems facing indigenous people: their inability to participate in decisions affecting their lives; the usurpation of their land by outsiders, often with governmental collaboration; and a lack of legal recourse exacerbated by the legal system's blatant bias in favor of the nonindigenous elite. The report's shift of focus is unfortunate, since conflicts between native peoples and outside developers are likely to increase as economic growth continues — especially since much of this
158
HONDURAS
growth is spearheaded by enterprises controlled by the military, which has little tolerance for those who oppose its interests.
The section on worker rights contains a number of minor improvements. The discussion of work conditions, for example, now makes the point that in addition to the poor enforcement of health and safety laws, there is "no provision for a worker to remove himself from a dangerous work situation without jeopardy to continued employment." Earlier dubious claims that the government and the military do not participate in blacklisting have been dropped, although the report still fails to point out that there is credible evidence that military intelligence maintains files on union activists and provides this information to private employers, and that the Association of Maquila Operators secretly maintains a quasi-official national blacklist (discussed below). The report also should have noted that in June Victor Artiles, Secretary General of the Confederation of Honduran Workers, claimed publicly that the majority of current union heads were corrupt. Above all, the report would have benefited from a stronger presentation of the growing problem of union-busting and labor abuses by the maquiladora plants in the free trade zones, a problem which is expected to intensify rapidly as maquiladora investment surges in response to the new North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
In particular, the discussion of the strike at the Paraíso, S.A. plant in Choloma, which received widespread public attention, is sketchy to the point of uselessness. A summary of the events that took place in September at the Paraíso plant would have served as an excellent illustration of the growing problems caused by the new, mostly foreign-owned maquiladora operations, and the government's complicity in such abuses as illegal union busting and atrocious working conditions. The National Labor Committee has reported that, according to Paraíso workers:
[The] average work-week was approximately 56 hours—10 hours a day Monday through Friday and 6 hours on Saturdays . . . [for] the equivalent of , . 41 cents an hour. "Discipline" at the plant was imposed by physical threats, slaps and blows. . . . Forced overtime — without overtime pay — for 12 to 15 hour shifts and work on Sundays was a frequent occurrence. Pregnant women were immediately fired [in violation of Honduran law]. At the first complaint or attempt to . . . assert one's rights, management would immediately fire the worker or workers and then pass their names on to the national blacklist maintained by the Association of Maquila Operators. The [workers] also complained about being forced to drink large quantities of coffee and cold water, which made them sick and which they believed contained drugs to increase the pace of their work.
159
CRITIQUE 1993
In response to these outrageous conditions, the workers, mostly impoverished women and many of them single mothers, attempted to form a union. The lead organizers were promptly fu^ed and their names passed to the national black list. This led to a spontaneous walk-out by the remaining workers, who later set up a picket at the plant's front gate. The company's response was a criminal complaint charging the workers with forcibly detaining company managers inside the plant, The report appears to accept this spurious charge at face value by inaccurately characterizing the picket as a "plant seizure." In reality the managers were free to come and go, and indeed actually resided within the plant compound, In meetings attended by the Minister of Labor and the ministry's regional director, Paraíso representatives stated openly that the company's senior management would not permit a union at the plant. Moreover, in the course of settlement negotiations, the company inadvertently confirmed in writing the existence of a formal national blacklist maintained by the Association of Maquila Operators when, as a concession, it agreed not to add the names of the strike leaders to the list. Despite Paraiso's open admissions of its illegal practices, the Ministry of Labor took no action. The police and the army subsequently conducted several attacks on the strikers and arrested many of them. A primary reason for their ability to deal so harshly with the strikers was that the proposed union never received the required governmental approval, thus denying the strikers the protections afforded to official unions. The "tip-off" problem created by the registration system, as illustrated in the Paraíso case, is summarized well in the report:
When unions are formed, a list of initial members must be submitted to the Ministry of Labor as part of the process of obtaining official recognition. Before official recognition is granted, however, the Ministry informs the company of the impending union organization. . . , Some companies in the industrial parks [i.e., the maquiladoras] have taken the information and dismissed union organizers before recognition was granted.
In the Paraíso case, the ministry permitted the company to obstruct the process of official notification, with the result that registration was never completed. There is ample evidence that this type of laxness is deliberate. For example, when the Honduran government sought to reduce the work force of the National Agrarian Institute (INA), the ministry registered a management-sponsored parallel union within 24 hours. The government's anti-union prejudice is particularly acute in cases involving the maquiladoras. Despite numerous attempts by activists, none of the work forces of the approximately 105 maquiladoras in Honduras is organized. The Paraíso case is clearly typical of the maquiladora
160
HONDURAS
owners' hostile attitude toward even the most basic worker rights, an attitude that has often enjoyed the tacit support of the Ministry of Labor.
The labor abuses that touched off the Paraíso strike are likely to intensify. The implementation of NAPTA is expected to cause rapid growth in the maquiladora sector, bringing an influx of foreign operators and entrepreneurs attracted by the prospect of cheap labor. Similarly, the military's rapid expansion into the private economy is likely to mean that workers will increasingly face — employers who belong to the predatory military elite, which has repeatedly demonstrated its intense hostility toward labor organizers. The report's discussion of worker rights makes no mention whatsoever of this growing problem.
The uncontrollable military establishment which was created in large part by the approximately $1.4 billion in military and other aid that the US government pumped into Honduras when that country was a key staging area for the contra war in Nicaragua constitutes a very serious threat to civil society and democracy in Honduras. This mafia-like institution is the biggest single obstacle to lasting human rights progress in Honduras, and the report's failure to confi"ont the problem undermines an analysis that is otherwise accurate, effective and commendably improved. Honduras is reaching a decisive point in its courageous struggle to wrest power back from the armed forces, impose accountability, and reform and demilitarize the judicial and political systems. If this effort fails, the alternative may well be military domination of the type that long blighted the Latin American human rights terrain — conducted this time, however, with new-foimd public-relations skill from behind the facade of a "Potemkin democracy." An unprecedented opportunity to secure lasting political stability and significant human rights progress will have been lost. Yet the US government appears willing to look the other way as Honduran democracy is eaten away from within by the military mafia. Simply by speaking the truth, without compromise, the United States could act to rein the military monster it has helped create, and provide critical support to the reform effort now underway in Honduras.
161
CRITIQUE 1993
