CROATIA
The human rights situation in Croatia in 1993 remained at crisis level, as the upheavals that began with the breakup of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia continued. Since the January 1992 ceasefire, which ended the war that followed Croatia's declaration of independence, nearly a third of the country's territory has been controlled by the so-called "Krajina Serbs," and troops of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) are deployed as peacekeepers in four United Nations Protected Areas (UNPAs) within Croatia. Intense and frequently violent ethnic conflicts, primarily between Croats and Serbs, but increasingly between Croats and Muslims, continue to rage within Croatia's borders, while a flood of refugees fleeing the war in neighboring Bosnia-Herzegovina has strained Croatia's humanitarian resources. The enormous scale of the human rights crisis in Croatia, as well as the difficulties inherent in travel between goverrmient and Serbian-controlled areas and in obtaining access to information, make an accurate assessment of the human rights situation in Croatia an exfraordinary challenge.
Despite these obstacles, the 1993 State Department report makes a serious and credible effort to document thoroughly developments across a broad spectrum of human rights issues. The report chronicles violations — and occasionally improvements on the part of the Croatian government, the Krajina Serb "authorities" and various non-official entities, and appears to assign responsibility for these violations in a fair and accurate manner. V\^ile the report acknowledges that serious human rights abuses have continued to occur in areas of Croatia under government control, it states frankly that "there was no evident commitment to ending human rights abuses" in the Serb-controlled portions of the UNPAs. Another strong feature of this year's report lies in its frequent use of illustrative examples of the practices it describes.
However, the 1993 report also has at least two significant weaknesses. First, its rigid format fragments important issues into too many sections to provide a coherent and comprehensive picture; second, it falls short in its attribution of responsibility for human rights violations.
The report's strict adherence to its point-by-point format misses the "forest" — issues of international significance such as "ethnic cleansing" and the disappearance of thousands of Croatians — for the "trees" of minutiae recommended by the State Department instructions for preparation of the Country Reports. This flaw is most obvious in the report's treatment of so-called "ethnic cleansing" in the UNPAs, where information on abuses by the Krajina Serbs is scattered in small pieces throughout the various sections of the report, without ever being pulled together in any single, authoritative treatment of the subject. Given
64
_CROATIA
the widespread international attention and condemnation that "ethnic cleansing" policies have received, it is surprising and disappointing to fmd only a cursory and sporadic treatment of the subject in this year's report.
The report's section on arbitrary arrest, detention, or exile states that '"ethnic cleansing' was employed aggressively and with the blessing of UNPA Serbian 'officials'" against non-Serbs in the UNPAs. However, this section does not indicate whether the rate of expulsions has increased or abated during the past year; nor does it describe the methods employed by the Serbs in forcing non-Serb residents to leave. Instead, the section attempts to illustrate "ethnic cleansing" policies by citing a confusing and seemingly random collection of data. It states that, "For example, on July 19,4 Croatian women were expelled from Sector South, and, during the week of August 6, 16 Croats were forced out of Sector East." But nothing places these expulsions in any kind of perspective, demonstrates any pattern, or suggests whether the events that took place on these dates were typical or aberrational.
Similarly, the same section cites a statement by the "leader of the Democratic Union of Hungarians from Croatia" that, as of June 28, 8,000 Hungarians had been forced to flee to Hungary, largely from Sector East, and that 2,000 others had sought refuge from Serbian "ethnic cleansing" in other parts of Croatia. Again, the report fails to place these numbers in perspective, either in terms of the original numbers of Hungarian residents in the UNPAs, or in terms of the rate of displacement in earlier periods.
Although this section does state that it is now estimated that "fewer than 400 Croats remain in Sector South," it fails to indicate approximately how many Croats originally resided in each of the various UNPAs, how many remain in Sectors North, East and West, when and by what means the majority of the expulsions took place, or where the Croat former residents have gone. Later, in its section on arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, the report outlines the practice of "forced resettlement" — one tactic used by Krajina Serbs in Sector East to harass non-Serbs and to evict them from their property. This description should have been consolidated with the earlier discussion of "ethnic cleansing," and should have included some additional description of Serbian tactics for expelling non-Serbs.
Later still, in the section devoted to the use of excessive force and violations of humanitarian law in internal conflicts, the report states that, "In the areas under the control of the 'Republic of Serbian Krajina,' the organized and massive 'ethnic cleansing' of Croats and other non-Serbs is largely a fait accompli." This section fmally offers some perspective on the enormous impact of "ethnic cleansing" policies, stating that Sector South and the Pink Zones, which were home to 44,000 ethnic Croats in 1991, now contain only 1,161 ethnic Croat residents. However, even the statistics presented here are more confusing than illuminating.
65
CRITIQUE 1993
For example, the report states that in UNPA Sector East, the Croat population has fallen by approximately 40 percent since 1991, while the Serb population has increased by 39 percent. The use of percentages — rather than actual numbers — makes it more difficult for the reader to understand the human dimensions of the population change, and leaves unclear how much of the change is attributable to the forced expulsion of Croats, and how much reflects an influx of ethnic Serbs from other regions.
A recent report by the Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) found that "on the Serbian side . . . violations of generally accepted international norms seem to form part of an officially tolerated and even supported systematic policy." The violations cited by the CSCE included violations of "international law as it relates to treatment of civilians and unarmed combatants during conflict. Among the atrocities [inflicted by the Serbs] were several instances of the summary execution of civilians and unarmed combatants, the torture and mistreatment of detainees, the forced displacement of civilian populations, the intentional killing of journalists covering the war, and attacks on foreign observers." Similarly, a recent draft resolution by the UN Commission on Human Rights strongly condemned "heinous acts ... in those parts of Croatia , . . under Serbian control" and called for the return of any victims to their homes. The gravity of these charges demands greater attention — and greater condemnation of the Serb "authorities" in the UNPAs and any others deemed responsible— than it is given in this year's report.
Another area meriting far greater attention, and whose signiñcance is lost in the report's detail-oriented format, is the subject of "disappearances." In early 1993, at the request of the UN Special Rapporteur on Human Rights in the Former Yugoslavia, the UN Commission on Human Rights established an investigative mission to attempt to determine the fate of the thousands of persons who have disappeared in Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, primarily since the seizure of Vukovar. In August 1993, the mission visited Croatia, including UNPA Sectors East and West, to consult with government officials and with nongovernmental groups such as the Mothers of Vukovar and the Mothers for Peace, in order to develop a plan to determine the whereabouts of some of those missing. (UN Commission Resolution 1994/72 of March 1994 noted that it was "dismayed" by the "huge number of missing persons still unaccounted for, particularly in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the Republic of Croatia.")
In contrast to the concern evinced by the United Nations, the section of the State Department report dealing with "disappearances" is startlingly brief, totalling only two sentences. This blandly states that, "There were fewer reported new cases of missing persons in 1993, but there was little progress in solving previously reported cases." The report adds merely that 7,857 persons are listed as "missing or forcefully disappeared" in Croatia as of the end of 1993, but completely fails to
66
_CROATIA
say how many of those persons disappeared during 1993, and also fails to explain why so little progress has been made in solving the old cases.
A notable strength of this year's report is that it does not allow the atrocities committed by Serbs within Croatia to overshadow the significant human rights abuses perpetrated or tacitly accepted by the Croatian government. As the March 4, 1994 draft resolution of the UN Human Rights Commission put it, "Despite the considerable decrease in violations of international humanitarian law m the Republic of Croatia, there continue to be serious human rights violations and patterns of discriminatory treatment against minority groups, as well as arbitrary practices on the part of the Croatian authorities." The report explicitly acknowledges that the Croatian armed forces have been guilty of violations of humanitarian law, and sets forth in some detail evidence of atrocities perpetrated by the Croatian army on the residents of three Serb-held villages near Sector South, including evidence of torture, mutilation and mass killings of civilians, among them elderly persons, as well as other incidents involving Croatian forces.
The report also acknowledges the intense nationalism and widespread intolerance among Croats for non-Croats, particularly ethnic Serbs and Muslims. These attitudes, prevalent among civilians and Croatian government officials alike, have meant that rights guaranteed by the Croatian Constitution, such as protections for the accused, free expression and the right not to be forced into exile, have, in practice, frequently been denied to non-Croats and to opponents of the government.
The second significant weakness apparent throughout the 1993 report is perhaps understandable, given the chaotic circumstances that prevail in many parts of Croatia. This is the failure to attribute responsibility for various violations. In contrast to its immediate predecessor, the 1993 report clearly acknowledges the division of Croatia into government-controlled and ethnic Serbian-controlled areas, and separately analyzes their respective legal structures and human rights practices. While this has the unfortunate consequence of appearing to give credence to the notion of two separate states, it does have the merit of providing a framework for attempting to assign responsibility to the various guilty parties. However, the report still refers generally to acts as having been committed by "Serbs," and fails to distinguish between the "Krajina Serbs" and the forces composed of "volunteers" provided by the government of Serbia/Montenegro or "provided by Serbian criminal warlords from other parts of the former Yugoslavia," who have periodically entered Croatia to take part in military actions against the Croatian government.
A variety of terms are used to describe Serb factions, yet nowhere does the report make clear whether or how it intends to differentiate between "Serbs," "Krajina Serbs," "Belgrade-backed Serbs," "ethnic Serbs" and "Croatian citizen[s] of Serbian origin." Some consistency in terminology would have made the report more understandable to the reader, and would have sent a clearer message as to
67
CRITIQUE 1993
whom the State Department considers responsible for the various human rights violations detailed in the report.
The report is also weak where responsibility for abuses may be attributed to Croats. For example, in discussing atrocities committed by Croat forces, the report merely notes that "while denying the charge of atrocities, Croat authorities relieved [military commanders] of their positions and launched their own investigation." Wherever possible, the report should go beyond this to assess whether goverrmient denials of responsibility are credible. Obviously, in many cases it is difficult, if not impossible, for outside observers to assign responsibility for violations among Serb groups or among various Croat governmental and nongovernmental elements. However, this difficulty should have been explicitly noted in the report.
In the area of civil liberties, the report sets forth in some detail the power wielded by the Croatian authorities over the publicly-owned media, explaining, for example, that the Tudjman government controls all national television broadcasting and nearly all national radio stations. At the same time, it fails to explain clearly how the government has attempted to suppress the independent, privately-owned press, especially the print media. For example, the discussion of the fate of the Split daily newspaper Slobodna Dalmacija acknowledges that the Croatian goverrmient had made a "politically inspired" decision to "compel the reprivatization" of the newspaper. The effect of this action would have been clearer to the reader had the report stated that, in fact, the goverrmient appointed a new board of directors and a new editorial board to keep the newspaper in line with government policies. It also would have been helpful for this section to state explicitly that the Croatian government owns approximately half of the country's mainstream media outlets and has a virtual monopoly on printing and distribution. This control enabled the government to force Danas, a respected weekly known for its criticism of the Croatian leadership, to mute its opposition to official policies. The report virtually ignores the effective censorship of Danas.
68
