	HAITI
For Haiti, 1993 was a year of continued frustration and terror. Tentative steps to resolving Haiti's governmental crisis, such as the deployment of the UN/OAS International Civilian Mission (ICM) and the signing of the UN-brokered Governors Island Accord raised many expectations. Faced with the potential return of ousted President Jean Bertrand Aristide, the Haitian military responded with a wave of terror that breached the Governors Island Accord and prompted the international community to withdraw almost all non-Haitian personnel. Foes of Aristide, including the army, police and paramilitary attachés, systematically denied human rights throughout the country to an extent that rivaled the early days following the 1991 coup in its ferocity and violence.
The State Department report on Haiti for 1993 captures much of this brutal reality. However, it suffers from omissions, mischaracterizations and underemphasis as described below. Even with these flaws, the report continues to paint a picture of terror and persecution that casts serious doubts on the US policy throughout 1993 of intercepting Haitians fleeing their country by boat and returning them without considering any of their claims for asylum.
The report should be commended for consistently implicating the military and its allies for violations of numerous human rights. It correctly states that the military and its allies implemented a general campaign of intimidation against Aristide sympathizers. Further, the report notes "strong evidence of systematic complicity between city police and criminal and vigilante gangs." The level of systematic abuses rose sharply as the date of Aristide's return pursuant to the Governors Island Accord approached. The report correctly notes this trend, properly characterizing most of the violence as efforts to stop the transition to democracy.
The report is flawed, however, by significant omissions. The report makes no mention of the Front for the Advancement and Progress of Haiti (FRAPH), which was visibly active by August 1993. FRAPH has developed into an institutional front for the thousands of attachés and other civilian agents of the military. Bearing a strong connection to the military, Duvalierist supporters and the Duvalier family's armed henchmen, the Tonton Macoutes, FRAPH, with the army's help, has carried out many of the activities which are cited by the report as serious human rights violations.
The report fails to mention one of the most notorious examples of human rights abuse in Haiti, one which clearly illustrates FRAPH's growing role in the ongoing violation of human rights in Haiti. According to a number of credible reports, FRAPH has been implicated in the attack on Cité Soleil, a shantytown well known for its support of Aristide. On December 27, 1993, a group of armed men set fire to dwellings, shot and killed a number of individuals and prevented
143
CRITIQUE 1993
residents from leaving the area while the fire spread. Estimates suggest as many as 860 homes destroyed and over 100 people dead or missing.
FRAPH represents a rallying point and organizational base for the armed bands — it would be proper to refer to them as "death squads" — who sow terror in Haiti. As the organization continues to develop, it has come to provide an increasingly powerful and cruelly effective tool for the military to maintain its sfranglehold on Haiti's citizens. FRAPH and its activities clearly should have been included in the report.
The report's section on exfrajudicial killings, criticized in the past, is markedly flawed. Indeed its underestimate of the number of killings — due in large part to a selective approach to the periods it covers — makes it hard to dispel an inference of intent to limit or downplay the level of violence which ensued after the United States withdrew the US Harlan County and its contingent of military trainers before the ship landed. After correctly noting the difficulty in assessing the actual number of political and extrajudicial killings m Haiti, the report purportedly goes on to cite the ICM as registering "over 100 homicides" from June to September. The numbers quoted are incomplete. The actual numbers of deaths reported by the ICM are as follows: nine in May, five in June, 34 in July and 33 in August, a total of 81. The report omits more than 60 deaths reported by the ICM for the month of September, marking a disturbing increase in killings in the aftermath of the Governors Island accord that continued throughout the rest of the year. According to information collected by Human Rights Watch/Americas and the National Coalition for Haitian Refugees, the number of political killings and suspicious murders continued to rise, with over 80 deaths in October, the month that Aristide was scheduled to return. Indeed, former Mission officials estimated 200 killings during the July-October period. Deaths in November and December have been estimated to be in excess of 70 and 55, respectively. Yet the State Department report provides no estimate at all for the months of October through December.
The State Department has been criticized in the past for not explaining the methodology its staff used to present the numbers of extrajudicial killings and other human rights violations. While this year's report does offer an explanation, it is misleading and contrary to the instructions provided by the State Department to embassy staff preparing the Country Reports. The instructions call repeatedly for the best available estimates of the number of human rights violations. Embassy staff are instructed to use evidence from all sources and to report what the available evidence shows. However, this year's report incorrectly cites one source, the ICM, and does not use any other source for its estimates. While the ICM was indeed the most comprehensive and authoritative source for such numbers while it was in Haiti, it by no means was the sole reliable source of information. Domestic human rights groups continue to exist, and they provide good accounts of events occurring in those parts of the country which they cover. The report explains its exclusive
144
_HAITI
reliance on the ICM figures by stating that its methodology was superior, and that local human rights groups lacked the means or training to investigate government activities. This implies that the only credible source for these numbers is the ICM. Since the report provides no estimates for the remainder of the year, the apparent corollary is that when the ICM is not in Haiti — which coincided with one of the year's most horrific waves of violence — the State Department will decline to report any numbers at all. This approach sets a dangerous precedent. By not presenting estimates based on all available, credible evidence, the report presents an unnecessarily vague and incomplete account which masks the marked rise in extrajudicial killings that took place from September to December of 1993. By the misleading use of ICM statistics, it also minimizes the political dimension of many of the killings that were recorded.
Ironically, the report neglects to use information provided by the ICM to strengthen its characterizations of two high-profile political killings: the assassinations of Antoine Izmery, a prominent Aristide supporter and Guy Malary, Minister of Justice for the Malval government. The report should be commended for clearly stating that there was strong reason to believe that supporters of the military were responsible for Malary's death. However, the accounts of both assassinations could have been strengthened by citing evidence reported by the ICM underscoring this conclusion. The State Department's treatment of Izmeiy's killing is cursory. One ICM report methodically established the military's complicity, and possible active involvement, in the Izmery murder. The ICM report detailed the military's heavy patrolling of the area before, during and after the murder, its control of traffic and pedestrians in the area, and its provision of an escort for the assassination team as it left the scene. Jodel Chomblain, one of the two leaders of FRAPH, was seen in a car at the scene of the killing.
In the case of the Malary assassination, the ICM noted in its interim report that military officials were on the scene immediately after the shooting, taking away witnesses and preventing ICM staff from approaching the scene for observation. Further, a UN report noted evidence that heavy assault weapons employing large-calibre ammunition were used in the attack against Malary, suggesting a possible link to the Haitian military.
Many credible reports provide detailed accounts of the torture inflicted by the military and its agents in 1993. The State Department report properly notes that torture and beating of detainees were common. In addition it cites the chilling example of a pregnant woman who was beaten so badly that she lost her child. The report's second example of the arrest and torture of three labor leaders notes insightfully that the three detainees, who suffered repeated blows with a club, incarceration in a filthy cell with 25 other prisoners, crushing of fingers and beatings in the djak position, were treated for their injuries in a military facility prior to release in order to prevent discovery of these abuses.
145
CRITIQUE 1993
The State Department's instructions for the 1993 Country Reports specifically ask for special emphasis in a number of areas, including the rights of women and children as well as the ability of human rights groups to operate effectively. Credible accounts of rape in detention have been reported by the UN Special Rapporteur and human rights groups, and the inclusion of this information could have added depth to the report. The report also fails to note that children were among the victims of arbitrary arrest and ill-treatment, despite a number of accounts of harassment, beatings and detention of youths.
According to former ICM officials, the State Department understates the extent to which the Haitian military failed to permit the ICM access to detainees, in violation of the terms of reference which governed the Mission. The military also denied the ICM access to individuals who had recently been arbitrarily detained and tortured, a fact overlooked by the report.
ICM observers suffered from much more widespread intimidation than the report suggests; the problem was not confined to the two regions cited. In addition, the ICM's decision to evacuate was not, as the report suggests in its introduction, the result of "perceived threats and intimidation," but rather of a demonstrated pattern of hostility combined with an increase in violence during the month of October. Actual incidents included ICM members being threatened with loaded weapons and, on one occasion, being fired upon. Observers were harassed and threatened in Cap Haïtien and Port-au-Prince in the week leading up to the Harlan County episode, and such treatment intensified after the ship left. Soldiers also illegally searched the residences of two observers, in direct violation of the ICM's terms of reference. Although the report omits any discussion of the issue, the ICM reported "persistent threats made against people [Haitians] apparently because of their contacts with the Mission or because the fact that they had been the victims of human rights abuse has been made public by the Mission and others."
The report's discussion of two attacks on ICM vehicles appears to be an example of the State Department's positing a false balance between actions of the military and its allies and those of other groups. In this instance, the first incident mentioned of a vehicle being stoned by a "pro-Aristide mob" apparently never happened, according to ICM officials. Even if it had, the report implies a symmetry which simply did not exist. The ICM was never hampered by forces supporting President Aristide, while the military and its allies were actively obstructionist.
The report's section regarding fireedom of the press is regrettably understated. While it correctly notes that freedom of speech and the press was often abridged due to intimidation, it neglects some of the most notorious examples. Most notably, the report fails to report the arrest and torture of Colson Dorme, a reporter for Radio Tropic FM. Mr. Dorme was abducted on February 1, 1993, and detained for nearly a week during which time he was kept blindfolded. His captors tortured him, accused him of being an Aristide supporter and shaved his head.
146
_HAITI
Bound hand and foot, he was dumped in front of Radio Tropic FM's offices on February 7.
The report also mischaracterizes the harassment of print and radio journalists as "petty," According to a report by the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ), reporters were named on death lists, beaten, detained for significant periods of time and threatened with guns and explosives in 1993. The report's discussion of disappearances includes an account of the abduction and assassination of a journalist's cousin because the journalist had taken pictures of soldiers pistol-whipping their way to the front of a gas line. News vendors were periodically beaten, arrested, or had their inventory confiscated. This was especially true of those selling Libete, the sole Creole-language weekly critical of the military.
The report should also have noted the comprehensive repression of the press in Haiti's provinces. Before the coup, more than 24 radio stations were broadcasting from the provinces outside Port-au-Prince. CPJ estimates that in 1993, no provincial radio stations were disseminating news due to "systematic silencing" by rural section chiefs, local military authorities and civilian militia. Finally, the report fails to note that foreign journalists were also detained, harassed, injured and in some cases expelled by security forces and their allies.
The report should be commended for clearly stating that "the military engaged in a systematic effort to inhibit any type of association during 1993." Noting a disturbing trend, the report also states that the military "continued to employ widespread repression and violence against trade union activities" and "intimidated leaders of rural agricultural unions and peasant cooperatives by arrests, beatings and by banning meetings." It also correctly notes that nonpolitical organizations involved in community health, civic education and literacy programs were prevented from operating normally. This acknowledgement that individuals could be targeted for persecution even if they had no direct political link to Aristide is an important point for Haitians trying to establish their claims for asylum. Nonetheless, the report's characterization of the repressions could have been stronger by noting that victims often (rather than "sometimes") received severe beatings for attempting to exercise their right of peacefiil assembly.
The report's treatment of freedom of religion is curiously brief In other sections, the report admirably notes the systematic efforts of the military and its allies to silence and intimidate clergy for their support, real or perceived, of President Aristide. Yet, the report makes no mention of such efforts in this section, where, to the extent that these acts discouraged or prevented church members from practicing their religions, it would have been most appropriate. The report could have included more detailed examples of military attacks against churches, church leaders and congregations. For example in June, soldiers released tear gas inside a church during a Sunday mass and then arrested and beat seven people.
147
CRITIQUE 1993
The section regarding pohtical rights is correct in its assertion that the right of citizens to change their government was forcibly abridged by the September 1991 military coup. However, the report could have noted some more specific trends in 1993 that have served to entrench the military and continue to deny the political rights of the Haitian people. As indicated above, the report makes no mention of FRAPH, whose activities include recruitment by force. There were credible accounts of individuals having to go into hiding, face beatings or worse for not joining FRAPH. This forced induction policy, with the tacit cooperation of the security forces, is a significant abridgement of the people's right to choose their political affiliations freely.
A second trend that has served to aid the military in denying the people's right to change their government is the role played by a bloc of members of the Haitian Parliament. As described by the UN Special Rapporteur:
Some political parties and many members of Parliament have played an unusual role in the crisis, forming a tactical alliance with the military which became a "legal" obstacle to Aristide's return. In the days following the coup d'etat, they appointed "President" Nerette and "Prime Minister" Honorât for the obvious purpose of legitimizing the action of the military. They sabotaged the implementation of the Washington protocols . . . and bitterly opposed the negotiations mediated by OAS, the United Nations and Special Envoy Dante Caputo.
This ongoing obstructionism serves as a powerful impediment to Aristide's return, thus denying the majority of Haitians their rightful choice for head of state.
As the military and its allies hold on to power for their third year, the State Department report, on balance, continues to sound a dissonant chord in US foreign policy. Since the coup, the report has consistently painted a picture of repression, persecution and horror for the majority of Haitian citizens. Yet US policy continues to turn a blind eye to the crimes and claims reported by the State Department and by non-governmental human rights organizations. Some examples include the following:
•	Since the coup and throughout 1993, the United States has continued its
widely criticized policy of returning all Haitians attempting to flee by sea. The report's consistent refrain that repatriated Haitians do not face persecution simply does not square with the extensive persecution documented in the report. Further, the claim has been soundly refuted by the National Coalition for Haitian Refugees, Human Rights Watch/Americas and the Jesuit Refugee Service/USA in their
148
_HAITI
comprehensive report, "No Port in a Storm: The Misguided Use of In-Country Refugee Processing in Haiti."
•	The United States applied pressure on Aristide to accept amnesty for members of the military in the Governors Island Accord — a concession that ultimately failed to secure Aristide's return and could have in fact emboldened certain officers to act with guaranteed impunity. The military's list of crimes and human rights violations, as reported by the State Department and others, presented a clear and powerful argument against amnesty.
•	Credible reports indicate that trade between the United States and Haiti has actually increased during a worldwide embargo and despite well-documented evidence of terrible working conditions for Haitian laborers.
These policy decisions and others like it continue to contradict the harsh situation portrayed in the State Department report, which, as noted above, is itself an understatement of the even more violent and oppressive reality in Haiti.
149
CRITIQUE 1993
