Introduction

The epidemic of communal violence in 1992 highlights the importance of human rights to the maintenance of global peace. From the genocidal "ethnic cleansing" of former Yugoslavia to the brutal conflicts in the former Soviet Union and many countries of Africa and Asia, violence has taken root between people who share the same terrain but differ in ethnicity, race, language or religion. Most of these crises have severe governmental abuses at their core, and their solution depends significantly on a reaffirmation of tolerance and respect for the individual. As the world grapples with this outbreak of violence, the need for a consistent and firm commitment to human rights is as acute as ever.

Since many of these conflicts did not erupt until the rigid structures of the Cold War began to crumble, they are often viewed as the product of deep and abiding animosities that only authoritarian governments can contain. Yet 1992 has made clear that the roots of most of these conflicts lie less in eternal antagonisms than in particular governmental abuses that exacerbate communal tensions. To understand and reverse these policies by promoting consistent respect for human rights is to begin to pursue the tolerance and sense of community that is needed to resolve these conflicts and avoid future conflagrations.

The U.S. government has a critical role to play in affirming the importance of human rights in reducing communal strife. Yet for much of the past 12 years, the Bush and Reagan administrations were mired in a paradigm that treated human rights as little more than periodic elections. Often these administrations lent moral or financial support to figures with dubious human rights credentials because they offered a chance to reverse communist rule. Once an elected government was in office, they justified a hands-off human rights policy by arguing that elected governments were less likely to commit abuses.

The fruits of this shallow vision of democracy have been reaped in the emergence of a series of elected tyrants whose one-time designation as "freedom fighters" cannot mask their appeal to hatred, intolerance and virulent nationalism. The view of elections as a human rights panacea belongs in the same bin of ill-conceived ideas as the argument that right-wing "authoritarian" governments deserve greater deference on human rights matters than their communist "totalitarian" counterparts.

The incoming Clinton administration faces the challenge of articulating a more complete vision of human rights to inform U.S. foreign policy in the face of mounting communal strife. This vision must move beyond the artificial simplicities of the Cold War to meet the challenges and complexities of today's world. It must recognize that repression can emerge from the ballot box as well as by force of arms, that human rights principles lose much of their force if not applied to friends and foes alike, and that the quest for peace, security and prosperity is handicapped without the vigorous promotion of human rights.

The Roots of Communal Violence

A review of the major communal conflicts of 1992 reveals how often their origins lie in abusive governmental policies. Some governments use divide-and-conquer strategies, based on ethnicity, religion or other factors, to develop a cadre of loyal supporters. Others justify human rights violations as necessary to counter separatist or independence movements. Some governments foment ethnic violence to fend off calls for democratization. Other political leaders seek to acquire or maintain power through appeals to communal antagonisms. Conflict is accelerated by those who equate the state with a single ethnic group and place an undue emphasis on collective interests over the securing of individual rights. And violence finds fertile terrain in societies whose independent institutions have been blighted by a range of other human rights violations.

Some of the most serious communal conflicts of 1992 emerged from governmental efforts to build political alliances through the discriminatory distribution of benefits and the discriminatory repression of rivals.

 In Liberia, the bitterness engendered by former President Samuel Doe's favoritism toward his Krahn ethnic group and his repression of others unleashed revenge killings in 1990 and a civil war that has now resumed after two years of unstable peace.

 In Somalia, deposed dictator Mohamed Siad Barre's violent discrimination spawned the clan and subclan fighting that underlies today's devastating famine.

 In Sri Lanka, a history of Sinhalese discrimination against the Tamil minority, together with violence by Tamil militant groups, have produced a particularly vicious war that has killed thousands and displaced over a million and a half since June 1990.

 In Sudan, long-term discrimination by the dominant Arab-Islamic north against the black-animist/Christian south is at the root of a brutal conflict that threatens resumed famine on the order of the 1988 disaster.

In other cases, a government's abusive response to a separatist or independence movement stokes ethnic conflict. What might have been resolved through political compromise degenerates into a cycle of violence once respect for human rights is undermined.

 The Indian government's use of murder, disappearance and torture to combat separatists in Kashmir, Punjab and Assam has sharpened antagonisms. Separatist militants, in turn, have attacked noncombatants and committed grave abuses.

 The escalating conflict in Nagorno Karabakh has been fueled by "ethnic cleansing," indiscriminate shelling, and attacks on civilians by both Armenian and Azerbaijani forces.

 Long-term discrimination and torture by the Turkish governmentin confronting Kurdish separatists, coupled with a troubling increase in assassinations, have led to spiraling violence in southeastern Turkey and a Kurdish insurgency that itself is responsible for serious abuses.

 The prospects for maintaining the territorial integrity of Iraq are vastly complicated by emerging evidence of Baghdad's genocidal Anfal campaign of 1988 against those deemed to be Kurdish separatists and their supporters.

 The confidence needed for progress in the Arab-Israeli peace talks has been undermined by continuing systematic abuses by Israeli forces in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, and by the use of summary execution and torture by both Israeli security forces and Palestinian extremists.

In some cases, governments seeking to resist pressures for democratization have fomented ethnic violence in a cynical effort to prove that only the strong hand of a dictator can hold the country together.

 In Kenya, the government of President Daniel arap Moi has fomented tribal tensions in an effort to fulfill its prediction that political pluralism will degenerate into tribal conflict.

 In Nigeria, General Ibrahim Babangida has continued to postpone the long-promised transition to elected government, in part because of ethnic conflict that has left thousands dead as government forces stand by and at times abet the fighting.

 While the South African government remains formally committed to a transition to majority rule based on universal suffrage, elements within it continue to foment violence among blacks with the apparent aim of sabotaging the long-awaited democratic transition.

 In Zaire, henchmen of President Mobutu Sese Seko, including "special divisions" of the army, have resisted democratic pressures by attacking civilians and engaging in looting with the aim of showing that only Mobutu can hold the country together.

Several ethnic conflicts were spawned by elected governments that have found popularity in appeals to the basest form of nationalism and ethnic exclusion.

 Serbian Prime Minister Slobodan Milosevic was elected on a platform of nationalist hatred that foreshadowed the policy of "ethnic cleansing" that Serbian forces have pursued in Croatia and Bosnia-Hercegovina.

 The nationalist rhetoric of elected Croatian President Franjo Tudjman contributed to the ethnic tensions in the region.

 In Azerbaijan, Moldova and other new states of the former Soviet Union, leaders have come to power through explicitly nationalistappeals, aggravating ongoing wars and risking the outbreak of new ones.

The lesson of these conflicts is that human rights violations by governments play a large role in transforming communal differences into violent clashes. The answer to halting or preventing such violence lies not in a return to an authoritarian past but in an end to the official abuse that fuels this strife.

Citizenship and the Nation-State

A less tangible but nonetheless important contribution to the explosion of communal strife is the equation of the state-a governing structure-with the nation-a particular ethnic group. In the Cold War world of inviolable borders, it was generally assumed that the members of a nation-state were those who resided within it. But as maps are now redrawn, citizenship, too, has been put in jeopardy. In Estonia and Latvia, an indiscriminate approach toward rectifying the injustices of the Soviet occupation has led to the potential disenfranchisement of large segments of the Russian-speaking population, including many who have lived their entire lives in the Baltics. Similar discrimination can be found in the Kuwaiti government's continuing refusal to recognize the citizenship of its native Bedoon population, the Dominican government's refusal to recognize the citizenship of many Dominican-born ethnic Haitians, the Burmese government's violent expulsion of Muslim Rohingyas, and the German government's virtual refusal to grant citizenship to those of non-German origin.

Behind these acts lies a conception of the state as a single national group. Yet this ideal nation-state does not exist. The natural shifting of populations has meant that virtually no place on earth is ethnically pure. Ethnic homogeneity can be achieved only at the cost of the sort of ruthless "ethnic cleansing" that is occurring in former Yugoslavia.

A quest for ethnic purity can heighten tensions and lead to strife whether a majority seeks to expel a minority or a minority hopes to break away from a majority. The ethnic Serbs in Croatia and Bosnia-Hercegovina did not succumb to the Serbian leader Milosevic's incitement to "ethnic cleansing" until they found themselves minorities in newly proclaimed states. Slovakia is facing rising tensions with Hungary because its ethnic Hungarians feel less secure as the principal minority in an increasingly nationalistic Slovakia than as one of several minorities in Czechoslovakia. The armed conflict in Moldova was sparked by the fears of the Russian-speaking population which suddenly found itself a minority in a foreign state that was seemingly bent on discrimination against it-a pattern that threatens to recur throughout the former Soviet Union. The turmoil resulting from these efforts by ethnic minorities to carve out their own mini-states suggests that the worldwide tendency to stress collective interests over individual rights can be a dangerous recipe for the violent explosion of ethnic grievances. Individual freedom may be less secure amid a multitude of self-determination claims than in conglomerate, pluralist states that respect such basic liberties as the right to practice one's religion, speak one's language, andpursue one's culture.

Restrictions on Civil Society

Communal violence finds particularly fertile ground where civil society was never permitted to develop or has been battered by other human rights violations. A society with a vigorous free press and a vibrant range of independent associations is better able to adapt peacefully to the political and economic exigencies that often lead to ethnic strife, and to resist the nationalist appeals that might be offered as quick fixes. But the atomized society that is often left in the wake of an abusive government lacks the flexibility and innovation needed to respond to such challenges without fissuring. A nation without a healthy civil society becomes a breeding ground for the virus of intolerance and ethnic animosity.

It thus is not accidental that many of the most severe outbreaks of ethnic violence can be found in countries that have suffered dictatorial rule. Somalia, Liberia, Iraq, Sudan, Burma and former Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union have in common a civil society that is stunted after years of authoritarian government. A similar breed of intolerance in the form of religious extremism has flourished in countries such as Algeria and Egypt, where years of tight governmental control have foreclosed alternative avenues for the expression of discontent.

The Cloudy Dawn of Democracy

It is not only communal violence that clouds what was to have been the post-Cold War dawn of democracy. More traditional political stratagems also intrude. Abusive leaders intent on retaining power have used various ploys, including human rights abuse, to limit the political risks attendant on sending voters to the polls. Others have simply ignored electoral results, or dispensed with elections altogether, in the name of protecting democracy. Their manipulation is facilitated by a negligence on the part of many proponents of democracy in identifying its essential elements-not only elections but also respect for individual rights and the rule of law.

Fortunately, the trend is not all negative. Welcome developments in 1992 included the peaceful presidential transitions in Guyana and the Philippines and the return to elected government in Thailand. But the year was more noteworthy for the persistent determination of dictators to manipulate the concept of democracy than any sign that they sought to respect its spirit.

Governmental leaders used a range of devices to avoid the unfiltered judgment of the voters:

 The Syrian-backed government of President Elias el-Hrawi in Lebanon detained opponents, restricted and closed press outlets, banned over 130 private associations, and rushed to hold elections before occupying Syrian troops were redeployed.

 The Kuwaiti government allowed parliamentary elections, but the significance of the opposition's surprising victory was lessened by the continuing ban on women voting, an extremely limited malesuffrage, and the Emir's insistence on naming members of the royal family to all key ministries.

 President Daniel arap Moi of Kenya finally promised multiparty elections but is intent on controlling them by maintaining restrictions on the opposition's ability to organize and campaign.

 The Arab-Berber government of Mauritania used fraud and violence to disenfranchise large numbers of blacks.

Some political leaders displayed open contempt for electoral results. President Alberto Fujimori of Peru defended his self-coup and assumption of extraordinary powers by asserting the need to overcome the corruption and incompetence that he said impeded the fight against drug trafficking and the vicious Shining Path insurgency. Ironically, the biggest blow against the Shining Path-the capture of its leader Abimael Guzmn-was the result of ordinary detective work. Meanwhile, in his readiness to discard the constitutional order, Fujimori handed the insurgents a tremendous gift by undercutting the long-term legitimacy of the state.

A similar sequence unfolded in Algeria, where the military defended its annulment of parliamentary elections won by the Islamic Salvation Front by claiming that it was protecting democracy and human rights from intolerant zealots. But the government belied its assertion when it sent thousands of suspected Islamists to remote desert camps without charge or trial, and refused to set a timetable for resuming the democratic process. Elsewhere:

 The Haitian military junta, having ousted freely elected President Jean-Bertrand Aristide purportedly because of his incitement of mob violence, continued to use detention, beatings and murder to prevent calls for his return.

 The military junta in Burma also continued to deny the results of the 1990 opposition electoral victory, and began plans for a national convention in January 1993 designed to consolidate the military's power.

 The unita rebels in Angola resorted to violence rather than accept a loss at the ballot box.

 Elements of the Venezuelan military twice attempted to overthrow what had been one of Latin America's most stable democracies.

Some countries did not bother with the charade of an aborted or rigged election:

 The Saudi Arabian government announced with great fanfare a series of political reforms, but a reading of the fine print revealed that the reforms in fact codified royal authoritarianism, and left Saudi citizens with fewer civil and political rights than they had in 1926.

 Syrian President Hafez al-Asad had promised wider political participation but instead began his fourth consecutive seven-year term after a referendum in which he said 99.98 percent of the voters approved continuation of his reign.

 China continued to detain thousands of pro-democracy activists, not only from the 1989 democracy movement but also from as far back as the Democracy Wall movement of the late 1970s. They endured horrendous prison conditions and torture, despite a Chinese government "white paper" proclaiming the many legal protections that they supposedly enjoy.

Accountability for Past Gross Abuses

A key measure of a country's evolution toward democracy is its capacity to hold past gross abusers of human rights accountable for their misdeeds. The worldwide quest for accountability had several notable advances in 1992, but there were setbacks as well.

Progress was particularly significant in El Salvador under the U.N.-sponsored peace process. A "Truth Commission," charged with investigating serious abuses since 1980, added to pressures on the government to allow exhumations of the remains of the victims of the 1981 El Mozote massacre in which an estimated 794 civilians were killed by the Salvadoran army. Initial results confirm contemporaneous press reports of the massacre that the U.S. government vehemently denied at the time. A parallel "Ad Hoc Commission" reportedly recommended purging the army of over 100 officers for their involvement in violent abuses, including the Minister and Deputy Minister of Defense. Despite resistance from the army, President Alfredo Cristiani reportedly is acting on the recommendations.

 The U.N. Security Council took a significant step toward constructing an international system of accountability for gross abuses when it established an expert commission to collect evidence of war crimes in former Yugoslavia, although it stopped short of creating an international tribunal to try the perpetrators of those crimes.

 Russia began to open KGB files and acknowledge past abuses, such as the massacre of 20,000 Polish officers in Katyn forest during World War II, although criminal prosecutions have yet to follow.

 In a rare exception to the impunity from criminal prosecution that has prevailed for Chilean gross abusers, the trial began in Chile of retired secret police chief General Manuel Contreras for the murder in Washington of Orlando Letelier and Ronni Moffitt.

 Four high-ranking police officials in Paraguay were convicted and sentenced to 25-year prison terms for their torture and murder of a political detainee under the former military dictatorship of General Alfredo Stroessner.

 Trials also began of Erich Honecker and other former senior East German officials for ordering the shootings of Germans fleeing tothe West, although the proceedings progressed slowly because of the defendants' poor health.

Compared to the civilian governments that emerged in Latin America in the 1980s, the governments of Eastern Europe had a golden opportunity to hold former officials responsible for gross abuses of the past. In Latin America, new civilian governments usually had to contend with still-powerful militaries that were intent on avoiding prosecution for their gross abuses. By contrast, the revolutions of 1989 in Eastern Europe so transformed the balance of power that former communists were able to offer little resistance to those who sought accountability for their crimes.

But the sheer number believed to be responsible for these crimes has presented a new set of problems. Most notably in Czechoslovakia and Germany, but also in Bulgaria and Poland, the effort to redress these crimes has swept so broadly that people are being caught up in the "lustration," or decommunization, effort simply because of past associations, without reliable proof linking them to a particular crime, or an opportunity to defend themselves before an impartial tribunal. Rather than affirming the rule of law as a means of moving beyond the abusive past, the new governments of Eastern Europe have allowed these serious due process deficiencies to perpetuate official arbitrariness.

Elsewhere, few suffered penal consequences for the commission of violent abuses. In some countries, the rule of impunity was best illustrated by the exceptional prosecution.

 Indonesia held the first-ever courts-martial of military personnel accused of criminal offenses in a political case-the November 1991 massacre of at least 75 unarmed demonstrators in East Timor. But none of the defendants was at the scene when the shooting began (thus shedding no light on who ordered the killing) and the sentences were ludicrously lenient (a maximum of 18 months in prison, compared to life imprisonment for the alleged mastermind of the demonstration).

 In Peru, members of the military have been convicted of human rights offenses in only two cases in the last 12 years. One of the convicted defendants was never imprisoned following his conviction and continued to receive regular promotions despite his involvement in the murder, torture and rape of 69 peasants in 1985.

 The Indian government cited the conviction of two army captains in Kashmir for the rape of a Canadian tourist as evidence of its commitment to human rights, but no other member of the security forces has been prosecuted in hundreds of cases of abuse, including murder, torture, rape and disappearance, and even the two captains have yet to begin serving their sentences.

Other countries granted formal or de facto amnesties for violent abusers.

 The Thai military, before returning power to an elected government, enacted an amnesty to protect those who ordered troopsto fire on peaceful pro-democracy demonstrators in Bangkok, killing at least 52. A constitutional tribunal has upheld the amnesty.

 In South Africa, an amnesty pushed through by F.W. DeKlerk's Presidential Council, after an unprecedented rejection by the Indian house of the tricameral parliament, will allow pardons for past abuses with no public disclosure of what is being forgiven.

 The Kuwaiti government, without even bothering to enact a formal amnesty, has said that it has no intention of prosecuting those responsible for torturing thousands of suspected Iraqi sympathizers, or for the ongoing abuse of hundreds of Asian maids, although it insists on the continued detention of some 120 alleged collaborators with the Iraqi occupiers who were convicted after trials wholly lacking in due process. The government has also made no apparent effort to exhume mass graves of those killed by Kuwaiti forces following liberation from Iraqi occupation.

The Right to Monitor

An important measure of any country's respect for human rights is its willingness to allow others to monitor its compliance with international standards. While the human rights movement continues to gain acceptance, some governments in 1992 still sought to shield their abuses from public scrutiny by attacking those who document and publicize them. Seven human rights monitors were murdered in 1992.

Colombia continued to be among the most dangerous places to monitor human rights, as a secretary and a security guard for the Regional Committee for the Defense of Human Rights of Barrancabermeja were murdered. In India, a human rights monitor died in custody of probable torture, and many others suffered threats, beatings and illegal detentions by security forces. In Turkey, security forces raided several branches of the Human Rights Association (hra), four hra members were on a death list of 28, and one hra board member was killed by unidentified assailants. In the Dominican Republic, a human rights activist was killed by police shooting indiscriminately into a crowd of demonstrators.

Rebel groups are known to have been responsible for the killing of two human rights advocates. In Egypt, a prominent writer and outspoken defender of minority rights who had criticized radical Islamists was assassinated by members of an extremist group. In Peru, a women's rights activist who had stood up to the Shining Path insurgency was executed by one of its assassination squads.

Some governments used detention to silence human rights critics.

 In Syria, 40 members and supporters of the Committees for the Defense of Democratic Freedom and Human Rights were detained in 1992, fourteen of whom were sentenced by the State Security Court to prison terms of between three and ten years of hard labor.

 In Cuba, at least 50 monitors and democracy advocates are serving prison terms of up to ten years for their peacefulactivities. Scores of others have been subjected to violent assault by state-organized mobs in supposedly spontaneous "acts of repudiation."

 In Vietnam, Dr. Nguyen Dan Que is serving a 20-year prison term for criticizing the government's human rights practices.

As many governments forsake these crude methods to silence the human rights movement, they have developed more subtle techniques.

 The Peruvian government has unfairly denounced human rights workers as supporters of the Shining Path insurgency-thus subjecting them to the risk of violent retaliation by right-wing forces-even though these activists regularly criticize abuses by the rebel group. The government has also sought to imprison human rights activists under a vague anti-terrorist decree. In one illustrative case, an attorney was charged for working with Americas Watch and litigating before the Organization of American States (oas) Inter-American Court of Human Rights.

 The Salvadoran government tried to block an Argentine legal advisor from joining the U.N. monitoring effort, apparently because he had provided legal assistance in the prosecution of those accused of the 1989 murder of six Jesuit priests in San Salvador.

 The Sudanese government, having banned the Sudan Human Rights Organization and the Sudan Bar Association, continued to proffer officially controlled clones by the same names in their place.

Some countries have been particularly disingenuous in their approach to human rights monitoring.

 The Nigerian government sponsored an international seminar on human rights in Lagos but did not invite domestic groups and warned them not to criticize the government while the seminar was under way.

 The Mexican government's own National Human Rights Commission has undertaken important investigations, but its recommendations of prosecution are routinely ignored or unfulfilled.

 The governments of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (asean)-particularly Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore-have acknowledged the universality of human rights principles, but argue that each government should be free to determine on its own how those principles are implemented.

 As the oas Inter-American Commission on Human Rights presses Latin American governments to bring to justice gross violators of human rights, many of those governments found it convenient to lash out in turn at the Commission.

U.N. Human Rights Policy

The end of the Cold War opened dramatic possibilities for theU.N. to promote human rights. Previously, human rights matters tended to be relegated to specially designated U.N. bodies in Geneva, with little effect. The highly politicized, protect-your-own voting patterns of participating states undermined much of the U.N.'s moral authority. And the substantial irrelevance of proceedings in Geneva for the foreign policies of the major powers meant that U.N. human rights resolutions had little practical clout.

Today, as Cold War divisions melt and the agreement of all major powers becomes feasible, the U.N. is able increasingly to undertake large-scale operations-for peacekeeping, protection or the provision of humanitarian aid-that can have a profound affect on human rights. Yet the relationship of these operations to the U.N.'s stated commitment to uphold human rights is being worked out only haphazardly. The U.N. has tended to downplay the promotion of human rights in favor of other operational goals, without appreciating the significant extent to which forceful human rights advocacy can facilitate achievement of these goals.

In the El Salvador peace process-the most successful effort to date to integrate human rights concerns into U.N. operations-the parties to the negotiations and the U.N. mediators have understood that any successful peace accord would need to give high priority to the protection of human rights. Yet U.N. administrators have tended to temper or avoid criticism of human rights violators in an effort to paper over potential points of conflict. This stress on immediate reconciliation is often short-sighted in that it neglects the importance of establishing the conditions of respect for human rights and the rule of law that will give antagonists the confidence to resolve future differences without resort to violence.

Similar failings can be found in Cambodia, where the U.N. has been myopically fixated on holding to the schedule for May 1993 elections, but has largely ignored the need to build institutions that can secure the rule of law and rectify human rights abuses. Nor has the U.N. itself been an effective substitute for governmental safeguards of human rights. The Khmer Rouge, while declining to participate in the peace process or the election, has campaigned for popular support through a series of ruthless attacks and racist invective against ethnic Vietnamese civilians in the country. The U.N. responded by criminalizing racist slurs and common epithets-steps that do little to address the escalating violence and set a poor precedent for free expression under the next Cambodian government.

A hesitancy to stress human rights concerns has also been apparent in U.N. operations in Iraq, Somalia and former Yugoslavia. While the creation of a safe haven in northern Iraq has temporarily stopped Baghdad's slaughter of the Kurds, a no-fly zone has been ineffective in the primarily Shi'a south, where Iraqi troops continue to engage in indiscriminate shelling, arbitrary detention and reported large-scale executions with impunity. Yet unlike its insistence that arms monitors have unimpeded access to Iraq, the U.N. did not take up the plea of its special rapporteur, Max van der Stohl, that U.N. human rights monitors be stationed throughout the country. So long as the Arab victims of this abuse do notcreate a refugee crisis like their Kurdish compatriots to the north, the U.N. appears unwilling to act effectively to protect them. The relationship between Baghdad's human rights violations at home and its long-term threat to international security seems not to be grasped.

In former Yugoslavia, the U.N. helped to keep the peace in Croatia but allowed "ethnic cleansing" and other abuses to continue in areas under U.N. supervision. When the war spread to Bosnia-Hercegovina, the U.N. sought to deliver humanitarian aid to those trapped by the war, but many aid convoys were attacked, hijacked or blocked by the warring parties. U.N. threats to use force to protect the convoys were rarely realized. Nor were effective steps taken to stop the slaughter, torture and forcible displacement of ongoing "ethnic cleansing." A so-far unenforced no-fly zone, a permeable embargo, and a commission to investigate war crimes which fell short of a tribunal to try them, were all the U.N. has been able to muster to end genocidal practices. The U.N. did periodically denounce violations of the laws of war, but the condemnations were largely sapped of force by the reluctance of U.N. representatives to identify perpetrators. This reticence derived from a desire to maintain strict neutrality for fear of jeopardizing stalled negotiations. The resulting downgrading of efforts to promote human rights made it appear that the U.N. aspired to no more than "well-fed dead."

Despite aspirations today to a greater preventive role, the U.N. in 1991 abandoned Somalia at a point when the downward spiral of armed conflict and famine might still have been checked. The U.N. returned in fits and starts in 1992, but its stress on negotiating with the warring factions to allow delivery of aid again kept it from the strong action needed to stop the ongoing, rampant abuse that underlay the humanitarian crisis. The U.N. is now embarking on a U.S.-proposed military intervention to protect the delivery of relief. But earlier U.N. attention to persistent violence might have avoided the need for such drastic measures.

The complex disasters confronting the U.N. defy simple solutions. But the pattern that emerged in 1992 as U.N. field operations expanded suggests that the institution undervalues human rights concerns. Finding a way to incorporate a more prominent role for human rights in these endeavors is important not only in its own right but also as a step toward addressing the causes of these disasters and laying the groundwork for their solution.

U.S. Human Rights Policy

The Bush administration during its four years has avoided the Reagan administration's overt hostility to human rights, but it has never developed its own positive vision of the importance of human rights in world affairs. The result was initiatives on particular countries that were often quite useful, but a lack of the coherent and consistent policy that is needed to promote human rights most effectively.

This failure of vision at times left the administration foundering in the sea-change caused by the end of the Cold War. The complex challenges to human rights in a multipolar world cried out for guidance, but they were often met in Washington with hesitationand inaction. Attaching no consistent premium to human rights, the administration lacked the vision to perceive novel threats and the creativity to fashion new defenses. Human rights in many countries thus remained in jeopardy.

The challenge facing the Clinton administration in the realm of human rights is to articulate a vision that allows the promotion of human rights to reassume a central role in U.S. foreign policy. To move beyond the Cold War paradigm of the Reagan administration and the frequent disarray of the Bush administration, the Clinton administration will need to discern the violations of human rights that underlie many of the world's most pressing problems, and to provide leadership in building an international order with a central place for human rights.

Over its four years, the Bush administration departed from the disastrous policies of its predecessor in several important respects. In El Salvador, prodded by Congress, it lent its support to a negotiated settlement of the country's decade-long civil war. In Nicaragua, it halted U.S. assistance to the abusive contra guerrillas. In South Africa, it ended "constructive engagement" and joined international efforts to press for an end to apartheid. Elsewhere in Africa, it lent considerable weight to negotiated resolutions of bloody armed conflicts in Angola and Mozambique. There were also a number of useful undertakings in 1992:

 Forthright public criticism by Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Herman Cohen and U.S. Ambassador Smith Hempstone, coupled with a cutoff of all but development aid, put strong pressure on the Kenyan government to enact political reforms.

 The Bush administration's initial reaction to Peruvian President Fujimori's self-coup was forceful. Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Bernard Aronson, in Lima at the time, cancelled his governmental meetings and made a point of visiting members of the nongovernmental human rights community before departing. Secretary of State James Baker denounced the coup as "tragic" and told the oas, "You cannot destroy democracy in order to save it." The administration also cut off most aid and froze commercial military sales. Unfortunately, various actions weakened this firm message of disapproval as the year progressed.

 In Guatemala, the administration repeatedly defended human rights monitors against governmental attacks. U.S. Ambassador Thomas Stroock publicly came to their defense on several occasions. And when trumped-up criminal charges were filed against one of Guatemala's leading human rights activists, Secretary Aronson telephoned Guatemalan President Jorge Serrano to protest.

 After Thai troops opened fired on pro-democracy demonstrators in Bangkok, the Bush administration ended joint U.S.-Thai military exercises, publicly condemned the loss of life, and met with Thai leaders to urge restraint and a peaceful political solution. However, when elected civilian government returned in Thailand, the administration relaxed sanctions without insisting that those who ordered these murders be brought to justice.

 The administration continued to enforce a safe haven in northern Iraq that has protected the Kurds from once again enduring Baghdad's genocidal crimes.

Yet the lack of an overarching human rights policy has weakened the precedential impact of these positive initiatives and hampered administration efforts to grapple with the many new challenges to human rights of the past year.

Communal Violence

For example, the administration showed itself most at sea in addressing the worldwide outbreak of communal conflict. The principal exception was in Kenya, where the State Department demonstrated an awareness of the government's promotion of ethnic strife to fend off calls for multiparty elections. With characteristic candor, Ambassador Hempstone publicly observed: "Self-fulfilling prophesies of chaos, bloodshed and tribal warfare are not useful. The government because it is the government has the primary responsibility of restoring order and maintaining security." More often, however, the administration remained apparently oblivious to the critical role that human rights violations can play in transforming communal tension into communal conflict, and often missed opportunities to condemn ethnic discrimination and violence at its early stages.

Perhaps the most glaring oversight was Turkey, where the administration offered no public criticism of attacks on Kurdish villagers by Turkish security forces, or of the murder of journalists and community leaders in the Kurdish southeast. State Department spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler went so far as to congratulate Turkey on its "use of restraint" when Turkish security forces killed at least 91 demonstrators during the Kurdish New Year. Spokesman Richard Boucher said that the State Department "supported the efforts the Turkish government is making to ensure the cultural and political rights of all Turkish citizens, including those of Kurdish origin," ignoring continuing restrictions on the use of the Kurdish language in courts, schools and official settings, and ongoing harassment of Kurds who attempt to express their ethnic identity.

Other examples abound of the administration's public paralysis in confronting the problem of communal violence.

 The administration voiced little concern as right-wing violence against foreigners raged in Germany. Worse, only two weeks after the police sat by as right-wing skinheads attacked 150 Vietnamese workers trapped in a burning building, the State Department praised the police for working to prevent such attacks.

 The administration opened embassies in all of the new states of the former Soviet Union, but as these states threatened to become engulfed in ethnic violence, the State Department assigned only one foreign service officer to the full-time monitoring of human rights-a second secretary in the U.S. embassy in Russia.

 The administration only belatedly acknowledged mounting evidenceof government complicity in some of the violence in South Africa, and even then did so obliquely.

The administration was on no firmer ground once clan or ethnic tension exploded into full-scale warfare, as it did in Somalia and former Yugoslavia. In each case, it took months before the disasters received the high-level attention they deserved. Until then, the administration reinforced the U.N.'s short-sighted strategy by insisting on viewing these conflicts largely as humanitarian emergencies, without attending to the human rights violations at their core.

A Narrow Vision of Democracy

The effects of the narrow interpretation of democracy favored by the Bush and Reagan administrations for most of the past 12 years became particularly apparent in 1992. The vision of democracy as little more than elections had long been manifest in Latin America, where these administrations actively supported elected governments that continued to tolerate and defend violent military abuses. More recently, the cost of this undue deference to elected leaders has risen as the victors of several elections themselves proceeded openly to flout human rights standards. Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia, Franjo Tudjman of Croatia and Zviad Gamsakhurdia of Georgia are examples of this new breed of elected despot. A long tradition of promoting democracy in its fullest dimension-not only free and fair elections but also respect for the rights of minorities and the rule of law-would have given the Bush administration surer footing in addressing this form of abusive majoritarianism. Instead, hesitancy and inconsistency have been the order of the day.

The lack of a more complete conception of democracy made the administration's response to Algeria's cancellation of the Islamist-won parliamentary elections seem particularly arbitrary. Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Edward Djerejian decried the "one person, one vote, one time" formula that he attributed to Algeria's Islamic Salvation Front, as if unaware that the ruling National Liberation Front's 30-year record on national elections could be summed up as "no vote, no way, never." Nor did the administration publicly protest when the Algerian military sent thousands of suspected Islamist activists to remote desert camps without charge or trial, often after torture. What emerged was a not a principled defense of democratic values but a preoccupation with defeating Islamic fundamentalism.

In other countries, the administration's response to political Islam suffered from a similar lack of principle.

 The administration started publicly criticizing restrictions on speech and association during Lebanon's extended electoral process only after Iranian-supported Hezbollah and its supporters emerged with the largest bloc in parliament.

 It offered no public criticism of incommunicado detention and routine torture of suspected Islamist extremists in Egypt.

 It registered no public reaction to the reported use of torture and coerced confessions at a mass trial of Islamists in Tunisia.

Even when pro-Western governments adopted restrictive legislation in an effort to appease Islamist extremists-such as Hudood ordinances in Pakistan that discriminate against women-the

administration eschewed public criticism.

The loss of the steady coordinates of the Cold War could be seen in the administration's inconsistent views on democracy elsewhere as well. Secretary Baker, in discussing the former Soviet Union, repeatedly linked the concepts of "building democracy" and "building free markets," as if promoting a capitalist economy was all that was needed to bring about a democratic system. The same belief guided U.S. policy toward China, where the administration was willing to threaten trade sanctions to advance U.S. business interests, but stuck to its policy of "engagement, rather than confrontation" when it came to political reforms or the release of detained pro-democracy activists.

Administration officials cited cultural differences in Saudi Arabia and Kuwait to explain their unwillingness to press harder for democratic reform. The State Department praised political reforms in Saudi Arabia as "very important steps" when in fact they expanded royal authority and outlawed elections as Western imports not suitable for Saudi citizens. U.S. Ambassador Edward Ghnem praised October elections in Kuwait as "extremely good at establishing at a grassroots level the idea of democracy" even though all women and most men had been denied the right to vote.

Other elected governments avoided U.S. criticism because their serious human rights violations lacked a traditional political motive. For example, both President Bush and Defense Secretary Richard Cheney visited Brazil without issuing any public protest over the huge number of summary executions by death squads and the police. By any objective measure these killings rank among the most serious abuses in Latin America, but because the victims are homeless children and common criminal suspects rather than dissenters, the administration seems not to have registered these murders as human rights offenses. Nor, for apparently similar reasons, has the administration protested the Brazilian courts' continued acceptance of the "legitimate defense of honor" to acquit men who kill their allegedly unfaithful wives or lovers.

The effects of the narrow vision of democracy that has reigned in the White House for much of the last 12 years were also highlighted in 1992 by the behavior of insurgent groups that had once received U.S. backing. When the regime of Afghan President Najibullah fell to the mujahidin, the State Department welcomed the victory after "a long and bitter struggle for self-determination which won admiration and support from around the world." But after years of pressing for this victory against communism, the U.S. government lost interest in Afghanistan as competition among abusive mujahidin factions threatens to lead the country toward a humanitarian crisis. unita, the Angolan insurgency, also proved an embarrassment in 1992 when it resorted to violence rather than accept its defeat in elections that international observers characterized as free and fair, although the State Departmentcalled on it to abide by the election results.

Accountability for Past Abuses

The Bush administration continued in 1992 its refusal to press newly elected governments to prosecute those responsible for past gross abuses. This eagerness to let bygones be bygones hobbled efforts to build new democracies, since the atmosphere remained poisoned by the wounds of the victims and their families, and a precedent of impunity was left intact for those who might contemplate future resort to human rights abuse.

 The administration compromised the potential precedent of accountability being set in El Salvador by refusing to release important information from its files on human rights abuses by the Salvadoran military.

 The administration blamed ousted President Jean-Bertrand Aristide of Haiti for the collapse of a political accord once he interpreted it, fairly, to allow prosecution of those military officials responsible for the massacre of Haitians following the September 1991 coup.

 The administration remained publicly silent about the South African government's effort to amnesty its security forces for past abuses, much as it and the Reagan administration had silently countenanced such amnesties by Latin American dictatorships as they handed over power to elected civilian governments.

 The administration dropped sanctions against the Thai military following the return to elected civilian government, even though no one had been prosecuted for the massacre of pro-democracy demonstrators and key questions remained unanswered about the military's role.

 The administration opposed sanctions on the Indonesian military, ultimately enacted by Congress, which are designed to press for prosecution of those responsible for the November 1991 massacre in East Timor.

 The administration remained publicly silent on the decommunization process in Eastern Europe, neither endorsing the goal of accountability nor expressing concern over the human rights compromises that have afflicted the process.

Human Rights in the United States

The administration's lack of concern with establishing accountability for human rights violations was also apparent in its approach toward human rights violations in the United States. U.S. Border Patrol agents along the Mexican border abuse undocumented migrants with impunity because federal law enforcement officials routinely cover up and defend the most egregious conduct. Abuse by local police officers, such as the brutal beating of Rodney King, is also facilitated by a federal government that, despite its duty under international law and the U.S. constitution to set standardsfor police conduct, treats police violence as a "local issue" with which it need be little concerned.

The administration took the positive step of ratifying the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights but refused to make it part of U.S. domestic law or to grant U.S. citizens the right to bring complaints to the U.N. body of experts charged with enforcing the treaty. Similarly, in a case pending before the U.S. Supreme Court, the administration asserted a narrow reading of the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act to oppose efforts by a U.S. citizen to obtain monetary damages for his torture and arbitrary detention by Saudi officials. The administration also sought to block legislation that would have clarified the right to obtain such redress.

The administration flouted one of the cardinal doctrines of international law-the principle of nonrefoulement-when it began forcibly repatriating Haitian boat people intercepted at sea without screening them to exempt those who risk political persecution. It also urged the U.S. Supreme Court, successfully, to uphold the kidnapping by U.S. government agents of a criminal suspect from Mexican soil without Mexico's consent. What emerges is a cynical attitude toward international law-a view that it applies to others but not to ourselves-which does immeasurable damage to the human rights cause.

U.S. Aid

While the threatened or actual withholding of aid can be one of the most powerful tools to promote human rights, the administration continued to distribute foreign assistance to a range of governments that commit serious abuses. Most notable were the three largest recipients of U.S. aid: Israel, Egypt and Turkey. None was publicly told by the administration that it risked cuts in aid if it continued to violate human rights (although the administration did condition loan guarantees to Israel on the related question of settlements in the occupied territories). Nor did the administration offer a public explanation of the "extraordinary circumstances" that compel ongoing aid despite persistent abuses. The administration successfully lobbied to remove human rights conditions on aid to Colombia and Peru, while seeking unsuccessfully to send aid to a Salvadoran military that remains unpurged of those responsible for systematic violent abuse over the past 12 years.

Multilateral Action to Promote Human Rights

One product of an increasingly multipolar world is the growing importance of enlisting other major powers in efforts to promote human rights. During the Cold War, a firm U.S. stance on a human rights issue, particularly concerning an ally, was often enough to effect change. Today, however, as several important centers of power emerge, the U.S. voice on human rights is more effective if joined by other concerned governments. The potential U.S. effect on human rights-even as a lone voice-remains exceedingly powerful, so a lack of multilateral support should never be an excuse for inaction. But there are significant advantages to enlisting other major powers.

Kenya and Malawi provide two recent examples of the effective exertion of multilateral pressure. In each case, after a World Bank-convened conference of donors conditioned aid on democratic reform, the target government began tentative moves toward multiparty elections. Other recent efforts by the Bush administration to enlist multilateral support occurred at donors meetings on Sri Lanka and Indonesia. Yet the redress of human rights violations in other countries would benefit from a multilateral approach:

 The U.N.-sponsored peace process in Cambodia is in jeopardy because of a recalcitrant Khmer Rouge which receives critical economic support through its lucrative trade with Thai military and business leaders.

 The significance of the U.S. refusal to support some World Bank loans to China because of continuing repression was undercut by the administration's failure to encourage other economic powers to adopt a similar stance. China in 1992 thus received more loans from the World Bank than any other country.

 Despite international sanctions, the miliary junta in Burma continues to be armed by China and kept afloat by trade with China, Thailand and others.

In several cases the failure of a multilateral effort lies as much in Brussels or Tokyo as in Washington. While the European Community now promises to consider human rights in its trade and aid agreements, it has cited technicalities in refusing to join the oas-sponsored embargo of Haiti, rendering the embargo a largely ineffective tool. Although Japan is ostensibly committed to use its extensive foreign aid to promote human rights and democratization-and restricted aid to Kenya, Malawi and Burma-it has said it prefers a "soft approach" (quiet diplomacy) to the "hard approach" it attributes to the United States and others. Thus in 1992, despite the lack of human rights progress in China, it gave China $1.1 billion in aid and received Chinese Communist Party leader Jiang Zemin in Tokyo.

The Clinton Administration

As Bill Clinton prepares to assume office, he will find guidance mainly by counterexample from the Bush administration. The systematic downgrading of human rights that characterized the Bush years has had its cost in a foreign policy that was often reactive, uninspiring and analytically handicapped. In the name of pragmatism, the Bush administration frequently ignored the very real consequences of the human rights ideal. To reintroduce human rights as a central element of U.S. foreign policy, and to reap its potential power in preventing and curtailing the violence and devastation that has become so prevalent, is a critical task facing the Clinton administration.

In pursuit of this goal, the new administration soon after taking office should articulate the human rights principles that will guide its foreign policy. It should make clear that it:

 understands that ethnic violence is far more than the unleashing of latent animosities, and intends to identify and condemn governmental actions that aggravate ethnic tensions, so that discriminatory and incendiary conduct is stopped before violent conflict breaks out;

 does not equate democracy with the mere holding of periodic elections, but measures all governments, including elected ones, by uniform indicators of respect for human rights, including respect for the rights of minorities, the strength of curbs on arbitrary violence, the health of civil society, and the vitality of the rule of law;

 will not close its eyes to the abuses of the past, but recognizes that holding perpetrators of gross abuses accountable for their actions is necessary both as a matter of respect for the victims and as a foundation for democracy;

 will assess respect for human rights not only with regard to traditional political violations but also by reference to abuses against women, minorities and common criminal suspects;

 vows to introduce an even-handedness into U.S. human rights policy by publicly condemning gross violations, whether the author is friend or foe;

 intends to abide by U.S. law prohibiting aid to governments that consistently commit gross violations of human rights, and to use that prohibition to pressure all aid recipients to halt gross abuses;

 promises to enlist multilateral support for the promotion of human rights, without allowing a lack of multilateral consensus to serve as an excuse for U.S. inaction;

 understands that respect for human rights is a critical component of any peace accord, be it those negotiated by the U.N., such as in El Salvador and Cambodia, or those principally orchestrated by the United States, such as the Arab-Israeli peace talks;

 places a high priority on ending human rights and humanitarian disasters, and will press the U.N. and other multilateral bodies to take effective action to stop them; and

 will apply human rights standards at home as well as abroad, including by ending summary forced repatriation of Haitian boat people, aggressively working to end abuse by federal and local law enforcement agents, and calling for legislation that makes the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights a part of U.S. law, with a right of individual recourse to the U.N. Human Rights Committee.

The Work of Human Rights Watch

The human rights disasters of 1992 consumed vast quantities of our resources. With so many lives in the balance, we felt compelled to devote extraordinary energies to the war in former Yugoslavia and the conflict and famine in Somalia. In each case, we were at the forefront of efforts both to convey the enormity of the disaster in progress and to rally international support for an effective response. We also worked to alert the world to the possibility of impending disasters in Afghanistan, Iraq, Liberia, Mozambique and Sudan.

Given the role that communal violence plays in most of these actual and potential disasters, we saw as a major priority the identification of the causes of such conflict. In Burma, Germany, Kenya, Nigeria, South Africa and the former Soviet Union, among other places, we sought to highlight the role that governmental policies of discrimination and abuse can play in exacerbating tensions and fomenting violence. When discrimination took the form of disputes over citizenship-an area where international legal guarantees are particularly weak-we sought to expand protection, in such places as the Baltic states, Burma, the Dominican Republic and Kuwait.

In both the disasters and the lesser communal conflicts, we profited from a relatively broad mandate to promote civil and political rights that allows us to address not only traditional prisoner concerns but also abuses committed in the context of armed conflict. International humanitarian law, or the laws of war, provides a well established legal framework to confront such abuses that fall outside the scope of traditional human rights law, such as indiscriminate shelling and attacks on civilian structures. The laws of war, which address all parties to an armed conflict, also permit us to deal with abuses by rebel militias that are not embraced by human rights standards which apply only to governments. Since abuses of this sort can lead to extreme suffering, we were able to direct our work to the matters of greatest concern to the actual and potential victims.

Despite the enormity of the abuses often associated with armed conflict, we resisted allowing them to keep us from our work on countries where less dire circumstances allowed the possibility of greater hope and progress. As the number of elected governments grew, we worked to ensure that they fulfilled the promise of democracy by creating the conditions of security, freedom and the rule of law that allow civil society to flourish. We paid particular attention to governments' response to such challenges as drug trafficking and religious extremism, which often lead to a compromise of democratic values and violations of human rights.

As we have for many years, we pressed to hold accountable those who are responsible for past abuses, both because we feel a duty to the victims and because we believe that such accountability provides the most secure foundation for future respect for human rights. The decommunization process in Eastern Europe put a new twist on the issue, since the problem we confronted was not so much resistance to accountability by still-powerful forces as it was an overzealous and unchecked quest for revenge and an inadequate grasp of or refusal to respect due process principles. We also undertook a research project of unprecedented size in northern Iraq, todocument the Iraqi government's Anfal campaign of systematic slaughter against the Kurds. Because in our view this 1988 campaign is the clearest case of genocide since World War II, we hope ultimately to trigger international criminal prosecution and trial of the Iraqi government and its leading figures for these horrendous crimes. As 1992 draws to an end and the world continues to grapple with how to end the "ethnic cleansing" in former Yugoslavia, we are contemplating a similar undertaking with respect to war crimes there.

We also kept up monitoring and pressure on such stalwart violators as China, Cuba, Iran, Saudi Arabia and Syria. Our experience with such seemingly unshakable regimes as the former Soviet Union reconfirms our belief that persistent pressure on human rights violators can pay off even in the case of apparently intractable governments.

We continued in our effort to bolster human rights advocacy in the portions of the civil and political rights agenda that tend to be neglected. Our thematic projects on prisoners' rights and women's rights contributed to this effort in a range of countries. We played a similar role as we continued our work on rural violence and police abuse against common criminal suspects.

As the U.N. influence on human rights grew dramatically with its expanded involvement in peace settlements, relief operations and protective undertakings, our attention to the U.N. also increased. With occasional exceptions, we historically have neglected the U.N. human rights machinery in Geneva because we felt that others were at work there, and that Human Rights Watch could have a more significant impact with our limited resources if we pursued alternative avenues. But as the U.N. becomes the key medium for the international community to address human rights matters, we have followed and contributed to its actions more carefully.

The work with the U.N. has forced us to address such conceptual issues as the relationship of human rights to peace, famine and ethnic conflict. The centrality of these complex issues to the U.N.'s most important undertakings presents an enormous challenge to the human rights movement but also offers unprecedented opportunities for influence.

We also contributed to the debate initiated by a series of governments that sought to assert cultural differences or development needs as an excuse to avoid human rights scrutiny. In reports that we submitted to two international conferences-the environmental summit in Rio de Janeiro and the Non-Aligned Movement summit in Jakarta-we sought to demonstrate that respect for civil and political rights is both compatible with and essential for environmental protection, sustainable development and economic justice.

We continued to devote substantial energy to shaping U.S. foreign policy, since we believe that Washington has tremendous potential to use its influence to promote respect for human rights. Increasingly, however, Washington's influence on human rights matters is matched by Tokyo's and Brussels's, so we spent more time trying to affect the human rights policies of the Japanese government and the European Community. Both have vowed to use their foreign aid to promote human rights, but each shows the sametemptations often exhibited in Washington to allow other interests to get in the way. As in Washington, we believe that persistent pressure will bring us the greatest opportunity to make these vows a reality. We hope to use similar techniques to introduce human rights concerns through the "good governance" criterion used by the World Bank. And our new arms project will allow us to begin influencing human rights practices through pressure to curtail the transfer of arms to abusive governments.

Finally, we continued to expand our work on the United States, both by addressing human rights violations for which our investigative and reporting methodology could make a significant contribution, and by filing legal briefs in cases addressing civil and political rights issues in which our expertise on international standards or practices could shed useful light. The many governments that cited the acquittals in the Rodney King beating case and the subsequent riots in Los Angeles to deflect criticism of their own human rights practices demonstrated to us once again that respect for human rights in the United States is important not only in its own right but also if the U.S. government is to play an effective role in promoting human rights worldwide.

What follows is a review of human rights in 53 countries, plus combined chapters on the countries that now make up former Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union. The report covers 1992, through the end of November. For each country, we describe some of the major human rights developments of the year, U.S. human rights policy toward that country (supplemented at times by a discussion of the role played by other international actors such as the U.N.), and our own response to those developments. This is our tenth annual review of U.S. human rights policy, and the third report that also describes human rights developments worldwide.

We have not in this volume included a chapter on every country on which we worked, nor have we discussed every issue of importance. Rather, the countries and issues treated reflect the focus of our work, which in turn is determined by a variety of factors: the seriousness of abuses, our access to information about them, our ability to influence governmental practices leading to the abuse, and our desire to balance our work across various political and other divides.


AFRICA WATCH OVERVIEW

Human Rights Developments

Human rights in Africa in 1992 were dominated by the twin themes of democratization and the descent into chaos and humanitarian disaster. Other concerns, such as the conduct of civil wars, arrest and detention, and accountability for past abuses, also persisted.

The cataclysm that has overwhelmed Somalia in 1992 has been called the most severe humanitarian disaster in the world today. The 21-year rule of former dictator Mohamed Siad Barre, who was driven from power in 1991, left the country with neither the institutions of civil society, nor intact structures of traditional governance and conflict resolution. After Barre's departure, the values he promoted-greed, clan loyalty and militarism-have rent the country. Two decades of grievances are being settled with the huge armory provided by both superpowers. The result has been an extraordinarily brutal civil war fought on the streets of Mogadishu and other towns, killing tens of thousands of civilians, and a famine of unparalleled severity, striking the disadvantaged farming communities of southern Somalia and killing at least 100,000. The war and famine feed on each other in a spiral of violence and deprivation: conflict is the main cause of the famine, while the need for food is an important motive for fighting. Meanwhile, hundreds of thousands of Somalis have fled to Kenya, Ethiopia, Yemen and elsewhere, where they, too, have been subject to cruelty and neglect.

In this picture of apparent hopelessness, the chief ray of hope has been the dedication of ordinary Somalis who have struggled to tend the wounded, provide relief, and resolve the conflict. Their contribution, often unseen by the outside world, has been a critical element in the effort to relieve suffering and achieve respect for human rights in Somalia. It is on their efforts that a future Somalia must be built.

The Somali disaster has drawn attention to the negligence of the international community, notably the United Nations, in failing to prevent a foreseeable tragedy. With one notable exception through the end of November, U.N. diplomatic and humanitarian interventions were late, inept, and done more with an eye to publicity than to resolving the problems. The exception was Ambassador Mohamed Sahnoun, special envoy of U.N. Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who displayed extraordinary diplomatic skills and a refreshing willingness to criticize his own organization, but who was forced in late October to resign, precisely because his honesty had offended his superiors in New York. Sahnoun's commitment and professionalism were matched by the efforts of a few voluntary agencies, above all the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc), which spent up to half its worldwide budget on Somalia. Rarely in the history of humanitarian assistance can an entire country have owed so much to a single voluntary agency as Somalia owes to the icrc.

Central authority in a number of other African countries was on the brink of disintegration in 1992. Parts of Mozambique had been reduced to that condition in the 1980s, and in 1992, despite the long-awaited peace accord between the government and the renamo rebels, the disappearance of any form of effective government throughout most rural areas of the country has appeared to draw closer by the month. The severe drought of 1991-1992 undermined the unified command of both armies, as soldiers turned to looting and pillaging to provide for themselves. Relief agencies are already describing Mozambique as "the next Somalia."

Meanwhile, Liberia, having been brought back from the brink in 1990 through the intervention of a coalition of west African states, was plunged into civil war once more. Much of southern Sudan came to resemble Somalia as the Sudan People's Liberation Army fragmented, and severe famine loomed once more.

One of the most tragic cases has been Angola, where the hopes for democratization were dashed in an explosion of violence. At the end of September, Angolans went to the polls in their first ever free elections, 16 months after a peace accord between the government of President Eduardo Dos Santos and the rebel unita movement, led by Jonas Savimbi. U.N. monitors pronounced themselves satisfied with the fairness of the elections, but when it became clear that Savimbi had lost, he denounced the elections and returned to warfare. Both the government and unita began targeting each other's civilian supporters and summarily killing them.

Throughout the continent, countries have moved unsteadily down the path of democratization, while repressive rulers have used violence in an effort to destabilize democratic transitions. In Kenya, President Daniel arap Moi is implicated in provoking rural violence in an effort to fulfil his own prophecy that multiparty democracy will be a recipe for ethnic conflict. Zaire's President Mobutu Sese Seko has similarly sought to undermine the democratic transition with military rampages in rural areas. The hopes for democracy in Togo have faded as factions of the armed forces under the control of President Gnassingb Eyadema have initiated violent attacks against its opponents.

Many transitions to democracy have been blatantly manipulated. In Nigeria, the military government of President Ibrahim Babangida has repeatedly interfered in the much-extended transition to civilian rule, undermining the vitality of the civil institutions that are so essential to a functioning democracy and doing his utmost to predetermine the outcome of elections. In mid-November, Babangida again postponed the hand-over to a civilian president for a further eight months, raising fears that popular resentments would turn violent, as they have in the past. In Cameroon, President Paul Biya won a general election amid widespread accusations of fraud, and immediately launched a crackdown on the opposition. A similar manipulation of the transition process in Ghana culminated on November 3 when Flight-Lieutenant Jerry Rawlings was returned as elected president. The incumbent government in Mauritania was returned in an election in January marred by widespread fraud and disenfranchisement of oppositionsupporters. The hopes for a rapid establishment of peace and democracy in Ethiopia faded with widespread ethnic and organizational violence, and deeply flawed regional elections.

A similar process has been at work in South Africa, where violence (in the townships, rural areas and nominally independent homelands) has become the single greatest threat to the prospect of a peaceful transition to majority rule. More than 2,000 were killed, as further evidence emerged of the government's role in stoking the conflicts.

In all these countries, former rulers have sought to protect themselves by evading accountability for past abuses. Amnesties in South Africa and Ghana have allowed those guilty of gross abuses to remain in government and the security forces. In Mauritania, the government continued to deny any responsibility for its direct involvement in human rights abuses. In countries where there has been real change, such as Zambia and Ethiopia, political priorities have interfered with the fair treatment of members of the former regime. In Zambia, bitterness against former President Kaunda has led to vengeful stripping of his civil rights. In Ethiopia, preoccupation with other pressing political concerns has led to a neglect of the need to bring members of the former regime to trial.

The pitfalls of pluralism have not deterred democracy advocates in Africa's remaining one-party states. After prolonged debate, Tanzania moved toward multiparty democracy in 1992. On October 18, Life-President Hastings Kamuzu Banda of Malawi finally agreed to allow his people the choice of a multiparty system. Tragically, two days later, Orton Chirwa, a long-serving political prisoner, died in detention. Meanwhile, his wife, Vera, remains in prison, and democracy advocates are being harassed and arrested.

The government of Sudan stands out as one that has failed to make even cosmetic concessions to democratic reform. Wedded to a fundamentalist ideology, the ruling Muslim Brothers have dismantled all institutions of civil society, and have arbitrarily arrested and tortured dissidents. Determined to reshape the country in the image of an Islamic state, the government is engaging in several programs of massive forced relocation and "ethnic cleansing," and has mounted the largest offensive yet in the war in the south, halting almost all emergency relief operations to the civilian population. Sudan faces a humanitarian and human rights disaster on a horrifying scale in 1993.

The events of 1992 served to underline the intimate links between human rights and famine. The humanitarian disasters in Sudan, Somalia and Mozambique all sprang from extraordinarily abusive wars; only in the last case has the weather also played a role. The southern African drought, hailed as the precursor of the worst famine this century, is also closely intertwined with human rights abuses. In each southern African country, a specific set of governmental actions has been instrumental in reducing sections of the population to imminent famine.

Zimbabwe is the clearest example. In 1990-1991, the Zimbabwe government exported its strategic grain reserves, leaving it with nothing when drought struck in 1991-1992. This policyreversal-which would have been deeply unpopular-was not subjected to public debate because journalists were prevented from raising it. Mozambican refugees in Malawi, Zimbabwe, Swaziland and South Africa were also subject to abuses that exposed them to starvation. In particular the South African government's refusal to recognize their refugee status (it is not signatory to the 1951 Refugee Convention) meant that refugees were subject to forced labor at wages below subsistence levels and refoulement (forced return) to drought-stricken areas of Mozambique.

The Right to Monitor

In 1992, human rights advocates in Africa were freer than ever before to obtain and publicize information about human rights violations, and to organize to pressure governments to rectify abuses. However, throughout the continent, the institutions of civil society that are the key to the protection of human rights remain fragile. In some countries, such as Sudan and Malawi, conventional repression has been the norm. In others, such as Ethiopia and Mozambique, the legal framework for a free press and independent human rights organizations now exists, but a combination of factors, including a legacy of fear instilled by decades of repressive government, have prevented the emergence of truly effective human rights advocacy. In many countries, a lack of resources and the temptations of political involvement in democratic experiments have hampered human rights advocacy, as have the challenges presented by monitoring issues relating to rural violence and famine.

Despite these obstacles and setbacks, advocacy of human rights has continued to flourish, and the language of human rights has gained ever greater currency throughout the continent. The peace agreement that brought an end to the civil war in Rwanda included a provision for a human rights commission to investigate abuses during the war, and several national and international human rights organizations are collaborating in this initiative. There have been moves to set up independent human rights organizations in countries that have never had them before, such as Mozambique and Eritrea. Some established human rights organizations have broadened their vision to encompass neglected issues, such as rural violence, famine and abuses against women. Individual journalists, lawyers, church members and others have continued to campaign on behalf of human rights. Even in the darkest circumstances of Sudan, Bishop Paride Taban has been an outstanding advocate for peace and human rights in the south, while a number of courageous individuals, who must remain anonymous, maintain their clandestine monitoring in the north.

U.S. Policy

For the most part, there appeared to be a policy vacuum with respect to Africa in the U.S. administration. Since the end of the Cold War, the strategic value of African countries has dissipated, and only Nigeria, Angola and South Africa are significant trading partners. U.S.-African relations are no longer those of asuperpower trying to entice clients, but rather orphaned African governments desperately searching for a patron. Speaking on July 26, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Herman Cohen said that "the end of the cold war has changed the nature of U.S. foreign policy, allowing us to concentrate on social and economic development in Africa without the past preoccupation with strategic interests." However, with this change, the degree of concentration has waned considerably.

The policy of supporting democracy and "good governance" has in principle informed U.S. policy. The notion of "democratization" has thus been widely accepted by African rulers of all shades, despite-or perhaps because of-a notable lack of analysis as to what it actually consists of. There is a danger that this vagueness, combined with disillusion with electoral experiments in countries such as Angola and the perception of hopelessness in Somalia and Liberia, will encourage those in the incoming Clinton administration who prefer to ignore Africa altogether.

The Bush administration inherited some legacies from the Cold War era, such as support for President Mobutu in Zaire and Jonas Savimbi in Angola. In 1992, the appalling human rights records of both men, and their lack of strategic value, belatedly led to U.S. estrangement from these erstwhile allies. The U.S. was active in trying to persuade Savimbi to accept the verdict of the Angolan electorate and not return to fighting. However, in these countries-as in Liberia and Somalia-there has been no official acknowledgment that the current disasters spring in large part from unquestioned backing of abusive clients during the Cold War.

The Bush administration has vigorously opposed a number of abusive regimes in Africa. Partly due to the efforts of Ambassador Smith Hempstone, the U.S. has maintained its pressure on President Moi of Kenya to stick to his promises of holding elections. In a new development, it has exerted serious economic pressure on Malawi, while continuing to distance itself from Mauritania and condemning Sudan with exceptionally strong language.

South Africa was, once again, the country where U.S. interest was greatest. In 1992, the administration lifted most of the remaining sanctions against South Africa, taking an optimistic reading of President F.W. de Klerk's willingness and ability to pursue democratic reform. While these actions have undoubtedly encouraged de Klerk, and may have influenced the voters in the all-white referendum who overwhelmingly supported the transition to majority rule, they have continued to give insufficient attention to serious ongoing abuses. The administration belatedly began to give recognition to the mounting evidence of government complicity in the violence in South Africa and the lack of accountability for abuses by the police. Only after the Bisho massacre in September did the administration publicly address the disastrous human rights situation in the nominally independent homelands and the ultimate responsibility of the South African government for that state of affairs. The Bush administration's criticism of South Africa has consisted, again, of too little, too late.

For many countries, humanitarian imperatives should have dictated U.S. policy. Effective action would have required making greater use of the U.N. system. In Somalia, the Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance responded generously to appeals by voluntary agencies and the icrc, but for much of 1992 there was no commensurate commitment from President Bush or the National Security Council. Only after the courageous visit of Senator Nancy Kassebaum to Mogadishu, on the eve of the Republican National Convention, and criticism by presidential candidate Bill Clinton, was an emergency operation belatedly launched. And not until late November did the administration propose using U.S. troops to provide needed security for the delivery of food.

The Role of the United Nations

Nineteen ninety-two could have been an auspicious year for Africa at the United Nations. The new Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, is an African with experience of diplomacy in the Horn of Africa. His appointment in March of Ambassador Mohamed Sahnoun as special envoy to Somalia appeared to confirm a level of commitment that was much needed, following the disastrous involvement of Assistant Secretary General James Jonah earlier in the year. However, as the year wore on, the hopes for the reforms needed to make the U.N. Secretariat truly effective began to fade. They received a severe, perhaps fatal setback with the forced resignation of Sahnoun in late October, after his public criticism of U.N. shortcomings on Somalia. This reaction indicated a return to the dark days of institutional self-protection, at the expense of humanitarian imperatives.

The creation of the post of Under-Secretary General for Humanitarian Affairs on March 1, and the appointment of Ambassador Jan Eliasson, also promised much for Africa. These hopes, too, were to be disappointed. Eliasson chose to define his mandate narrowly, excluding the possibility of addressing the human rights crises that give rise to most humanitarian disasters. A combination of indifferent staff, organizational sclerosis, and bureaucratic infighting also hampered the effectiveness of the new Department for Humanitarian Affairs. On his visits to Africa in April and September, Eliasson failed to achieve progress in either Sudan or Somalia.

The U.N.'s failure in Sudan is particularly revealing, as it gives the lie to the often-cited excuse that the U.N. is only as strong as its member nations, particularly those on the Security Council. Most of the major powers at the U.N., notably the European countries and the U.S., have condemned Sudan in extremely strong terms and used a variety of diplomatic and economic measures against the country. All were eager that the U.N. should follow suit. However, Secretary Eliasson preferred to follow the established pattern in dealing with Sudan through "quiet diplomacy," despite the accumulated evidence of the failure of this strategy over almost a decade.

The U.N. specialized agencies have continued to show a resistance to reform and a lack of accountability. Too manyoperations throughout the continent are plagued with slowness, overconcern with bureaucratic niceties, organizational jealousies, careerism and indifference to human suffering. The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) has continued to operate with an agenda set chiefly by media profile rather than humanitarian needs. The urgent need for reform has never been greater.

The Work of Africa Watch

Rakiya Omaar, Executive Director of Africa Watch since its creation in 1988, resigned from her position in 1992 to devote her full attention to the Somali crisis. In her four-and-a-half years as director of Africa Watch, she set the agenda and standards that have established Africa Watch's international reputation as a leading human rights organization dealing with Africa.

Africa Watch's major effort in 1992 concerned Somalia. There were two Africa Watch missions to the country, and an unprecedented level of advocacy. Between late July and late September, Africa Watch staff gave more than 80 radio and television interviews, in addition to providing numerous articles in the U.S. and international press. Africa Watch also testified on Somalia three times before the U.S. Congress. This work broke new ground in a number of ways. It included analysis of the close links between the armed conflict and the lack of food, and it included penetrating criticism of the negligence of the United Nations.

As in previous years, Africa Watch was active on Sudan, especially covering issues that were neglected by other human rights and humanitarian organizations, such as the relocations from Khartoum and the abuses against the Nuba. Again, the willingness of the U.N. to make unacceptable compromises with the Sudan government was a target of criticism.

Africa Watch produced a comprehensive account of human rights in Mozambique, entitled Conspicuous Destruction: War, Famine and the Reform Process in Mozambique. The report was published in July, just as the warring parties negotiated the terms of a cease-fire.

Africa Watch closely followed abuses relating to the transition to democracy in Nigeria as well as attacks against civil society. Similarly, Africa Watch analyzed efforts by the Mobutu government in Zaire to stop the democratization process, and documented the army's attack on peaceful demonstrators in February. Human rights abuses against democracy advocates in Mauritania, Cameroon and Togo were also monitored throughout the year. Africa Watch remained an important source of information on the deteriorating human rights situation in Liberia, especially after renewed warfare engulfed the country in October.

Africa Watch has also undertaken two investigations into the problem of land mines, one in northern Somalia and one in Angola. Africa Watch also investigated the links between human rights abuses and the creation of famine, and contributed a substantial chapter on this subject to the Human Rights Watch report Indivisible Human Rights, which was issued for the Non-Aligned Movement summit in Jakarta in September.
ETHIOPIA

Human Rights Developments

Nineteen ninety-two marked the first full year in power for the Transitional Government of Ethiopia, headed by the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (eprdf). The creation of the new government had produced high hopes for the establishment of peace and human rights, but instead the year saw the dawn of a sober reality.

In retrospect, the expectations that an impoverished, fractured, heavily armed country with no democratic tradition would quickly establish an unprecedented peace and democracy were unrealistic. The main partners in the coalition government-the eprdf and the Oromo Liberation Front (olf)-harbored deep mutual distrust. Moreover, the former ruling elite (variously termed "Amhara," "Shewan" and "Centralist") was vigorously opposed to the Transitional Government's radical program of political restructuring, in particular its regionalization plan, which envisaged granting "self-determination" to all "nationalities" (roughly equal to major ethnic groupings).

Nevertheless, there has been significant progress toward respect for human rights in Ethiopia, and the Transitional Government remains more accountable on human rights matters than any other government in Ethiopian history. However, both the government, including its chief force, the eprdf, and its opponents have committed serious abuses.

The central event in Ethiopia's political calendar was the regional elections. Repeatedly postponed, the elections were finally held in 12 of the country's 14 new regions on June 20. With international observers invited to oversee them, the elections proved so deeply flawed that many dismissed them as meaningless.

The electoral process took place against a backdrop of nine months of intermittent military clashes between eprdf and olf forces. Originally a rebel front, the eprdf by virtue of its military victory in 1991 became both a political party running the government and the national army. The olf, while also becoming a political party, retained a small and poorly equipped private army. Disputes over the territory to be controlled by each front led to a series of agreements between the two fronts in late 1991 and early 1992, each signed after prolonged and often bitter negotiations. Under the final agreement, both fronts vowed to encamp their forces before the regional elections were held. Each force flouted the agreement by keeping substantial numbers of soldiers in the field through election day. The eprdf in particular failed to encamp a significant number of its troops.

Intimidation was widespread before the election-practiced mainly by the eprdf, which controlled the great majority of the territory, but also by the olf and other fronts. eprdf forces aggressively promoted the cause of its member organization, the Oromo People's Democratic Organization (opdo), which was a directrival of the olf. olf offices were closed and candidates were harassed and imprisoned. Two leading members of the Islamic Front for the Liberation of Oromia, an organization increasingly allied with the olf, were killed at a roadblock in the town of Dire Dawa in January. The olf and related forces attacked eprdf military posts, sabotaged bridges and other installations, and increased their armed strength beyond that agreed to. On one occasion in March, olf forces attacked the major eprdf garrison of Harer in an attempt to capture it. The eprdf put opdo cadres in charge of voter registration wherever it could; the olf did the same in areas it controlled.

Other victims of harassment were the Ethiopian Democratic Union, which was prevented from opening an office in Tigray, and the All-Amhara People's Organization (aapo), whose candidates found themselves unable to register in many constituencies. The Ogaden National Liberation Front decided to participate in the elections in the ethnic Somali region, which were delayed until September, and many of its members were harassed and detained.

Shortly before the June elections, the olf and aapo announced their separate decisions to boycott the balloting. The olf also withdrew from the government, and its leaders went into voluntary exile or returned to the rural areas controlled by the olf.

On election day, the eprdf mounted offensives in a number of areas formerly controlled by the olf, such as western Wollega. Civilians and unarmed olf members were killed in the eprdf attacks.

Since the fall of President Mengistu Haile Mariam in May 1991, there has been an explosion of rural violence in the southern part of Ethiopia. The fighting has taken a variety of forms and has spread through diverse regions.

Some of the worst incidents of violence occurred when Oromo people attacked Amhara settlers in their vicinity. The Amhara settlers were originally introduced to the area to pacify it on behalf of the central government in the nineteenth century. Generations later, the legacy of communal antipathy remains. In the Arba Guugu area of Arsi, the history of Oromo-Amhara relations has been particularly tense, in part because the former government exploited the differences a decade ago in its suppression of olf activities in the area. In December 1991, olf cadres instigated repeated attacks on Amhara settlers. Villages were burned and civilians were killed. One hundred fifty-four Christians, mainly Amhara, were killed in Arba Guugu, and a further 46 were murdered in a neighboring area of Harerghe. In July and August 1992, another round of attacks were launched, allegedly at the instigation of a senior opdo cadre.

Harerghe province in the east of the country was the site of other fierce clashes. At Bedeno in mid-April, 150 civilians were reported killed, many of them by being forced to jump off cliffs. Most of those killed were ethnic Amhara. A commission of inquiry into the incident established by the Council of Representatives, the Ethiopian parliament, put the blame squarely on the olf. While admitting that its supporters were responsible for the massacre, the olf denied institutional responsibility.

On March 25, eprdf forces opened fire on a crowd of Oromo demonstrators at Weter, also in Harerghe. Different reports placed the death toll between 24 and 92. The eprdf claimed provocation, alleging that members of the crowd had fired first. The olf claimed that the demonstration was entirely peaceful.

In the north of Harerghe, the eprdf and the Issa and Gurgura Liberation Front have engaged in a series of clashes over the administration of the area and the regulation of trade. The Issa people are highly dependent upon trade, and have resisted attempts by the government to limit their access to trading licenses and their right to exact local customs duties. The Ethiopia-Djibouti railroad line has been sabotaged, and in response the government has sent punitive patrols to the area.

South of Harerghe, in the ethnic Somali area of the Ogaden, there have been a number of incidents of violence. For example, in the Kelafo area, members of the dominant Ogaden clan burned several dozen villages of the farming Rer Abbas people who live along the Shebelle river, forcing them to abandon their homes and take refuge in camps. A conflict between the Geri and Jaarso clans displaced 125,000 people near Jijiga, while 45,000 were affected by fighting between the Yabere and Isaaq.

In the far south of the country, there has been fighting between the Borena Oromo and the Marehan Somali. Other local ethnic groups, such as the Gujji, have also been drawn in. The fighting caused tens of thousands of refugees to flee to nearby Kenya. In the west, ethnic Anuak and Nuer have clashed, and Amhara settlers have been attacked. In July, an unknown number of highlanders were killed in a Nuer attack on a marketplace.

The rural violence has a multiplicity of causes: organizational rivalry; ethnic disputes, fuelled by the new ideology of "self-determination" which has encouraged an upsurge in nationalism; local disputes over land, water and grazing rights, in many cases brought about by the former government's policies of forcible relocation of the population; and simple banditry, often by some of the 400,000 demobilized members of Mengistu's army who now face widespread rural unemployment and poverty in an environment in which weapons are readily available.

Throughout 1992, the Transitional Government of Ethiopia has arbitrarily arrested and detained political opponents. In some cases, the government has shown an encouraging respect for habeas corpus, but these have been rare. For example, at the end of 1991, three leading members of the National Democratic Union, a "Centralist" opposition party, were detained for allegedly inciting violence during a demonstration in Addis Ababa. They were not formally charged. After writs of habeas corpus were presented, the three were released pending a court appearance.

After the olf withdrew from the electoral contest, the eprdf detained a large number of olf supporters. The precise numbers and the circumstances of the arrests have been impossible to ascertain. In April, the olf claimed that 250 of its members were being detained without charge. By October, there was credible evidence that well over 1,000 were imprisoned.

Ethnic Somalis suffered increasingly frequent abuses during 1992. Several leading members of the Ogaden national Liberation Front were detained early in the year, and at least one subsequently died in detention. The number of detainees reportedly reached 250 by September, when at least 11 people were killed while demonstrating against the eprdf. Also in September, a large number of Somalis, of both Ethiopian and Somali origin, were arrested in Addis Ababa. More than 1,000 were detained in what was described as a screening exercise to distinguish Ethiopian citizens from refugees.

One of the most glaring incidents of abuse was the refoulement of refugees from Sudan. In June, 23 Ethiopian refugees who were resident in Sudan were arrested by a joint Sudanese-eprdf security force. The 23 included four active members of the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Party (eprp), a long-time opponent of the eprdf that had engaged in armed combat against the eprdf and was not in the Transitional Government; and a number of disabled former eprp combatants, together with some friends, relatives and servants. One of those arrested was Tadele Demeke, an Ethiopian student at the University of West Anglia in Great Britain, who was visiting Sudan to see her former husband and to conduct research for a degree. The refugees were taken across the border and held in several prisons. The Ethiopian government at first denied holding them but belatedly released 19 (keeping the four political activists) after an international campaign.

The refoulement of the 23 refugees drew attention to the eprdf's secret detention centers in Tigray. In 1991, four political leaders of the eprp were captured in combat inside Ethiopia, and disappeared into secret prisons in Tigray. Africa Watch has obtained evidence suggesting that the four are still alive, but the government refuses to comment on the case. There are also an undisclosed number of dissidents from within eprdf ranks held in prison, some for several years. These prisoners are denied family visits and access to the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc). Some of them are reliably reported to have been subjected to physical abuse.

The olf has also engaged in arbitrary detention. In Jijiga, the olf kept a number of dissident Oromos in detention until the olf office in the town was forcibly taken by the eprdf in June. Some of these detainees reported having been tortured.

Conditions in detention have varied substantially. Officials of the former regime have been kept under good conditions and allowed family visits. Others held in secret or rural detention centers are often kept in overcrowded facilities with inadequate food. Confirmed reports of physical abuse are rare.

Except in a few cases in Addis Ababa, there is no effective judicial supervision of detentions. Policing and security functions in Ethiopia remain under the control of organizations that are not accountable under the law, or even answerable to the Council of Representatives.

Immediately after its military victory, the eprdf dissolved the security forces of the former regime, disbanded the army, andsuspended the police force pending an investigation of its members. The eprdf promised to reinstate a police force as soon as it could be purged of those guilty of abusive or corrupt practices. As a result, despite the laudable aim, Ethiopia was effectively without a police force until March 1992. This meant that the eprdf and the newly established neighborhood Peace and Stability Committees (pscs) were wholly responsible for policing. These organizations lacked the training and equipment for the task. For example, eprdf soldiers were required to police large and sometimes violent public demonstrations without riot control equipment but with only assault rifles. In addition, structures of accountability were not established.

The eprdf army assumed the role of national army in August 1991, although this was not publicly announced for several months, as well as a de facto policing role. eprdf forces have been responsible for a number of arbitrary actions against suspected criminals. Some alleged criminals have been shot on sight, although this was rarer in 1992 than in 1991. Others have been abusively detained. For example, 850 suspected robbers were held in a round-up in Addis Ababa in March. Their friends and relatives did not known where to turn to obtain information or to seek the prisoners' release. The eprdf routinely ignored court orders concerning alleged criminal detainees.

Peace and Stability Committees have faced similar problems. pscs were set up by the eprdf, and the eprdf zonal commanders have ensured that they are accountable only to the eprdf.

The Transitional Government has promised a new Judicial Commission and guarantees of the independence of the judiciary, and has enacted legislation to establish these. However, as in so many of the government's ventures, progress has been slow, creating a serious vacuum.

Throughout 1992, the judiciary was not functioning properly, either as an adjudicating body or as a check on arbitrary action by the eprdf and the pscs. Various factors contributed to the problem, including a proposal to suspend all judges who were formerly members of the Workers' Party of Ethiopia (wpe), the single party under Mengistu), delay in enacting new legislation, paralysis at the Ministry of Justice following the resignation of the minister early in the year, and the absence of a functioning police force. This created the vacuum in which the arbitrary actions of the eprdf and pscs were possible.

To fill this vacuum, justice in the north of the country is administered by People's Courts. Originally set up by the eprdf when it was a guerrilla movement, these courts are staffed by locally elected officials. Their shortcomings include a lack of independence from the eprdf, their failure to afford criminal defendants the presumption of innocence or access to counsel of their choice, and inconsistency in sentencing. The Ministry of Justice has criticized the procedures used by People's Courts, but so far without consequences.

Ethiopia under the eprdf has witnessed the flourishing of numerous political parties, representing an unprecedented varietyof opinions and platforms. These range from monarchists to separatists representing small ethnic groups. All parties can produce their own literature, and can organize public demonstrations.

The development of other institutions necessary for a flourishing civil society promises to be a slow process, despite the government's gradual enactment of legislation that is largely respectful of civil and political rights. The establishment of a free press is proving slow. A press law, with guarantees against censorship, was belatedly promulgated in October, but technical and commercial obstacles remain, particularly a lack of paper and printing presses. The formation of a Bar Association progressed slowly. The University of Addis Ababa was granted a new charter securing its academic freedom, and appointed its own President (a professor known to be wholly independent of the government). Academic appointments made under the previous government-including professors known to be hostile to the eprdf-have not been interfered with. However, there are indications that the government distrusts the university and is unhappy with the vigorous political debate that occurs on campus.

The government's treatment of the senior members of the Mengistu government has on the whole been good. None has been killed. About 1,500 remain in detention, under relatively good conditions, just outside Addis Ababa. However, the bringing of charges against them has been seriously delayed. Legislation for the creation of a special prosecutor to try those accused of crimes under the former government has been promised since the end of 1991, but little progress has been made.

During 1991, former wpe members were stripped of most of their civil rights, such as their freedom to work and travel. Most of these rights were restored in 1992. There has been no wholesale purge of government institutions. The only category of former wpe members who are barred as a group from their former posts are judges.

In 1991, workplace Grievance Hearing Committees (ghcs) were established to hear complaints against those who were corrupt during the former regime. The ghcs often acted in an arbitrary manner, dismissing and detaining people who were denied judicial recourse. These activities continued for the first months of 1992, until the ghcs were brought under the control of the Prime Minister's office and subjected to more systematic scrutiny. In May, the ghcs were abolished, and all outstanding cases were handed over to the labor courts.

The Right to Monitor

A number of human rights organizations were set up in 1991 and continued to function in 1992. The Ethiopian Human Rights Council (ehrco) is chaired by Professor Mesfin Wolde Mariam, a strong critic of the current government. ehrco has been permitted to function and to publicize its criticisms of the government, but has also been subjected to a barrage of abuse in the government-controlled media. Another organization, abugida, is committed to public education in human rights.

In October, the government promulgated a press law that removes almost all censorship rules imposed by the former regime. However, almost all the media remains controlled by the government, there are chronic shortages of newsprint, and few journalists have the training or courage to test the limits of government tolerance.

The government has given free access to the country to foreign human rights organizations, and allowed the icrc to operate freely. International observers were invited to monitor the June elections, and given the freedom necessary to do so. However, the leader of the American observer team was expelled from the country, after allegedly expressing support for an independent Oromo state at an olf rally.

U.S. Policy

The U.S. government is the most prominent backer of the Transitional Government of Ethiopia, and has excellent access to the President and other senior members of government. It has been sympathetic to the huge difficulties facing the Ethiopian leadership, and has provided assistance to help overcome them. At the same time, the U.S. embassy often appeared to be missing opportunities to use its privileged access to the Transitional Government to press for more marked improvements in human rights.

In April, the U.S. waived the provisions of the Brooke Amendment, which prohibits U.S. aid to any country that is in arrears on any loan payment to the United States, to make Ethiopia eligible for economic assistance. Ethiopia had lost its eligibility because the State Department held it responsible for failing to pay for military equipment purchased in 1976, although the equipment had not actually been delivered. The legal bar on economic assistance had proved embarrassing to the U.S. government, which until April 1992 had been able to provide only humanitarian aid to Ethiopia. In the summer, the U.S. pledged $161 million in development assistance, of which $60 million was delivered in September. The U.S. is active in assisting the Transitional Government in drafting a new constitution, formulating national election plans, and developing the institutions of civil society, such as a free press.

The U.S. government was moderately active in human rights initiatives, reportedly prompting the Ethiopian government on matters such as bringing detainees to trial and respecting the rights of former wpe members. It has encouraged attempts to negotiate agreements between the eprdf and olf, although for the most part other Western countries took the lead. However, there appear to have been no formal demarches on human rights issues, and little public criticism of the conduct of the elections.

The chapter on Ethiopia in the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in 1991, issued in January 1992, was an accurate reflection of reality. The testimony of Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Herman Cohen before the House Africa Subcommittee on September 17 also included faircriticisms, but Cohen made it clear that these shortcomings would not affect U.S. relations with the Ethiopian government.

The Work of Africa Watch

Africa Watch maintains an active dialogue with the Transitional Government on human rights issues. On May 8, Africa Watch published a newsletter entitled "Waiting for Justice" which outlined concerns about the arbitrary actions of the eprdf, olf, pscs, ghcs and People's Courts, and expressed disappointment at the delay in bringing the cases of former officials to court. Africa Watch staff members visited Ethiopia in March and in June-July, and exchanged views with senior members of the Transitional Government, including the President. Africa Watch's criticisms were taken seriously by the government, which responded carefully and in considerable detail, and invited Africa Watch to send further delegations to Ethiopia to investigate alleged abuses. The Transitional Government responded positively to Africa Watch's suggestion that the charges brought against officials of the former regime should include crimes under common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions of 1949. Africa Watch also campaigned for the release of the 23 refugees abducted from Sudan.


KENYA

Human Rights Developments

In October 1991, President Daniel arap Moi announced that he would crush the opposition "like rats." He was compelled to change his strategy in November of that year when the consultative group of bilateral donors suspended aid to Kenya pending economic and political reforms. Moi and the ruling Kenya African National Union (kanu) immediately announced the introduction of a multi-party system in Kenya. The transition to democracy was quickly imperiled by growing ethnic violence, fueled by the government. The Moi government has long contended that political pluralism in Kenya would degenerate into tribal conflict, and many fear that the government is seeking to fulfill that prophesy.

In December 1991, the Kenyan Parliament repealed Section 2(A) of the Constitution which prohibited opposition parties. In 1992, the government permitted greater freedom of expression and association. The government also released some political prisoners who were convicted despite the lack of any tangible evidence and discrepancies in the prosecution's case. In February, George Anyona, a former member of Parliament and multi-party advocate who was sentenced to a seven-year prison term in July 1991 on charges of plotting to overthrow the government, was freed on bail. His co-defendants, Edward Akong'o, Esaiah Ngotho Kariuki and Augustus Kathangu Njeru, were also freed. On June 24, the government released four government critics charged with treason, but refused to release the other four defendants-Koigi wa Wamwere, RumbaKinuthia, Mirugi Kariuki and Godfrey Kuria Kariuki. All eight defendants had been accused of being members of the Kenya Patriotic Front, an underground organization that allegedly seeks the overthrow of the Kenyan government, and have been severely mistreated in custody.

Serious human rights abuses continued throughout 1992, including torture and mistreatment of prisoners, excessive use of force by police, government involvement in inflaming ethnic conflict, harassment of and attacks on opposition activists, and prosecution of independent journalists. In addition, much of the repressive institutional structure used by the Moi government remains in place, such as the laws on treason and sedition; the Preservation of Public Security Act, which allows indefinite detention without charge or trial; the law allowing the banning of any publication in the interests of "public safety and public order"; and powers to manipulate the justice system, such as pressing trumped-up criminal charges against government critics and applying illicit pressure on judges in politically sensitive cases. Until these pillars of Moi's rule are dismantled, respect for human rights will remain subject to the whims of the authorities.

One of the most disturbing developments in Kenya in 1992 was a serious escalation of rural violence and its spread into areas formerly free of ethnic conflict, notably the Rift Valley and Western Provinces. The conflict stemmed directly from the Moi government's abuse of its powers of patronage to reward selectively members of certain ethnic groups, particularly Moi's own Kalenjin, and the government's manipulation of ethnic tensions since the advent of multipartyism.

There is no accurate estimate of the number of people killed in ethnic clashes during 1992, but it is clear that scores and perhaps hundreds have died. Many thousands of others have been left homeless, after their homes were burned and belongings looted. Despite clear evidence that pro-government Kalenjin were responsible for many attacks, the authorities have done little to protect civilians, and have preferred to blame the violence on the opposition.

The level of discontent with the government's apparent involvement in the ethnic clashes led to unprecedented criticism of the government by the Catholic bishops. In March, they issued a pastoral letter accusing the government of instigating the ethnic conflict in the western areas. The letter stated that the security forces' attitude "seems to imply that orders from above were given in order to inflict injuries only on particular ethnic groups."

On September 17, the Parliament's Select Committee on Ethnic Clashes released a report concluding that the violence was politically motivated and often incited by provincial officials. It called for criminal investigations of all politicians who had made inflammatory statements during the violence, and alleged that close Moi associates Nicholas Biwott and Ezekiel Barng'etuny were involved in organizing and financing the fighting. The parliamentary report confirmed many of the findings of an earlier report issued in late spring by a committee established by theopposition parties and the church. However, the government denied those charges and threatened criminal sanctions against the report's signatories. On October 14, the Parliament voted to reject the Committee's report. (Kennedy Kiliku, the former Assistant Health Minister who chaired the Committee, quit the ruling party on November 8.)

Excessive force by the Kenyan police continued to be a major problem during 1992. In one incident, the well known Kenyan environmentalist and Forum for the Restoration of Democracy (ford) activist Wangari Maathai and three other women were beaten unconscious by riot police on March 3. They had joined a demonstration by about 50 women who were conducting a hunger strike in Nairobi's Uhuru (Independence) Park demanding the release of 52 political prisoners. Many of the protesters were mothers of the prisoners. After a crowd of demonstrators assembled in the park, the riot police attacked the women with batons and teargas. The police action led to two days of protests, with rioting and looting.

Excessive force was also used on March 20 in Kisumu, on March 22 in Kitale in Western Province, and on April 27 in Limuru. In each of these cases, police fired at a crowd of peaceful demonstrators, killing at least three. In April, when ford called a general strike to push for the release of political prisoners and secure elections, riot police clashed with groups of young people who set up roadblocks and stoned state-owned buses and cars; at least three people were shot and some 160 were arrested. The government considered the strike to be illegal. Violence continued in October and November, with attacks by police and kanu supporters against opposition activists, including the police beating of opposition leader Paul Muite in late October. The Kenyan police continue to act with impunity-harassing, beating and killing-without any known investigation or prosecution.

The principal political struggle has revolved around the impending elections. Moi's bid for re-election was helped by the disarray within the main opposition party, ford. At the time of the September 4 ford conference, the party split into two factions: "ford-Kenya," headed by Jaramogi Oginga Odinga and Paul Muite, and "ford-Asili" (Original Ford), led by Kenneth Matiba and Martin Shikuku. Both factions submitted requests to register as ford, and in late September they were permitted to register separately.

Some eight other opposition parties have been allowed to register. The most prominent is the Democratic Party (dp), formed in January, a predominantly Kikuyu party headed by Moi's former vice president (he resigned on Christmas), Mwai Kibaki. Only one party was denied registration, the Islamic Party of Kenya (ipk), based on a presidential directive that religious groups are not allowed to form political parties. In May, police arrested several imams, which served to boost support for the ipk. One of those arrested was Sheikh Balala, who was initially charged with treason but the charges were later withdrawn. The ipk has filed a suit against the government demanding that it be registered. ipksupporters have staged demonstrations calling for registration, leading to clashes with police.

The government placed numerous administrative and legal obstacles in the way of the opposition, leading to delays in registration and permits for rallies. On August 5, Parliament passed a bill to amend the constitution to prevent any party from winning the elections based on regional strength. The bill states that the presidential candidate must win a majority of votes nationwide as well as 25 percent of the votes in at least five of Kenya's eight provinces. In addition, the president is required to choose a government from his party rather than forming a coalition. If no one wins a majority, a run-off will be held between the two candidates who won the most votes; if there is still no majority, the incumbent continues as president. Because the opposition draws its support primarily from two provinces, this amendment greatly enhances kanu's prospects of forming the next government.

On October 28, Moi dissolved the Parliament, paving the way for elections, which were later scheduled for December 7. Moi had stated that his control over the date of elections would be his "secret weapon" against the opposition. However, on November 12, the High Court upheld an appeal by ford-Kenya for an extension of the deadline for the nomination of candidates. The elections were then postponed until December 29. Since this date falls in the midst of the Christmas holiday period, many Kenyans who live in the cities and travel back to the rural areas for the holidays will be compelled to return to the place they had registered to vote.

Attacks on the independent press continued during 1992, although the press operated with significantly fewer restrictions than before. A particular target of government repression was the news magazine Society. In January, copies of the magazine were impounded by police because the material was deemed to be offensive to the President. In April, five Society journalists were detained, and later charged with sedition related to information they had published on the suspicious death of former Foreign Minister Robert Ouko. In June, 10,000 copies of the magazine were seized, with no explanation. Also in June, the magazine was subjected to a suspicious arson attack.

Another magazine, Finance, also encountered problems with the authorities. In May, thousands of copies of the magazine were confiscated without explanation. In August, the publisher and editor-in-chief, Njehu Gatabaki, was charged with sedition in connection with articles that appeared in the May 31 issue suggesting that the government, and especially the president, are responsible for the country's economic and political problems. In early November, police impounded over 50,000 copies of the November 15 issue of Finance, apparently because it carried the headline "Impeach Moi."

Kenya has traditionally sought to exclude refugees, using a variety of abusive means to deter them from entering the country, and to expel them after arrival. In 1992, these measures failed to prevent the development of a refugee crisis. Over 300,000 Somali refugees are currently registered in Kenya, with significantnumbers of Ethiopians, Sudanese and others as well. Neither the Kenyan government nor the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (unhcr) has fulfilled its obligations toward the refugees to provide basic material assistance and physical and legal protection. Humanitarian conditions in the camps for Somalis became a public scandal in January after death rates climbed to appalling levels due to poor siting of the camps and inadequate relief supplies. Abuses against refugees continued virtually unchecked, including killing, rape and looting. The Kenyan government preferred to blame incidents on Somali "bandits," but there is compelling evidence of the involvement of Kenyan forces in certain incidents. In August, about 3,000 Sudanese boys were abducted by the Sudan People's Liberation Army from Kenyan territory.

Meanwhile, ethnic Somalis in Kenya continue to suffer persecution from the Kenyan authorities. In one incident in August, the police rounded up some 2,000 Somali and Ethiopian refugees in Nairobi and Mombasa, forced them at gunpoint into trucks, and relocated them to refugee camps. In the process, families were separated and children were abandoned.

The Right to Monitor

The Kenyan government continued to be hostile to visits by foreign human rights monitors. A delegation from the New York-based Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Center for Human Rights was denied visas to visit Kenya in August. Also in August, a delegation from the National Democratic Institute for International Affairs (ndi), an organization funded by the U.S. Congress, was permitted to visit Kenya but prevented from meeting with independent or opposition organizations.

In July, the Kenyan Civil Liberties Union (kclu) was created in Nairobi by a group of pro-democracy activists, including Rev. Timothy Njoya, Kiraitu Murungi and Kathurma M'Inoti. The kclu intends to defend human rights in the courts and through public education.

On September 17, a new human rights group was launched without incident in Kenya, called the Kenyan Human Rights Commission. Two of its principal organizers are Makau wa Mutua and Maina Kiai, although Mutua is based at Harvard University in Massachusetts.

Meanwhile, former human rights monitors who had been the focus of much international acclaim became subsumed in party politics.

U.S. Policy

During 1992, the Bush Administration continued to pressure the Kenyan government to organize free and fair elections and to enact political and economic reforms. To this end, the U.S. government withheld $28 million of a projected $47 million in economic aid to Kenya for fiscal year 1992. The remaining $19 million that was delivered was for agricultural development, population programs and small enterprise development.

In private dealings with the Kenyan government, U.S. officials reportedly sent a consistent message: U.S. assistance will be re-evaluated only after economic and political reforms are instituted.Administration officials, including Herman Cohen, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, and especially the U.S. Ambassador to Kenya, Smith Hempstone, denounced the Moi regime's efforts to manipulate and obstruct the electoral process.

The major statement of U.S. policy toward Kenya came in Secretary Cohen's testimony on June 23 before the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Africa, in which he gave a forthright appraisal of the situation in Kenya. He praised the Kenyan government's progress since December 1991, but criticized continuing problems in its human rights record, including the harassment of opposition politicians and the press and instances of police violence. He labeled ethnic conflict "the most disquieting development," noting that "the security forces did little to stop the violence." Cohen also put pressure on the opposition to participate in elections, saying that a boycott would be "ill-advised."

On several occasions in 1992, Ambassador Hempstone issued strong public criticisms of the government's human rights practices and its manipulation of ethnic conflict. In March, for example, he announced: "Self-fulfilling prophesies of chaos, bloodshed and tribal warfare are not useful. The government because it is the government has the primary responsibility of restoring order and maintaining security." On October 15, he gave an address to the American Business Association of Kenya which went to the heart of widespread doubts about the Moi government's commitment to ensuring free and fair elections:

Perhaps we can be forgiven for being just a little skeptical when virtually nothing has been done to allow for an effective domestic monitoring system, when the opposition has been hampered in its efforts to hold meetings or open branch offices in many parts of the country, when the registration process has been terminated before one million young people without ID cards have had a chance to register, when we read in the press that teachers, civil servants, the army and the police have been admonished to vote for kanu... or else, when opposition access to the media is limited, when kanu and the government have not been delinked, when dialogue among the political parties has been honored in the breach rather than in the observance. The spirit of fair-play and tolerance that is at the heart of the democratic process seems largely-if not entirely-absent.

Ambassador Hempstone went on to say that "second-class democracy" will not satisfy the U.S., and that elections that are "obviously flawed, blatantly rigged" will not be accepted as legitimate.

State Department officials in Washington also added their voice, although in more abbreviated terms. After the attack on the women protesters, State Department spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler stated that the U.S. administration was "deeply concerned" about the Kenyan government's abuse of basic democratic rights.Meanwhile, dialogue continued at senior governmental level. In April, Secretary of State James Baker told Kenya's Vice President George Saitoti that "after a promising start, multi-party democracy in Kenya is threatened by a growing climate of political intolerance, including serious violence." In October, Acting Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger met with Kenyan Foreign Minister Wilson Ndolo Ayah and reportedly delivered a similar message.

LIBERIA

Human Rights Developments

During most of 1992, Liberia remained divided as it had been since the November 1990 cease-fire: the Interim Government of National Unity (ignu) governed Monrovia, backed by the West African peace-keeping force (ECOMOG), while Charles Taylor's National Patriotic Front of Liberia (npfl) controlled the rest of the country. The United Liberation Movement for Democracy in Liberia (ulimo), a rebel group made up primarily of soldiers from former President Samuel Doe's army, launched incursions against the npfl from neighboring Sierra Leone. However, the situation changed dramatically on October 15, when the npfl attacked Monrovia, ending two years of an uneasy peace and plunging the country back into war.

Elections were originally scheduled for April 1992, but were twice postponed and then cancelled. At no point had the minimum conditions for holding elections-disarmament and encampment of all warring factions-been remotely accomplished. Additional obstacles to free and fair elections were that ECOMOG troops were prevented from deploying in many parts of the country controlled by the npfl, and that one-third of the population remained as refugees in neighboring countries.

In early 1992, there was some hope of a political settlement. Roads between Monrovia and npfl territory were opened and ECOMOG troops were permitted to conduct inspection tours of npfl areas. In January, the Interim Elections Commission was sworn in, composed of three representatives of the National Patriotic Reconstruction Assembly Government (nprag-the npfl's governing body) and two from the ignu. On March 16, the ad hoc Supreme Court was sworn in, composed of three judges named by the nprag and two by the ignu. In April, the University of Liberia re-opened. This progress was reversed as the warring parties continued to commit human rights abuses, and ultimately all-out war returned.

In January, Prince Johnson, the leader of a break-away rebel group called the Independent National Patriotic Front of Liberia (inpfl), held two Liberian journalists in incommunicado detention and subjected them to abusive treatment. Also in January, Johnson executed at least four of his commandos, in connection with his opposition to new bank notes issued by the ignu in early January.Johnson forbade anyone to enter Caldwell (the area outside Monrovia where his troops are based) with the new currency, which he reportedly discovered some of his fighters confiscating and holding.

Taylor, too, objected to the new currency, and tried to prevent people from entering his territory with it. Many npfl fighters manning the checkpoints used the currency restrictions as yet another excuse to harass and conduct extensive searches of civilians traveling through the area. Those found carrying the new bank notes faced reprisals, including detention, beating and confiscation of property.

The security situation in npfl-controlled territory continued to present problems for civilians as well as international relief agencies working there. A series of incidents took place in late 1991 and early 1992 involving the confiscation of relief vehicles, the detention of foreign and Liberian workers at checkpoints, accusations of spying, and general harassment of relief operations. In general, the ability of relief organizations to operate, like the safety of civilians, depended largely on the whims of the local npfl commanders.

The principal source of tension in the npfl-controlled territory during 1992 involved alleged ulimo infiltration. Since the latter part of 1991, the npfl used the ulimo threat as a means of controlling the population in its territory, and Taylor often cited this threat as justification for his refusal to disarm his fighters and confine them to barracks. Civilians were arbitrarily denounced for spying for ulimo, and faced a range of penalties, from harassment and detention to extrajudicial execution.

For the most part, civilians had little or no recourse against the npfl fighters. However, on one occasion in Buchanan, the population rose up against the npfl. Rumors began circulating in mid-March about a possible ulimo attack on the city. On March 22, six bodies were found in a nearby river, including some young men who had been arrested for being ulimo sympathizers. npfl authorities responded by arresting four fighters and taking them to Taylor's capital, Gbarnga, although reports indicate that they were released shortly thereafter. The following day, the local population began to demonstrate against the npfl, calling for it to leave. The city was effectively shut down, and Taylor himself travelled to Buchanan in an attempt to pacify the people.

Efforts to implement peace agreements continued throughout the year. The Yamoussoukro IV peace conference, held in the Ivory Coast in October 1991, yielded a plan for the deployment of ECOMOG forces, the disarmament and encampment of the warring factions, and elections. However, implementation of the agreement quickly stalled, due to Taylor's refusal to allow ECOMOG forces to enter his territory.

In April, a mini-summit of West African states was held in Geneva. The participants re-affirmed their commitment to the Yamoussoukro IV accords, and established a new timetable for ECOMOG deployment. They also reiterated the need to set up a buffer zone near the Sierra Leone border to separate npfl and ulimo forces.However, just after signing the accord, Taylor announced that he had been forced to sign and indicated that he was not prepared to disarm or encamp his fighters.

On April 30, ECOMOG began its long-awaited deployment in npfl territory, with the aim of disarming all factions and establishing an atmosphere in which free and fair elections could be held. Always problematic, the deployment took a serious turn for the worse in late May, when six Senegalese soldiers were apparently captured during a gun battle with the npfl in Lofa County and executed, reportedly by having their throats slit. As a result, all ECOMOG troops were withdrawn from Lofa Country to Monrovia, and the Senegalese government announced that a commission would be formed to investigate the killings. At a summit of West African states in Dakar in late July, economic sanctions against the npfl were proposed, which would have given Taylor one month to comply with the peace process before an economic blockade would be mounted.

Meanwhile, mounting insecurity was apparent in Monrovia. A series of grenade attacks in late spring and early summer were launched, leaving at least eight dead and sixty wounded. Responsibility for the attacks was never established. Growing frustration with the Interim Government, based in part on mounting economic hardship, the stalled political negotiations and reports of corruption, came to a head in mid-August, when fuel shortages led to anti-ignu demonstrations in Monrovia.

The cease-fire was finally broken in August, when ulimo launched an attack against the npfl. Skirmishes between the two rebel groups had occurred sporadically since late 1991, especially near the Sierra Leone border. After refusing to participate in the peace talks held in Benin on August 17, ulimo launched an offensive from Sierra Leone to the outskirts of Monrovia. The npfl forces were routed and at least 30,000 displaced persons streamed into Monrovia. Civilians reportedly were targeted by both sides during the conflict, with fighters looting in villages, stealing from fleeing refugees, and executing those suspected of sympathizing with the opposing faction. Taylor has accused ECOMOG of supporting ulimo.

ulimo's political agenda is unclear. Officially, ulimo leaders state that they are a group of displaced Liberians who seek to liberate Liberia from npfl occupation. They claim to seek peace and democracy for the country, and deny that they will engage in reprisals against any ethnic group. However, many observers remain skeptical about ulimo's real intentions, because of its links to the deposed Doe government and the number of former army soldiers in its ranks. The leader of ulimo is generally recognized to be Raleigh Seekie, who had been deputy minister of finance under Doe. Additional support is provided by a largely Mandingo group based in Guinea, the Muslim Redemption Movement (mrm), headed by Alhaji Kromah. Tensions exist among the different ulimo factions, and the infighting culminated in June with the execution of General Albert Karpeh, a leading member of ulimo and chair of its military section.

The ulimo offensive forced ECOMOG to announce the withdrawal of all its forces to Monrovia. However, the 580 ECOMOG soldiers stationed in small groups up-country were prohibited by Taylor from leaving. Until early September, the soldiers were effectively being held hostage; they were disarmed, prevented from leaving their sites and prohibited from receiving supplies or communications from Monrovia. The ECOMOG soldiers were finally allowed to return to Monrovia in late September, due to the intervention of former U.S. President Jimmy Carter. However, during their return to Monrovia, many of the soldiers were humiliated, beaten, and had their weapons, vehicles and personal belongings confiscated by the npfl.

After the ulimo incursion, security in the western counties worsened. On August 26, a convoy of the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc) was attacked in Bomi; one Swiss national was injured and one Liberian was killed. On August 31, an ECOMOG soldier was also killed in a skirmish with npfl fighters at the Po River Bridge. This was soon followed by other attacks by the npfl and ulimo on each other, sometimes leading to the involvement of ECOMOG. In one incident on October 2, the npfl and ulimo were skirmishing near ECOMOG positions in Brewerville, when ulimo reportedly disappeared behind ECOMOG lines, leaving ECOMOG to fight the npfl; three ECOMOG soldiers and as many as 50 npfl fighters were reportedly killed.

Meanwhile, Taylor began a crackdown in his territory. According to npfl radio broadcasts, some npfl officials were executed, and others were prevented from leaving the country. There were also reports that local officials were harassed for not participating in Taylor's campaign to recruit young men into his army. A particularly egregious action occurred on September 28, when the npfl reportedly massacred an unknown number of civilians-estimates range from thirty to 300, but no one has yet been able to conduct a full investigation-and burned houses in Klay, in Bomi County. The npfl denied responsibility.

The fighting took a far more serious turn on October 15, when the npfl launched an offensive against Monrovia. In the early morning hours, the npfl attacked ECOMOG positions around the city as well as the Camp Schiefflin barracks of the Armed Forces of Liberia (AFL), former President Doe's army.

At the end of November, ECOMOG remained in control of Monrovia, but fighting continued in and around the city. Prince Johnson's base at Caldwell is under ECOMOG control, and Johnson is in ECOMOG custody. npfl artillery shells and rockets have been hitting Monrovia daily, threatening civilians and destroying parts of the city. Heavy fighting near the Spriggs Payne airport has caused civilian casualties, and led to the temporary closure of the facility on several occasions.

Approximately 200,000 refugees from the suburban areas of Monrovia have flooded into the central city to escape the fighting. Some reports indicate that civilians are also being pushed behind Taylor lines into the country's interior. The lack of water has become a serious problem, since the npfl controls the city's water processing plant at White Plains.

For its part, ECOMOG has conducted bombing raids in Taylor territory, including the port of Buchanan and targets in Gbarnga, Kakata and the Firestone Plantation in Harbel. Precise information about the targets and casualties are not available, although npfl officials report that many civilians have been killed and wounded. ECOMOG contends that any civilian casualties are unintentional and the result of collateral damage. One particularly disturbing incident took place on November 16, when ECOMOG apparently bombed the Catholic Relief Services (crs) warehouse in Buchanan, destroying large quantities of rice and blended food.

Meanwhile, ECOMOG has approved the re-armament of the AFL, and has apparently allowed the AFL and ulimo to help patrol the streets of Monrovia. Although it is difficult to confirm serious attacks against civilians, it seems clear that the presence of these factions has heightened tensions among many city residents, who fear a resurgence of the kind of brutality and ethnic violence associated with these soldiers in the past. On November 21, the AFL publicly executed Private Tarwaley Mannie, who was convicted by a Court Martial Board of the murder of a civilian he believed to be a rebel in late October. General Hezekiah Bowen, chief of staff of the AFL, announced that the execution was an example of what would happen to soldiers caught looting or killing. An additional armed group, what is known as the "secret army" or the "black berets"-a fighting force of approximately 500 men trained in Guinea and organized by the ignu-has also arrived in Monrovia, and is patrolling the streets. Given all these armed combatants, the command and control situation is very unclear.

On the weekend of October 31, Archbishop Michael Francis announced that five American nuns had been shot by the npfl. It is possible that four Liberian student nuns were also killed. The nuns were based in Gardnersville, a suburb of Monrovia, and were members of the Precious Blood order. Although the nuns represented a tiny fraction of those killed during the Liberian conflict, their death helped to elevate the level of international attention to the resurging war.

The ecowas leaders met again in Abuja, Nigeria, on November 7, and issued a communiqu calling for: a cease-fire effective midnight November 10, and the subsequent encampment and disarmament of all warring parties; the appointment by the Secretary General of the United Nations of a special representative to help implement the ecowas peace plan; and the imposition of sanctions.

On November 19, the United Nations Security Council passed a resolution authorizing an arms embargo against Liberia; the ECOMOG force is exempt from the embargo, subject to future review. The Security Council resolution also requested the Secretary General to send a special representative to Liberia to evaluate the situation and report back to the Security Council. The special representative, Trevor Livingston Gordon-Somers, who works for the United Nations Development Program (undp), was appointed the following day, and is scheduled to leave for Liberia in early December.

The Right to Monitor

Human rights groups are permitted in Monrovia, although they are often precluded from operating in the area controlled by Charles Taylor. A new monitoring organization, the Catholic Faith and Justice Network, emerged in 1992 under the auspices of the Catholic Church. Monitoring is also part of the program of the Center for Law and Human Rights Education, which was formed at the University of Liberia Law School. There are no known human rights organizations in the area controlled by the npfl.

U.S. Policy

The U.S. government in 1992 continued its policy of not recognizing any government in Liberia-neither the Interim Government nor the nprag. The U.S. also remained committed to supporting ecowas and its peace plan.

The U.S. is the largest donor to the Liberian relief effort. From the beginning of the conflict through July 1992, U.S. relief assistance totaled $203 million, approximately $60 million of which was sent during fiscal year 1992. For the past three years, the U.S. has provided only humanitarian aid to Liberia, since other assistance is prohibited by the Brooke Amendment, which suspends aid to countries that have failed to repay their loans to the U.S.

In addition to humanitarian assistance, the U.S. has provided a total of $8.6 million to ecowas for peace-keeping, and $18.75 million in Foreign Military Financing (fmf) and Department of Defense Drawdown (dod) authority to ecowas member states to support ECOMOG.

A waiver of the Brooke Amendment was included in legislation that authorized the U.S. to provide limited assistance for "nonpartisan election and democracy-building assistance to support democratic institutions in Liberia" as well as assistance for repatriating refugees, and demobilizing and retraining troops, pending certification by the President that Liberia was making progress toward democratization. The legislation was signed by President Bush in April. In September, after conditions in Liberia began to deteriorate and the President was unable to make such a certification, Acting Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger used his discretionary authority under Section 451 of the Foreign Assistance Act to make $2 million available for ecowas, to support their peace-keeping efforts, and $1.3 million for the International Negotiating Network of the Carter Center, to promote programs about peace, democratization and conflict resolution.

On August 1, immediately after the ulimo offensive, State Department spokesman Richard Boucher named ulimo as the party responsible. Given that the U.S. usually refrains from directly naming any of the warring factions, this was a positive and important step.

After the npfl attack on Monrovia, State Department sources indicate that the U.S. engaged in behind-the-scenes diplomatic efforts to encourage a cease-fire and negotiations. However, the administration did not issue any public statements until an npfl rocket fell near the U.S. Embassy on October 29, when the StateDepartment then announced that it would hold Charles Taylor "personally liable for such dangerous incidents."

The U.S. issued a far stronger statement on October 31, expressing outrage at the killing of the five American nuns. While not publicly blaming any of the warring parties, sources at the State Department privately acknowledged that they had reason to believe that the npfl was responsible and were pressing for an investigation.

On November 5, to demonstrate U.S. displeasure with the continued practice of Burkina Faso of providing military aid to the npfl, the administration recalled its ambassador, Edward P. Brynn, and informed the Burkinabe government that its ambassador-designate to Washington would not be welcome. The U.S. action fell short of breaking off diplomatic relations, but showed that the U.S. held the government of Blaise Compaore responsible for exacerbating the Liberian conflict and named Libya as the source of some of the arms.

The U.S. policy of supporting ECOMOG lost some credibility after the BBC broadcast remarks made by Herman Cohen, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, on November 11. After an off-the-record briefing given at Harvard University on November 4, Cohen was taped as saying: "ecowas is unfortunately no longer a neutral party....They are now one of the combatants. I think the next step-and we are discussing this in Washington-will be U.N. intervention to provide a neutral party to try and bring about a political solution." Cohen tried to clarify his position the following day, when he told the BBC: "I think it must have been a slip of the tongue....We have not changed our policy. We still believe in what the West African countries are trying to do, which is to bring about a non-violent, democratic solution to Liberia." BBC officials apologized to the U.S. administration for permitting "use of information that was somewhat misleading."

The U.S. stepped up its attacks against the npfl in an unusual post-session hearing held by the House Subcommittee on African Affairs on November 19. Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Leonard Robinson described the npfl as "essentially an internal army of occupation, sustaining an environment of brutality and coercion and prolonging the misery of the Liberian people." While noting that none of the warring factions is blameless for the renewed fighting, Robinson stated that "no factor contributed...as much as the intransigence of the National Patriotic Front." He went on to list the recent record of the npfl, including responsibility for the murder of the five American nuns.

Robinson also declared strong U.S. support for ECOMOG. He refused to criticize the conduct of their bombing raids, saying only that the U.S. has expressed its concern about civilian casualties and "ECOMOG has assured us that such collateral damage is unintentional." In conclusion, Robinson warned that "no one who comes to power in Liberia through force or fraud can expect normal relations with the United States."

The Work of Africa Watch

Africa Watch continued to monitor the human rights situation in Liberia. Staff wrote articles that appeared in West Africa, The Atlanta Journal and Constitution and Reconstruction which updated and analyzed the ongoing human rights abuses.

MALAWI

Human Rights Developments

In 1992, Malawi experienced a surge of unprecedented public criticism of the repressive 28-year rule of nonagenarian Life-President H. Kamuzu Banda and his Malawi Congress Party (mcp). Spearheaded by the Catholic and Presbyterian churches, Malawians demonstrated against their government's authoritarian policies and in favor of multiparty democracy.

These protests were met with violent repression and only token concessions. Although Life-President Banda ultimately released several prominent prisoners and agreed to hold a referendum on whether to move the country to a multiparty system, only cursory moves were made to abandon the practice of imprisoning political dissidents and suppressing the freedom of the press. On October 20, Orton Chirwa, one of Malawi's most prominent political prisoners, died in Zomba Prison. His wife, Vera Chirwa, remains in detention. In November, government officials declared the opposition movement Alliance for Democracy (aford) illegal, and arrested hundreds of its supporters.

The protests were launched on March 8, when the country's seven Catholic bishops issued a letter containing the first public criticism of the government since independence in 1964. The letter expressed concern about a "growing gap between the rich and the poor" and called for greater popular participation in politics, and expanded freedom of expression and association. The letter noted that the bishops could not "ignore or turn a blind eye to our people's experience of unfairness and injustice, for example those who...are imprisoned without knowing when their cases will be heard."

The reading of the bishops' letter at Sunday masses throughout the country was met with applause and tears. Young Malawians danced with joy in the aisles and copies of the letter began to circulate widely.

The government reacted with predictable harshness. On March 10, the police interrogated the bishops for eight hours. The government media condemned the letter, which was quickly banned. An extraordinary meeting of the Malawi Congress Party was called to discuss the letter, and the party chair for the city of Blantyre, Charles Kampulusa, reportedly said that if the government had known what the bishops were going to say, they would have been killed. Alleged tape-recordings of the meeting obtained by aford revealed that government officials discussed how to kill the bishops.

The bishops' letter sparked unprecedented student protests against the government. At Chancellor College, in Zomba, on March15, a group of students held a demonstration to show their support for the bishops. The next day, following a confrontation between the students and the police, the Registrar of Students decided to close the college to avoid violence-an unprecedented step.

After hearing about the closure of Chancellor College, students at Blantyre Polytechnic decided to demonstrate in solidarity. On March 17, after students stoned stores owned by President Banda's company, Press Holdings, the police arrested up to 70 students. Six students are believed to have been beaten and tortured to death in police custody.

Although the threats to the Catholic bishops were never carried out, on April 17, Bishop John Roche, an Irish citizen who had lived in Malawi for 20 years, was deported, upon 24 hours' notice. A few days earlier, the government also revoked the residence papers of another Irish priest, Patrick O'Malley, as he was returning to Ireland on sick leave. A Presbyterian minister in Mzuzu, Rev. Aaron Longwe, was also twice arrested and released, in April and May.

The next wave of anti-government protests followed the arrest of unionist and pro-democracy activist Chakufwa Chihana. On April 6, after attending a meeting of Malawian exiles in Lusaka, Zambia, Chihana returned to Malawi with the intention of leading the campaign of the Interim Committee for a Democratic Alliance in Malawi. As he disembarked from the plane at Lilongwe International Airport and attempted to read a pro-democracy speech, Chihana was immediately grabbed by four plainclothes policemen, swept into a waiting car, and detained incommunicado.

On May 6, the most serious anti-government protests yet broke out in the city of Blantyre, as 30,000 striking textile workers were joined by other anti-government protesters. The demonstrators reportedly looted stores thought to be owned by President Banda. The police responded with bullets and teargas. On May 7, demonstrations spread to Lilongwe. Three thousand people gathered at the High Court where Chihana was to be produced for a bail hearing. When the government failed to produce him, the crowd reportedly began looting stores and overturning cars, and burned the mcp's Lilongwe headquarters.

Although the precise number of casualties is not available, at least 38 people are believed to have been killed. By May 8, after a shaken Life-President Banda appeared on national radio and appealed for Malawian citizens "to behave like ladies and gentlemen," the situation in Lilongwe and Blantyre was calm. However, demonstrations later spread to tea and tobacco plantations in rural areas, where workers demanded higher wages and a change in government.

Government repression of perceived dissidents continued. On May 16, businessman Krishna Achutan was detained after pleading on BBC radio for the release of his father-in-law, Aleke Banda, a prominent political prisoner who had been detained in January 1980. (Achutan was eventually released on bail on July 13.) In June, reports began to surface of widespread arrests of people who the government believed to be copying and disseminating anti-governmentliterature or receiving faxes from outside the country. Police are believed to have conducted sweeps of city offices searching for the Catholic bishops' letter and targeting in particular offices with photocopy or fax machines. Amnesty International reported that prisoners were tortured and kept in severely overcrowded cells: in one case a released detainee stated that 285 prisoners were kept in a cell measuring five by four meters, with one prisoner dying every two nights. A report in the South African newspaper The Weekly Mail stated that diplomats in Malawi estimated that as many as 2,000 people had been arrested.

By June, though, in response to increasing pressure from donor countries, the government began to release some well known political prisoners. On June 12, eight prominent prisoners, including Machipisa Munthali, were released. Munthali, who had been arrested in 1965 and held at Mikuyu prison, was believed to be one of Africa's longest serving political detainees. On July 10, Aleke Banda was released along with ten others. After his release, Banda stated that he had been kept in a windowless cell in Mpyumpyu prison. He said that he was in good health, but was astonished at the sight of stars: he had not seen them for 12 years.

The government defended its human rights record and instituted some minor reforms. On July 5, Life-President Banda stated that "detention has been used to protect national security and not to abuse human rights" and that "physical torture of prisoners is not our official policy." Banda stated that in the future, all prisoners would be charged and tried. The Life-President also stated that he had invited the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc) to visit Malawi's prisons, that he would recommend changes to the policy of enforced contributions to the mcp, and that freedom of the press and association existed. However, he also declared that political parties "are against the laws of this country" and that "detention is necessary" to avoid civil war.

Parliament then dutifully ratified several changes in the country's repressive legislation. On August 24, it approved the creation of a Detention Review Tribunal, to hear appeals of prisoners who were detained without charge, and moved to modify the Penal Code to limit the maximum sentence for sedition from life to five years' imprisonment.

These steps fall far short of needed changes. The existing definition of sedition remains unchanged, and the press is legally barred from publishing anything likely "to undermine the authority of, or public confidence in, the government." The Detention Review Tribunal is to be led by a judge appointed by the Minister of Justice (who happens to be Life-President Banda) and its rulings are only advisory. The repeal of the 1964 Preservation of Public Security Ordinance, which allows for indefinite detention without charge or trial and arrest by not only the police but also the Malawi Young Pioneers, would be a far more significant step.

The actions of the Malawian government gave lie to its rhetoric of change. Shortly after approving changes to the security regulations, the government once again attacked the church. On August 25, the Synod of the Presbyterian Church, in an open letterto Life-President Banda, asked him to release immediately all political prisoners, institute a referendum on multiparty democracy, and established a broad-based national commission to consider political changes. The Presbyterians and other religious leaders also planned to hold a rally on August 30 in Mzuzu.

The government responded by arresting ten church leaders and declaring the meeting to be unlawful. It singled out for blame Presbyterian minister Aaron Longwe, stating that "misguided people like him should not be allowed to confuse the people." Although the ten church leaders were soon released, an Irish priest, Father Thomas Leary, who had been in Malawi for 20 years, was arrested, held for 20 hours and then deported. Reverend Longwe was arrested on August 31 at St. Peter's Cathedral and held under the Preservation of Public Security regulations for his role in planning the rally at Mzuzu.

Chakufwa Chihana spent three months in detention without charge. After the government failed to present him in court several times, Justice James Kalaile ordered his release on bail on July 10. Chihana was released the next day and stated that he had been kept in solitary confinement and refused reading material. For more than a month, he reported, he was kept in leg irons and repeatedly interrogated.

Only three days later, Chihana was charged with three counts connected with the issuance of seditious publications. The following day, as Chihana and his wife reported to a police station in Lilongwe, in compliance with his bail conditions, the police detained him again, and held him incommunicado until August 16, when his lawyer, Bazuka Mhango, was allowed to visit him and confirmed suspicions that Chihana had been arrested due to an interview he had given to the BBC shortly after his release in July. On September 8, he was charged with two further counts of sedition and released on bail.

When Chihana's case was brought to court, in October, crowds of as many as 30,000 surrounded the High Court in Lilongwe to show their support. After the first two weeks of trial, these crowds were met by harassment and beatings by the police and the ruling party's youth wing, the Young Pioneers. At least five people are believed to have died as a result of beatings at the hands of government forces, and many more were arrested. On November 4, Chihana's car was stoned as he was leaving the court and his lawyer, Bazuka Mhango, and a bodyguard were slightly injured. By mid-November, arguments in the case had closed and Chihana was awaiting the judge's verdict.

On October 18, as he attacked dissidents for "spreading all kinds of false allegations," Life-President Banda announced "a referendum on the question of whether people want our present one-party system or want to switch to the multiparty system of government." Banda stated that he was confident that "his people" would "reject the chaos and disunity of multiparty politics" and stated that he hoped to hold the referendum as soon as possible. President Banda also stated that international observers couldmonitor the referendum and that the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc) would be invited to inspect Malawi's prisons.

Two days later, however, Orton Chirwa, one of Malawi's most famous political prisoners, died in detention. He and his wife, Vera, had been abducted from Zambia in 1981. In 1983, they were convicted of treason and sentenced to death, a sentence later commuted by President Banda to life imprisonment. They were tried before a "traditional court" which did not conform with basic international norms: for example, they were not allowed a defense lawyer or the right to call witnesses on their behalf.

Although the cause of Orton Chirwa's death is unclear, he was 73 years old and had been kept in harsh conditions. A delegation of British lawyers who managed to meet the Chirwas in September found that he was in poor health. He had been tortured and mistreated at various times during his 11 years of imprisonment. As just one example, in October 1992, Chirwa was forced to squat on the floor for two days with arm and leg-irons chained to a metal rod behind his knees. The results of the government's autopsy have yet to be publicly released.

Vera Chirwa is still being held at Zomba Central Prison and was not permitted to attend her husband's funeral. When she and her husband met with the delegation of British lawyers in September 1992, it was the first time she had seen her husband in eight years. In November, her family, which was in Malawi to attend Orton's funeral, was allowed to visit her for 45 minutes. Family members stated that she appeared strong emotionally, but had lost weight and was physically weak.

The Right to Monitor

There are no human rights monitoring organizations in Malawi. Given the government's harsh response to even the most simple political criticism from well established organizations such as the Catholic Church, it is apparent that human rights activity would be extremely dangerous and would be met with immediate suppression.

Actions by the World Bank and Major Donor Countries

In a significant break from the past, Malawi's major donor countries met in Paris in May and decided to freeze most of their bilateral aid to Malawi for fiscal years 1992 and 1993, with the exception of drought and refugee-related assistance. A Malawian request for $74 million in development assistance was refused. A press release at the conclusion of the meeting expressed "deep concern about the lack of progress in the area of basic freedoms and human rights." The donors decided to meet again in six months to determine whether there had been "tangible and irreversible evidence of a basic transformation in the way Malawi approaches these matters, so that there is a fundamental shift in the way human rights in Malawi are viewed."

The World Bank did not follow this example. On June 17, it approved a $55 million loan to Malawi to build a hydroelectric dam. Although World Bank police on the granting of loans requires consideration of "good governance"-a concept broad enough toembrace human rights issues-Bank representatives stated that they were prohibited from considering non-economic factors.

U.S. Policy

In contrast to past years, in 1992 the U.S. government publicly and explicitly criticized the lack of respect for basic human rights in Malawi, and backed this criticism with a substantial reduction in economic assistance. Following the Paris meeting, the U.S. reduced its economic aid to Malawi by one third, to $22 million, and stated that it would make no new aid commitments until its human rights concerns were resolved. In addition, the U.S. voted against the June 17 World Bank loan, on environmental grounds.

On April 6, when Chakufwa Chihana was detained, the United States embassy publicly protested:

The U.S. government views this action by the Malawi government in most serious light and urges the Malawian government to release Mr. Chihana so that he may freely express his political views and undertake political activities.

The U.S. earlier protested the government's reaction to the Catholic bishops' letter and the expulsion of Msgr. John Roche. The U.S. embassy was also reportedly instrumental in coordinating diplomatic pressure on the Malawian government and sent representatives to observe Chihana's trial. United States government officials have assured Africa Watch that Malawi's poor human rights record is consistently brought up in private meetings between U.S. and Malawian officials.

Although Africa Watch welcomes these developments, we believe that the government of Malawi is engaged in a consistent pattern of gross violations of human rights, in particular because of the continuing use of torture and the degrading treatment of prisoners, and the continuing practice of imprisoning any critic of the government. As a result, Malawi falls under the provisions of U.S. law that mandate a cutoff of all U.S. aid that does not directly benefit the needy.

In the past, Malawi's sheltering of Mozambicans fleeing their country's brutal war has made the country a favorite of international donors. The Malawian government has handled the enormous influx of refugees-currently numbering approximately 950,000-with generosity and efficiency, and has argued that as a result it deserves assistance from the developed world. However, Africa Watch believes that this hospitality, and the harsh drought that the country is currently facing, should not obscure the government's lack of fundamental progress on human rights and should not impede the cutoff of all assistance except that targeted to meet basic human needs of the refugees and Malawian citizens.

The Work of Africa Watch

On March 18, shortly after Malawi's Catholic bishops were threatened, Africa Watch issued a statement detailing the threatsand other human rights concerns. Africa Watch also called on the U.S. Congress and President Bush to urge the Banda government immediately to cease harassing the bishops, revoke the ban on their letter and permit freedom of the press and assembly. Later, in April, Africa Watch urged Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Herman Cohen and Lewis Preston, the president of the World Bank, to bring up these and other concerns during their meetings with John Tembo, a close associate of Life-President Banda who is believed to exercise day-to-day control over the government.

On June 11, Africa Watch called upon the Executive Directors of the World Bank to vote against the planned $55 million hydro-electric plant loan. Africa Watch noted that this loan did not meet "basic human needs" and was at odds with statements made by the major donor nations reducing their bilateral aid programs.

In July, in a letter to John Tembo, Africa Watch followed up on statements made by Minister Tembo to the House Subcommittee on Africa indicating that he would invite Africa Watch to Malawi. Meetings were requested with Life-President Banda, Tembo and other government officials, and permission to conduct an independent investigative mission to Malawi was sought. No response has been received.

MAURITANIA

Human Rights Developments

Despite cosmetic democratization and a lessening of government-instigated violence in 1992, Mauritania retains all the apparatus of a repressive state with a disregard for basic human rights. In January, Mauritania held its first multiparty elections, which resulted in the re-election of President Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Taya, but the elections were marred by serious irregularities and fraud. The new government, which is virtually identical to its predecessor, continues to be responsible for human rights abuses, particularly in the areas inhabited by the black populations along the Senegal River Valley.

The dramatic abuses associated with the mass deportations of 1989, during which tens of thousands of blacks were summarily expelled, and the massacre of November 1990-January 1991, in which at least 500 black political prisoners were executed or tortured to death, have been replaced by a more chronic and insidious pattern of violations, principally against the black population of southern Mauritania. For the ruling beydanes (white Moors of Arab-Berber descent), the result is the same: many blacks are forced to flee the country, and much farmland can be confiscated for future ownership by Moors. For the black population, subjugation to military rule and associated human rights abuses have often proven intolerable.

Throughout 1992, there were reliable indications that violent incidents, including killings, arbitrary detentions and torture,continued along the Senegal River Valley. Precise details are very hard to obtain because access to the area remains closed for independent observers. An unofficial night curfew and an undeclared state of emergency remain in place. Africa Watch learned of one incident on the night of February 21-22 in which security forces killed one man near Boghe, and another on August 22, in which they arrested a number of villagers in Sory Male, one of whom later died under torture. At least two mass graves dating from the 1990 killings were discovered in the summer of 1992.

The central political event of 1992 was the presidential election in January. The opposition united to support Ahmed Ould Daddah, the candidate of the Union of Democratic Forces (ufd) (later renamed ufd-New Era). Ould Daddah, an economist and half brother of the country's first president, Moctar Ould Daddah, attracted the support of most of the black voters, who saw him as the only alternative to President Taya. Although the opposition was not prevented from campaigning, the ruling party was able to use many of the state's resources to help its campaign, including the state bureaucracy and the national airline, Air Mauritanie.

Electoral malpractice began with voter registration. A variety of tactics was used to prevent many blacks and supporters of the opposition from registering. The ufd estimates that some 25,000 people were unable to register in Nouakchott, the capital, alone. In some districts, the prefect simply refused to register blacks. In others, special forces of the army were deployed around registration centers, and sometimes used in violence to disperse those who had gathered to register. Blacks were often prevented from registering because they had no identity cards, since the authorities effectively stopped issuing these cards to blacks in the late 1980s. Another method was to ask questions in Arabic, knowing that many blacks would not be able to speak or understand the language, since they tend to speak French and their native languages-Pulaar, Wolof or Soninke.

Even managing to register to vote did not guarantee receiving permission to vote. Many blacks were denied voting cards on such pretexts as that the spelling of their names on the electoral list differed from the spelling on their registration or identity card; the number on the electoral list did not match the registration card; or the registration number had already been used by someone else. In some instances, the authorities simply did not bring the list of registered voters, or claimed to have lost the registration cards.

Both to register and to vote, blacks waited on long lines, often from early morning to late at night, and sometimes on successive days. Given the conditions surrounding the elections, the victory for the ruling party was not surprising.

After the January 24 elections, a curfew was announced and a crackdown on opposition activists was launched, leading to the arrest of opposition supporters in various parts of the country, including Nouadhibou, Nouakchott, Rosso and Kaedi. In addition, government forces violently attacked opposition activists in Nouadhibou and Nouakchott, including members of the ufd who weredemonstrating in Nouadhibou on January 26. As a result, Ousmane Traore, Samba Diallo and possibly as many as three other ufd supporters were killed. Scores of ufd supporters in Nouadhibou were rounded up and 27 of them were imprisoned on charges of inciting violence. They were released in early February and all charges were dropped. On January 25, the security forces used tear gas to attack the ufd headquarters in Nouakchott, injuring 20.

In March, legislative elections were held, but the opposition boycotted, due both to the conduct of the presidential elections, and to the government's refusal to meet the opposition's conditions, such as postponing the elections to permit the political parties to prepare adequately, revising the electoral lists, creating a commission to supervise the elections, and forming an independent commission of inquiry to investigate the post-election killings in Nouadhibou. The president and his party thus retained control of the country.

On the diplomatic front, the most important development took place in April, when Senegal and Mauritania re-established diplomatic relations, which had been broken after the massive deportations of blacks from Mauritania to Senegal beginning in April 1989. Unfortunately, many of the issues relating to the deportations remained unresolved, especially the question of the return of those expelled and those who fled for their own safety. These refugees have made it clear that they cannot return to Mauritania until their security is assured, their citizenship is restored, and their goods, homes and land are returned.

Currently, there are more than 50,000 Mauritanian refugees in Senegal and more than 10,000 in Mali. That the Mauritanian government continues to paper over the past and trivialize the steps that must be taken to ensure their safe return was evident in a radio interview given by Prime Minister Sidi Mohamed Ould Boubacar on May 21:

Now I am anxious to affirm here that Mauritania has never expelled any of its citizens (emphasis added). The events of April 1989 constituted a real tragedy for both our peoples....[T]his situation has now been put behind us. We believe that all Mauritanian citizens who are in Senegal or elsewhere are free to return to their country. This has always been the case.

Until the Mauritanian government acknowledges the expulsions of 1989 and their attendant abuses, it gives exiles little confidence in their security if they return, and no reason to expect compensation for, or restoration of, their lost homes, land and belongings.

Nor has the government shown any inclination to investigate, prosecute or punish those responsible for such gross abuses as the deportations and the massacre of prisoners, despite ample evidence pointing to the direct involvement of many high-ranking government officials. To the contrary, the government has not acknowledged even that the killings occurred, let alone responsibility for them.It also has consistently refused to permit an independent commission of inquiry to investigate the deaths, allowing only a military commission whose findings were never publicized.

Moreover, in December 1991, the government promoted two colonels, both members of the Military Committee for National Salvation, who were directly implicated in orchestrating the prison massacre. The two men, Colonels Sid'Ahmed Ould Boilil and Cheikh Ould Mohamed Saleh, were, respectively, the commanders of the military regions of Nouadhibou and Aleg, where most of the killing and torture took place. Both men had been put on a kind of six-month probation as a result of the internal military investigation after the massacre. By then promoting them, the Mauritanian government sent a clear message that military commanders would not suffer for participating in egregious human rights abuses.

In addition, the families of the victims reportedly have never received official notification of the prisoners' deaths, nor any cooperation from Mauritanian authorities in determining the fate of their loved ones. Efforts in 1992 by a group of wives, mothers and sisters of those killed to obtain government acknowledgement of the executions have been unfruitful.

The one positive note is that the independent press became a more vibrant force in 1992, despite the restrictive new press law issued in July 1991. Independent journalists investigated and wrote about government abuses, both past and present. In July, however, individuals closely associated with the government sued two of the most outspoken journals, Al Bayane and L'Eveil Hebdo. The case against Al Bayane was brought by the administrator of a private school in Nouakchott because of an article about corruption in the school. The case against L'Eveil Hebdo was brought by a relative of the President, Hadramy Ould Taya, concerning an article on the post-election violence in Nouadhibou which reported that one of the demonstrators was killed by a bullet that may have come from his home. Both plaintiffs won their cases, and although the damages awarded were not substantial, the cases may have a chilling effect on the independent press.

The Right to Monitor

The Mauritanian League for Human Rights is the only human rights organization in the country, and it has been known for its pro-government positions. During 1992, however, the League was more vocal in calling on the government to respect human rights.

On March 5, a coalition of opposition groups organized a day of events to honor human rights, including a march and a conference in Nouakchott. Reports indicate that the march was the largest ever seen in the capital, with estimates of the number of demonstrators as high as 200,000. Some participants carried pictures of those killed in the 1990-1991 massacre; others held signs denouncing torture, slavery and dictatorship. Another symposium on human rights that the ufd-New Era tried to hold in Nouadhibou in July was reportedly blocked by the authorities.

In late 1991, an official government delegation from Nouakchott visited the United States and promised Africa Watch thatit could send a fact-finding mission to Mauritania, which Africa Watch had been attempting to do for more than two years. Unfortunately, the promised visas never materialized.

U.S. Policy

With few interests in Mauritania, especially after it supported Iraq in the Gulf War, the U.S. government has criticized Mauritania on human rights grounds. In 1991, the United States ended all bilateral assistance. In November 1991, the Bush administration took steps against Mauritania at the World Bank. Citing human rights violations, the administration instructed the U.S. Executive Director at the World Bank to abstain on World Bank loans to Mauritania, except those involving basic human needs.

In February 1992, a high-ranking State Department official visited Nouakchott and delivered a strong, private message to President Taya concerning ongoing human rights violations against the black population. State Department sources indicated that the U.S. official made it clear that improvement in the human rights performance of the Mauritanian government was the key to any amelioration of U.S.-Mauritanian relations.

The U.S. in 1992 did not make any public statements about human rights violations in Mauritania, even after the elections. However, State Department sources indicate that U.S. Ambassador William Twaddell was authorized to make private demarches about human rights concerns.

In response to a petition filed in May 1991 by Africa Watch documenting systematic labor rights violations in Mauritania, U.S. Trade Representative Carla Hills announced in June 1992 that she would extend her review of worker rights in Mauritania for another year, rather than immediately cut off trade benefits under the Generalized System of Preferences as required by U.S. law.

The Work of Africa Watch

Africa Watch continued to monitor the situation in Mauritania, issuing protests about abuses and serving as a source of information for the press and others interested in Mauritania. A major report on human rights violations in Mauritania will be released in 1993.

MOZAMBIQUE

Human Rights Developments

Nineteen ninety-two was a year of both hope and disaster in Mozambique: hope, in that progress in the peace talks between President Joaquim Chissano and renamo (Mozambique National Resistance) leader Afonso Dhlakama led to the signing of a cease-fire agreement on October 4; disaster, in that much of the country plunged into the most severe famine in living memory, both causedby and in turn aggravating widespread violence, much of it by undisciplined soldiers from both armies.

The 15-year war has been the main cause of human rights violations in Mozambique, and the October cease-fire is a prerequisite for improvement. However, the cease-fire agreement was soon violated-for example, on October 18, renamo occupied four northern towns in Nampula province, which were later abandoned or retaken by government forces-and serious human rights abuses were committed.

It is uncertain whether the forces led by Chissano and Dhlakama will obey their leaders and lay down their arms. renamo has been known for its extremely abusive tactics, and it is unclear to what degree its forces are under a central command. There is also reportedly some disagreement within the organization's leadership over whether a cease-fire should be implemented. On the other hand, hungry and unpaid soldiers of the Mozambique Armed Forces (ufd) have mutinied in several instances. Disgruntled soldiers reportedly continue to attack people and extort money and food.

The effects of war and continuing insecurity have combined with the worst drought to hit the country in the past century to create what could be an unprecedented tragedy. According to a United Nations estimate, as many as 3.2 million Mozambicans face famine and are in need of urgent aid. However, attempts to secure overland "peace corridors" for the delivery of food aid have been stalled and blocked, mainly by renamo.

Throughout 1992, the famine and the war have strongly influenced each other. The scale of humanitarian need has added urgency to the negotiations, while the need for unpaid soldiers to provision themselves has led to looting and pillaging on both sides.

An important breakthrough in the negotiations came on July 16. In a meeting in Rome, where mediators led by the Italian government and the Catholic Santo Egidio community had been coordinating talks since July 1990, renamo and the Mozambican government signed an agreement to permit the nationwide distribution of humanitarian aid. The joint declaration guaranteed "free circulation and respect for personnel and means of transport" for vehicles and workers under U.N. or Red Cross flags and "unrestricted movement of people to allow them complete access to humanitarian assistance."

However, renamo was slow to implement the accord. Several weeks after its formal signing, no land route had been agreed upon and no food delivered. A U.N. representative in the capital, Maputo, blamed renamo for not responding to a proposal of possible relief routes.

On August 5, Chissano and Dhlakama met for their first face-to-face talks in Rome. The meeting was preceded by intense diplomatic efforts by Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe and efforts by the British businessman "Tiny" Rowland, chairman of Lonrho, a British multinational corporation. On August 8, following meetings brokered by the Italian foreign ministry, the two sides agreed that they would sign a cease-fire on October 1. PresidentChissano later told the press that he had asked for an immediate end to the war but that Dhlakama had declined. The renamo leader explained that there were still outstanding concerns about the disarmament procedures, the status of the security police, and the formation of a new army.

During the next meeting, held at Gaborone, Botswana, on September 18, Dhlakama and Chissano agreed on the size and composition of a future national army (30,000 soldiers with 15,000 each from the government and the rebels) and concurred that the State Security and Intelligence Service (sise) would remain under government control. The two sides also agreed on the eventual withdrawal of Zimbabwean and Malawian troops who were in Mozambique to guard transportation corridors.

However, renamo once again hesitated to accept a U.N. plan for the delivery of food aid to areas held by the rebels. The Government ratified the plan on September 14. After several delays, renamo accepted only two of ten proposed relief corridors, subject to certain conditions.

Food deliveries were also blocked in the field by rebel and government troops. In September, for example, foreign diplomats reported that three regiments of unpaid ufd soldiers rioted on the outskirts of Beira, putting the city under virtual siege for several days and cutting off the delivery of aid along this crucial transportation corridor. Diversion of food aid by government officials, soldiers and traders reached levels of 75 percent in many areas. The government also repeatedly accused renamo of blocking food deliveries and attacking relief convoys.

The next stage of the peace process was the signing of a cease-fire accord, set for October 1. Again, renamo hesitated. Two days before, the Italian mediators called off the signing, saying that renamo would not attend. Although Dhlakama did eventually arrive in Rome, he said that renamo still had objections which had to be resolved before the agreement could be signed.

The cease-fire agreement was finally signed in Rome on October 4, with the cessation of hostilities to occur upon enactment by the Mozambican Assembly of several new laws addressing renamo's concerns. The agreement stipulated that ufd and renamo troops were to gather in sites under U.N. supervision, where they would hand over their guns and receive food. Zimbabwean troops in Mozambique would leave the country within 30 days and the new, unified army was to be created. Special commissions to monitor the cease-fire, the operations of the State Security and Intelligence Service, the demobilization of the combatants and the formation of a new army were also agreed to. Elections were to be held within 12 months of the cease-fire.

In the following weeks, the Mozambican Assembly ratified several of the requisite new laws, including an amnesty that covers renamo members accused of crimes against state security and military crimes such as terrorism, kidnapping and treason, as well as battlefield acts. The amnesty reflects a consensus in Mozambique that holding accountable those responsible for gross human rights abuses during the war might jeopardize the process of nationalreconciliation. The cease-fire formally went into effect on October 15.

Despite the cease-fire, serious violence continues. Disputes and delays occurred regarding the formation of the verification commissions and the procedures for confining troops. renamo delayed sending its representatives to Maputo to sit on the commissions on the asserted grounds that it feared for their safety. Even more worrying, food deliveries were not been regularized due to ongoing fighting.

On other human rights issues, the government has finally begun to disclose the fate of dissidents detained and executed after independence in 1975. Prison conditions and the rights of detainees have improved compared to previous years, but remain well below international standards. A large number of political prisoners remain detained, although many are being released following the cease-fire accords which stipulated that the government and renamo should release all prisoners. The establishment of a viable judiciary is hampered by the economic problems of the country and an acute lack of qualified lawyers.

Mozambican citizens in the major towns have continued to enjoy the freedoms recognized in the 1990 constitution and related legislation. Political parties are able to function. The press law enacted by the government in 1991, which guarantees press freedom, has led to a flowering of independent journalism, including much candid coverage of the war, famine, corruption and banditry. However, there have been incidents of harassment and censorship of journalists, and in April a journalist at Notcias, Noe Ditimande, was dismissed after criticizing two senior government figures.

The Right to Monitor

As yet, there are no organized human rights organizations in Mozambique, although several prominent jurists, with the support of the Minister of Justice, have begun to set one up. The Mozambican government has allowed independent foreign observers to report on conditions in the country. In 1990, the government invited Africa Watch to undertake research in the country and allowed representatives to visit prisons without obstruction or interference. Africa Watch was also granted access to senior members of the government, including the President. This level of access, and the accompanying frankness of government officials, was unprecedented in Africa Watch's dealings with African governments.

U.S. Policy

The United States has continued to play a positive role in the search for peace and improved respect for human rights. In 1992, U.S. policy concentrated on supporting the peace process, in particular attempting to influence renamo to move forward.

The United States also continues to deliver more aid to Mozambique than to any other sub-Saharan African country. For fiscal year 1992, the Bush administration had planned to disburse a total of over $68 million dollars of aid, composed of $36 million in development assistance, $32 million in food aid and $100,000 inInternational Military Education and Training funds. It is believed, though, that due to the emergency famine situation in Mozambique, U.S. assistance for 1992 will top $150 million, mainly in food and humanitarian assistance.

Beginning in June 1992, the U.S. participated in the peace talks as an official observer, along with Portugal, the United Kingdom, France and the United Nations. The U.S. was particularly involved in working sessions on the cease-fire.

The U.S. played an important role in pressing renamo to cooperate in the peace process. On April 25, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Herman Cohen met with Afonso Dhlakama in Malawi and reportedly pressed the renamo leader to permit the distribution of food assistance and restart the stalled peace talks. Although Dhlakama objected to a U.S.-proposed temporary truce to facilitate the delivery of food aid, Secretary Cohen did secure Dhlakama's agreement to return to Rome for further talks. While the U.S. has increased its contacts with renamo to further the peace process, it has still not granted Afonso Dhlakama a visa to visit Washington, an important symbolic policy in light of the horrendous abuses committed under his command. The U.S. government has continued to condemn these brutal tactics, and has not allowed the imperatives of the peace process to soften its criticism.

During a trip to the United States in July, President Chissano met with Secretary of State James Baker, who reportedly expressed positive views on constitutional and economic reforms enacted by Chissano and assured him of continued support from the U.S. government. The U.S. has also promised to "participate generously" in the effort to "avert a large-scale human catastrophe." While Africa Watch applauds the humanitarian assistance donated by the administration, we also note that Assistant Secretary Cohen has expressed concern about "ballooning U.N. peacekeeping costs" and indicated that the United States will seek to keep the U.N. presence in Mozambique "as lean as possible." Africa Watch hopes that the U.S. will be prepared to fund U.N. operations in Mozambique to the fullest extent necessary.

The Work of Africa Watch

In July, Africa Watch released Conspicuous Destruction: War, Famine & the Reform Process in Mozambique, a 200-page report. The report was the result of extensive research carried out in Mozambique at the invitation of the government. It detailed abuses by the renamo rebels and the ufd, the role of the war in the creation of famine, prison conditions, and efforts by the government to move toward a liberal democracy that respects civil and political rights. It is the most comprehensive report on human rights in Mozambique available, both in the range of issues addressed and in its apportionment of blame for war-related abuses to both sides. The report was delivered to representatives of the government and renamo and to the mediators at the Rome peace talks.

NIGERIA

Human Rights Developments

The overriding human rights issue in Nigeria in 1992 was the postponement, once again, of the departure of the military government of President Ibrahim Babangida from political office. The blame for many of the human rights abuses during the year can be tied directly to the failure of the Armed Forces Ruling Council (afrc) to leave office as promised.

Right up to its supposed conclusion, the government has insisted on repeatedly interfering with the details of the transition program, by disqualifying candidates of the political parties it created, promulgating military decrees to regulate behavior of candidates and voters, and changing dates of elections. It has allowed only its own two parties to contest elections. In January 1992, the hand-over was postponed for a further three months, to January 1993, to allow additional time for National Assembly and presidential elections. The government also announced that it would continue to use the so-called "open ballot," according to which voters line up behind photos of the candidates of their choice, even though this inherently coercive system had failed to eliminate fraud in elections in 1991.

National Assembly elections in July 1992 took place with a minimal amount of fraud, but then the government announced that the Assembly could not be sworn in until January 1993. Extraordinary fraud in the first presidential primary election in August 1992 caused the government to annul the results. A second attempt in September fared no better, leading the government in October to annul those results too and to dissolve the parties' leadership. The National Electoral Commission was given the task of creating a new selection process and screening all prospective candidates. It recommended a return to the secret ballot. In November, President Babangida again announced a postponement of the hand-over date, this time to August 27, 1993, the anniversary of the coup that brought him to power. All 23 presidential candidates were banned from participating in new elections to be held in June 1993. In attempting to head off resistance to the postponement, Babangida promised to disband the afrc on January 2, 1993 and replace it with a National Defense and Security Council; to inaugurate the National Assembly in December 1992; and to replace the Cabinet with a civilian-led Transitional Council in January 1993.

Decree 2, which provides for virtually unlimited detention without trial, was used in 1992 to detain members of a pro-democracy group, a former military governor and others. A positive development was the release in March of all relatives of suspected participants in the coup attempt of April 1990, including wives, girlfriends and infants, who had been detained under Decree 2 for nearly two years, together with two civilians tried in secret in October 1991 for their role in the coup attempt along with nine army officers. The nine officers are still held, reportedly in incommunicado detention.

Thousands of Nigerians died in 1992 in rioting and internal conflicts in various parts of the country. Longstanding disputes over political dominance, economic privileges and land control have been major causes of violence between various ethnic groups, such as the conflict between the Tiv and Jukun ethnic groups in Taraba and Benue States in east-central Nigeria, which has claimed some 5,000 lives since October 1991. Dozens of villages have been burned to the ground, and up to 150,000 residents have fled the area. Federal and state governments have been criticized for failing to give proper attention to the conflict because of the remoteness of the area and the involvement of minority ethnic groups that lack a voice in government. Although the federal government has made some attempts to stop the killings, its efforts began late in the crisis and have failed to take account of inaction by local authorities and allegations of police bias. Police have been implicated in abetting the killings by joining in the attacks and selling arms.

Already severe economic conditions deteriorated drastically with the devaluation of the naira by nearly 80 percent in March. President Babangida only inflamed resentments with statements such as the following, on March 30: "People themselves, quite frankly, should start rising now. They should start resisting some of these arbitrary prices being fixed." On May 4, riots broke out in Lagos, sparked initially by an increase in commuters' transportation fares. On May 13, a peaceful student demonstration led by the National Association of Nigerian Students, which has been banned by the government since 1986, was joined by angry mobs who turned the event into a violent looting spree. On May 20, ethnic clashes between Igbo and Yoruba traders in Lagos left several dead, and rioting broke out again the next day. Some 80 people died in the month of disturbances. Riots also spread to other cities, such as Benin, Akure, Enugu, Nsukka and Port Harcourt. Police were widely criticized for random shootings, indiscriminate use of teargas and arbitrary arrests.

Also in May, devastating riots struck Kaduna State, in northern Nigeria. Existing tensions over political supremacy in Zango Kataf, in southern Kaduna, between the predominantly Christian Katafs and Muslim Hausas erupted during an argument over the construction of a larger marketplace. Three months earlier, more than 60 residents of Zango Kataf died in a confrontation over the government's plan to move the local market, but government leaders had ignored the warnings from that incident and had not acted upon recommendations to the President sent by Muslim and Christian leaders in Kaduna to form problem-solving committees at all levels of government. In the May riots as many as 1,800 may have died in Zango Kataf, which is now a ghost town. When news of the killings reached Kaduna city, riots also broke out there, resulting in many more deaths.

Security forces arrested hundreds during and after the riots. Among them was the former military governor of Rivers State, retired Army-General Zamani Lekwot, who was arrested on May 18 in Kaduna, under Decree 2. On July 29, he and five other Kataf leaders were arraigned before a special tribunal on charges of unlawfulassembly with intent to subjugate the Hausa community in Zango Kataf. The charges were dropped for lack of evidence, but the six were immediately rearrested. Lekwot and six others were later served with a 22-count indictment that included the charge of culpable homicide, punishable by death. Lekwot is accused of distributing guns and ammunition to rioters and instigating a group of Katafs. Nigerian human rights groups believe that leaders in Kaduna are attempting to make scapegoats of Lekwot and the others because they are vocal leaders of Christian ethnic minorities in the state.

On May 20, the government proscribed all ethnic, religious and regional associations that supported political candidates. Five days later, the president outlined security measures including a crackdown on all persons, associations and groups that seek either to derail the transition program or to destabilize the nation. A number of arrests were made in Lagos, and five members of a pro-democracy group were detained for more than a month.

As in past years, the Nigerian Police Force continued its practice of extrajudicial execution, torture and arbitrary arrest. The government offered some reforms in 1992: the carrying and use of firearms were restricted, and mobile police were ordered to withdraw from police checkpoints. It remains to be seen whether these reforms will be fully implemented, and in the absence of more rigorous attempts to change police attitudes and behavior and to charge and try police for violent abuses, whether the reforms will have the desired effect. For example, Nigerian human rights groups have noted that the government's usual practice in cases of extrajudicial killings is to launch investigative commissions, the findings of which it then disregards.

Deaths in prison from diseases such as tuberculosis and diarrhea probably numbered in the thousands in 1992, abetted by malnutrition, severe overcrowding and lack of medical care that plague the prison system. A positive development was an increase of over 125 percent in prisoners' food allowances.

Hundreds of students were suspended or expelled in 1992 for either participating in demonstrations or taking part in student union activities. Four student activists who were detained in mid-1991 were released in January 1992, after charges of murder and conspiracy against them were withdrawn, but they were not readmitted to the university. Student unions at universities across the country have been harassed or dissolved, and many universities have shut down temporarily after student demonstrations. The National Association of Nigerian Students continues to be banned, and its president was arrested in May, along with several human rights activists.

Once again, the government banned the Academic Staff Union of Universities (asuu), the national professional association of university lecturers, following a strike it had called in July over issues of university funding, conditions of service, and university autonomy. The government then pressured lecturers with threats of dismissal and eviction from their living quarters.

As in past years, newspapers were shut down and individual journalists were detained and harassed after controversial stories appeared. In April, the Concord press group was closed by police after the African Concord had published a series of articles critical of the government's handling of the economy and the transition program. The offices were reopened two weeks later, after publisher Chief Moshood Abiola apologized to the government for the "discomfort" caused by the publication. Bayo Onanuga, editor of the African Concord, and three journalists resigned rather than apologize.

The managing and deputy editors of the government-owned Daily Times, Nigeria's most widely circulated newspaper, were fired in January 1992, following a front-page story on December 31, 1991 that cited criticism of the open ballot system. In March, editor Fola Olamiti and deputy editor Victor Antwi of the Nigerian Tribune in Ibadan were briefly arrested following publication of a story entitled "Ibadan Under Police Siege," which claimed that police were making random arrests and demanding bribes to secure the detainees' release. The two editors were released shortly after their arrests. In October, Olamiti was reportedly arrested again and taken to Lagos for questioning.

The Right to Monitor

As in the past, the afrc paid lip service to human rights, while maintaining its antagonistic attitude toward human rights monitors. In February, the Nigerian Ministry of Foreign Affairs co-sponsored an "International Seminar on Human Rights" in Lagos, but none of the active domestic human rights groups was invited. While the conference was taking place, Nigerian Vice President Augustus Aikhomu issued a warning to Nigerian human rights groups not to criticize government programs.

In February, security agents seized the passport of Emma Ezeazu, the former national secretary of the Civil Liberties Organisation (clo), as he was attempting to leave the country for a human rights training session in Geneva. In March, the passport of Dr. Michael Ekpo, former chair of the Lagos branch of the Committee for the Defence of Human Rights (cdhr), was seized. Later in March those passports, as well as the passports of human rights activists Gani Fawehinmi, seized in 1991, and Alao Aka-Bashorun, seized in 1990, were returned with no explanation. However, this evidently did not signal a change in government policy, since the passport of clo president Olisa Agbakoba was then seized on April 21, while he was en route to the Hague to attend a human rights conference, and has not been returned.

In May, the government used the riots and demonstrations as a pretext to arrest and detain some of the most outspoken members of the human rights community on the grounds that they were allegedly plotting to overthrow the government. The arrests are probably in retribution for the activities of the Campaign for Democracy (cd), a coalition of human rights, students, women and journalists organizations that was formed in November 1991 to protest theundemocratic nature of the transition program and the continuation of military rule.

At a press conference on May 10, the cd called for the resignation of the government because the country was "gradually moving toward a situation of chaos." Arrests quickly followed. On May 19, the home of Dr. Beko Ransome-Kuti, cdhr president and cd chair, was raided by 200 State Security Service (sss) members. The same day, Femi Falana, a lawyer, leading cd member and head of the National Association of Democratic Lawyers, was also arrested by the sss, as was Baba Omojola, a labor economist, human rights activist and cd member. Chief Gani Fawehinmi, one of the lawyers representing the detainees before the Lagos High Court and a well known human rights activist, was arrested on May 20, after filing habeas corpus applications with the Lagos High Court on behalf of the detainees. On June 9, Olesegun Mayegun, nans president, was arrested. Two other students were arrested and released on bail on June 16. Three offices of the clo were raided and documents taken away. The cd offices were raided, and computers, diskettes and files were seized.

The detainees initially were held in incommunicado detention under Decree 2. On June 15, they were charged with conspiracy and treason. Although all were in Lagos when arrested, they were tried in Magistrates Court in Gwagwalada, 500 miles away, probably to discourage popular demonstrations in their support. The government's refusal to produce the defendants on the dates ordered caused the Nigerian Bar Association (nba) to call a strike in Lagos, which was halted by a court injunction after a day. All detainees were granted bail on June 29, and the treason trial was adjourned initially to October 23 and later to March 26, 1993. Ransome-Kuti, who became ill during his detention, and Falana were awarded damages for unlawful detention; by November the damages had not been paid.

U.S. Policy

William Swing became the new U.S. ambassador to Nigeria in September, replacing Lannon Walker, who was, according to human rights groups, privately quite outspoken in defending human rights before the Nigerian government. In February, Ambassador Walker forwarded to the Nigerian government under formal diplomatic note a letter written to him by Africa Watch raising a number of human rights issues, including police abuse, and attacks on human rights organizations, students and the press. The note requested the government's assistance in responding to the letter. Ambassador Walker's candidness on human rights and other issues apparently angered the Nigerian government so much that even in October, well after the ambassador's departure from Lagos, Information and Culture Minister Professor Sam Oyovbaire accused him of "espionage and acts detrimental to the well-being of Nigeria." Although new in his post, Ambassador Swing has met with some local human rights groups and is expected to be supportive of human rights concerns.

Unfortunately, there were no public statements issued either by the State Department or the embassy in Lagos on human rightsissues. A strong public protest would have been particularly welcome during the arrests of the Campaign for Democracy supporters, as would a public statement urging the military to keep to its original transition timetable.

No military assistance was provided in 1992. U.S. aid for military training in 1992 totaled $401,000. Non-military aid totaled $16.3 million, including $2 million in aid not assigned to specific projects. For 1993, $20 million in non-military aid has been authorized, all on specific projects relating to children's health, family planning, and hiv prevention and care.

The Nigeria chapter in the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in 1991, released in January 1992, appropriately criticized abuses such as extrajudicial killings, arbitrary arrests and torture by the security forces; abysmal prison conditions; and harassment of the press. Unfortunately, the report downplayed violations of academic freedom. It also attributed to others rather than pronouncing in its own voice criticisms of the open ballot system and the reliance on special tribunals.

The Work of Africa Watch

Africa Watch released two newsletters on Nigeria in 1992. A 30-page newsletter released in April, "Contradicting Itself-An Undemocratic Transition Seeks To Bring Democracy Nearer," updated a 1991 report on the transition and attacks on civil society. In June, "`Silencing the Vocal Opposition'-Crackdown on Democracy Advocates" reported on the trial of the Campaign for Democracy supporters.

In March, Africa Watch wrote a letter to President Babangida to urge greater efforts by the government to resolve the conflict between the Tivs and Jukuns. In June, Africa Watch wrote to Nigerian Ambassador Zubair Kazaure protesting the arrests of the Campaign for Democracy supporters. Africa Watch representatives also met with Ambassador Kazaure in November to pursue these and other issues.
SOMALIA

Human Rights Developments

Somalia experienced the most tragic year in its modern history in 1992. Riven by conflict, devastated by famine, and ignored by most of the international community, Somalis living at home and as refugees have been undergoing traumatic suffering with apparently no end in sight.

The year began with intense fighting on the streets of Mogadishu between the forces of self-appointed Interim President Ali Mahdi and his rival, General Mohamed Farah Aidid. Both are members of the same Hawiye clan and of the same political party, the United Somali Congress (usc). The fighting, which broke out in November 1991, arose from a number of factors, including rivalryfor the position of President and the symbols of sovereignty that go with it (particularly money), sub-clan loyalty (President Mahdi's Abgal versus General Aidid's Habr Gidir), competition for the commercial exploitation of looted property, and the need for unpaid soldiers to steal in order to eat. The fighting saw an extraordinary level of indiscriminate brutality as all the weapons of the former dictator Mohamed Siad Barre's arsenal were deployed. Field artillery, anti-aircraft guns, heavy machine guns, mortars, the ubiquitous AK-47 and even air-to-air missiles mounted on jeeps were used in the capital of Mogadishu. Most were fired by untrained teenagers merely in the approximate direction of the "enemy." Residents referred to artillery rounds fired across the city as "to whom it may concern" shells, because of their wholly indiscriminate targeting. In addition, the breakdown of civil authority, the lack of legitimate employment and the scarcity of food led to a serious problem of freelance banditry, with looters and thieves displaying a near-total disregard for human life.

According to calculations made by Africa Watch and Physicians for Human Rights, 14,000 people were killed and 27,000 injured in Mogadishu between November 1991 and the end of February 1992. An unknown number were permanently disabled. Tens of thousands more were psychologically scarred and will suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder and varieties of pathological grief, not only because of the horrors they have suffered, but also because of the failure to observe traditional rituals to respect the dead.

The city's medical facilities were swamped. On the southern side, in General Aidid's area, four hospitals, staffed by Somali doctors and nurses who have not been paid since before the fall of Siad Barre in January 1991, worked extremely long hours, often without electricity and adequate clean water, and with few drugs, to tend the wounded. Week after week, the physicians were compelled to use triage, neglecting those who would almost certainly die to allow the possibility of caring for those who might survive. In the northern part of the city, controlled by Mahdi, there was no functioning hospital, but on the second day of the fighting, a group of Somali doctors came together and formed the Health Emergency Committee. They requisitioned a seafront villa to serve as an operating theater and casualty ward, and gradually requisitioned dozens of other houses to serve as post-operative wards. For several months, "Karaan Hospital," as this was known, was the only medical service available on the northern side of the city, until February, when the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc) opened an emergency hospital in a former prison just outside the city perimeter.

In March and April, the fighting in Mogadishu began to subside somewhat, although chronic insecurity remained. The lull followed the failure of a major attempt by the Aidid forces to overrun the Mahdi enclave at the end of February. It also coincided with the threat of a renewed offensive by the forces of the former dictator Siad Barre, the Somali National Front (snf), composed mainly of Siad Barre's Marehan clan. General Aidid patched together a coalition of forces to confront the snf, and succeeded in drivingit into Kenya in April and May. Aidid also defeated forces belonging to the Somali Patriotic Movement (snm), consisting mainly of the Ogaden clan, and captured the southern port of Kismayo. The military campaign saw widespread abuses against civilians, including the selective killing of scores, possibly hundreds, of Marehan in the towns of Belet Hawa and Luuq.

The rout of the Siad Barre forces meant that the Bay, Gedo and Juba regions were accessible to journalists and relief workers for the first time (only the icrc already had a presence there). What came to light was apocalyptic-a famine of perhaps unparalleled proportions. The farming populations of these regions had traditionally been disadvantaged in Somali society; the Rahanweyn farmers had been considered second-class citizens, and the Bantu descendants of slaves living in the lower reaches of the Juba Valley had even lower social standing. Under Siad Barre, they had suffered a gradual erosion of their economic position, and in many cases, forcible confiscation of their land. They had few firearms and were easy targets for looters. There had been chronic war in these areas since late 1988, and the armies of Siad Barre, the snm and the usc had crossed the region numerous times in 1989, 1990 and 1991, on each occasion looting as they went. The final straw was the 1991-1992 occupation by the snf, which had engaged in systematic and comprehensive looting of food, livestock, household possessions and even clothes. One relief worker reported that Rahanweyn women, robbed of even their clothes, were so destitute and demoralized that they would not leave their houses despite imminent starvation.

The Rahanweyn towns of Baidoa and Baardheere became the sites of some of the most appalling famine camps seen in Africa. Death rates reached extraordinary levels, and starvation was common. By the end of November, death rates were reportedly dropping in Baidoa but had risen sharply again in Baardheere, due to a new outbreak of fighting.

The final factor in the creation of famine has been the blockage of relief. In a destitute country, food is a vital resource which people are prepared to fight and kill for. Delivering food relief under these circumstances is a difficult and hazardous business. While no warlord will claim that he opposes humanitarian relief, few are prepared to allow it to be distributed in areas not under their control. The negotiations needed to ensure effective delivery and distribution have therefore been long and difficult. If one local warlord or clan believes that it has been left out, it may decide to claim its share by force. There is also always the chance of undisciplined soldiers or freelance bandits seizing the food to save themselves.

Along with the Rahanweyn and Bantu farmers, several other groups were severely hit by the famine. They included those displaced by the fighting, urban people who had lost all their possessions in the war or who had been reliant on trade, and Ethiopian refugees. The displaced were affected not only by hunger but also by epidemic disease brought on by overcrowded squatter camps and the lack of sanitation facilities and clean water.Nomadic cattle and camel herders from the powerful clans were less hard hit; their herds remained intact and they possessed the firepower and political influence to protect themselves and lay claim to food resources.

Conflict and scarcity of food fed on each other in a vicious spiral. High food prices compelled soldiers to steal to eat. Food aid was the target for looters because it was a precious commodity. Merchants also hoarded food to drive the price up. Meanwhile, the fighting caused more food shortages and population displacement. Fortunately, these processes also operated in reverse. As food became more widely available (and, equally important, people began to have the confidence that it would remain readily available) prices came down and merchants released stored grain stocks onto the market. By the end of November, the cycle of famine feeding war seemed to have been broken in some parts of the country, allowing attention to turn to ensuring that the marketing system can be rebuilt and not damaged by food aid supplies.

In October, the security situation deteriorated sharply as Aidid's alliances began to unravel. His coalition of Hawiye, Rahanweyn and some Darod groups had lasted only a few months before beginning to come apart. The snf, with support from the Kenyan army, launched a counter-offensive and succeeded in capturing the town of Baardheere. In Mogadishu, Aidid's power perceptibly weakened as freelance banditry increased, and speculation mounted that out of desperation he would resume full-scale war in the city.

The Somali National Movement (SNM), the Isaaq-dominated front controlling northwestern Somalia, unilaterally declared independence in May 1991, to create the Republic of Somaliland, an entity not recognized by any other country. During 1991, the Somaliland government of Abdel Rahman Tur appeared to be making progress in establishing peace and security, rebuilding the shattered infrastructure that had been destroyed in the war of 1988, and encouraging the return of the 400,000 refugees who had fled to Ethiopia.

Still, enormous problems faced the government: it had virtually no resources, and international assistance was slow in coming due to the lack of diplomatic recognition. Land mines were a major problem in both the towns and countryside, killing and injuring hundreds of people, but also blowing up livestock and discouraging the use of water-reservoirs, the lifeline of the largely nomadic population.

In January 1992, a battle between the fighters of two subclans of the Isaaq at Burao left over 150 dead, and forced tens of thousands to flee to the countryside. In late March, fierce fighting broke out in the port of Berbera, Somaliland's economic and commercial capital, and unrest spread to Sheikh and the city of Hargeisa, the political capital. Most civilians had to flee Berbera.

The Right to Monitor

As Somalia descended into complete anarchy and chaos, human rights monitoring as well as international relief efforts faced extremedangers. The threat of violence came not only from the various armed factions but also from freelance bandits and looters.

U.S. and U.N. Policy

Despite the enormity of the human rights disaster in Somalia, it did not receive the attention of the White House or the top echelons of the State Department until well into 1992. Officials at the State Department's Africa Bureau, including Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Herman Cohen, as well as Andrew Natsios and James Kunder of the Department's hard-working Bureau for Food and Humanitarian Assistance, were clearly concerned about the Somalia tragedy and pressed for a more active U.S. response. But they were largely ignored by the National Security Council and President Bush's political advisors, who sought to minimize foreign policy issues in the course of the U.S. presidential campaign throughout much of 1992. By year's end, the Bush administration had made Somalia a priority, but by that time the disaster had reached such cataclysmic proportions that options for dealing with it were limited.

The decade of generous U.S. support to the Siad Barre dictatorship-hundreds of millions of dollars in military and economic aid were provided throughout the 1980s-placed a special burden on the United States to respond quickly when the collapse of the regime predictably ushered in civil war and widespread famine. Rather, following assaults on the U.S. embassy in Mogadishu at the time of Siad Barre's ouster in January 1991 (necessitating a dramatic helicopter rescue of the ambassador and his staff) and the subsequent sacking of the embassy by insurgents, the U.S. presence in Somalia ended. For most of the next two years, U.S. involvement with Somalia was limited to providing generous humanitarian assistance to the few, superb humanitarian organizations working within the country-the International Committee of the Red Cross, Save the Children (U.K.), the International Medical Corps and the French Mdecins Sans Frontires. U.S. aid to Somalia in fiscal year 1992 was composed of $26 million to support humanitarian organizations in Somalia, $51 million in food donations and $23 million to support refugee programs.

But humanitarian assistance alone was not enough. Although the relief groups pleaded for greater involvement in Somalia, the international community dithered and temporized for all of 1991 and half of 1992. The Bush administration largely avoided the issue of Somalia when U.S. leadership at the United Nations was most needed. In particular, the U.S. could and should have insisted that the United Nations play the role that was required of it by providing humanitarian assistance and assisting in the political reconciliation of the country in the months following Siad's departure in early 1991.

But the United Nations ignored Somalia in 1991. And despite the passage of three separate Security Council resolutions on Somalia in the first half of 1992, U.N. humanitarian agencies failed to implement the U.N.'s own relief program or to play thekind of leadership and coordination role with other groups that is expected of them in crises of this kind.

Indeed, there is some evidence that for months the United States actually held back U.N. efforts. The New York Times reported on December 29, 1991 that "[s]enior Administration officials rejected the suggestion, made by some at the State Department, of putting Somalia onto the Security Council agenda at the United Nations." And when Somalia did first come up on the Security Council agenda on January 23, 1992 at the instigation of Cape Verde, the U.S. changed the text of the resolution to weaken its call for U.N. involvement in a political settlement of the conflict. The U.S. apparently also weakened a second resolution on Somalia considered by the Security Council in March. When questioned about the U.S. stance at hearings in April before the House Subcommittee on African Affairs, John Wolf of the State Department's International Organizations Bureau confirmed that the U.S. had pressed for a change in the resolution because of concern over the safety of a peacekeeping force. He added that "at the very senior level" of the Security Council there was "a lot of appreciation for the position the United States took."

The effect of the Bush administration's dithering at the U.N. was to signal that Somalia was not a priority. Absent another strong patron, Somalia remained an orphan until July 1992. The U.N. agencies continued to resist appeals by private relief groups to establish programs within the country, and famine and disease spread.

One bright spot in an otherwise dismal picture was the appointment by U.N. Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali of special envoy Mahmoud Sahnoun on April 28. Sahnoun, an experienced Algerian diplomat, quickly became engaged in painstaking and comprehensive political negotiations with Somalia's warring parties, and demanded the immediate involvement of the U.N.'s humanitarian agencies. Although the response by these agencies to sluggish, Sahnoun nonetheless was able to provide badly needed leadership and coordination to relief efforts within Somalia. Officials of private humanitarian agencies working within Somalia are unanimous in their praise of Sahnoun's efforts.

However, the situation in Somalia worsened over the summer as tens of thousands died from hunger or disease. The civil war's disruption of crop planting, animal herding and market activity, the interference by armed bandits with relief efforts, and the continued severe drought were a deadly combination that claimed as many as 300,000 lives by mid-1992. In July, U.S. Senator Nancy Kassebaum helped to galvanize international attention to Somalia by undertaking a trip to the country. Until the senator's visit, not a single prominent official from any country had visited Somalia. Spurred by Kassebaum's example, by extraordinary press reports of the Somalia disaster, and by mounting criticism of U.S. inaction by members of the U.S. Congress, top Bush administration officials at last focused on the crisis in mid-August. On the eve of the Republican National Convention, the administration announced that it was commencing an airlift of supplies to Somalia.

The airlift, though hastily conceived and executed, was nonetheless an important and highly visible demonstration of U.S. interest in Somalia. It had an immediate effect on the creaking U.N. bureaucracy. Within a matter of weeks, the director of the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), James Grant, and the U.N.'s humanitarian affairs coordinator, Jan Eliasson, made their first visit to the country and promised the kinds of large-scale programs that Sahnoun had been pleading for since May. In another important development, the State Department's Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance sent a team of relief experts to help coordinate the entire relief effort, in clear recognition of the U.N.'s neglect of this badly needed role. In addition, the team introduced important relief innovations, such as the revitalization of traditional Somali markets, in an effort to speed the provision of relief and bolster the authority of the country's clan elders and civilian infrastructure. The U.S. also offered to transport U.N. troops that had been authorized to be deployed to protect relief efforts.

The heightened U.S. attention was welcome but many months too late: despite the new efforts, famine worsened in Somalia. The forced resignation of U.N. special envoy Sahnoun in October brought efforts at political reconciliation to a full stop, and the relief community was left demoralized and overwhelmed. Increased fighting in the area along the Kenyan border (exacerbated by Kenyan logistical support for one of the warring parties) disrupted relief supplies to very fragile communities of displaced people, and the death toll mounted. Many in the U.S. Congress and some in the humanitarian relief community appealed for a more vigorous response, and on November 25, Acting Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger notified the U.N. of the U.S. willingness to provide a battalion of troops (including up to 20,000 U.S. soldiers) to be employed as part of a multinational force to help protect relief supplies and officials.

The offer of U.S. troops to the United Nations appeared to be a recognition of the U.N.'s failure to employ its own forces successfully in Somalia. A force of 3,500 U.N. peacekeeping troops had been approved for Somalia in August but has yet to be fully deployed. By late November, only 500 of the U.N. troops were stationed in Mogadishu, with plans for the deployment of the additional 3,000 repeatedly deferred. According to press reports, President Bush decided to offer U.S. troops to the U.N. on the condition that they be incorporated into a broader multilateral effort under U.S. command with enough authority to carry out their mission.

As of November 30, the issue of an expanded international military presence in Somalia had not yet been resolved. President Bush's offer of troops heightened international attention to the crisis further, and clearly indicated that Somalia is now a top U.S. priority. The tragedy is that the magnitude of the crisis and the years of neglect by the U.S. and the international community have assured that even extraordinary efforts at this point may notsave millions of Somalis from death, or facilitate the rebuilding of Somalia's devastated society.

The Work of Africa Watch

The disaster in Somalia has been the highest priority of Africa Watch in 1992. Africa Watch has devoted unprecedented resources to the country, and achieved a significant impact on policy in the U.S. and at the U.N. As of November, Africa Watch had participated in 101 radio and television interviews on Somalia (92 of them after late July), published 19 articles in the press, and received innumerable mentions in the media. Africa Watch sent two missions to Somalia in 1992, one to Mogadishu in January and February, and one to the north in June and July.

For the first half of 1992, Africa Watch sought primarily to draw attention to the crisis in Somalia-both the scale of human rights abuses being committed and the need for a greater international response. Africa Watch produced two newsletters in February and March (the second jointly with Physicians for Human Rights) detailing the fighting in Mogadishu, including the armaments used, the military tactics, the number of casualties, the types of medical treatment available, the social and psychological impact, and the impending famine.

In Mogadishu, Africa Watch met with both President Mahdi and General Aidid and expressed outrage at the abuses being committed by both sides. Africa Watch told the two leaders that their aspirations to legitimacy had been destroyed by their flagrant disregard for human life, and predicted that they would remain international pariahs unless this barbaric behavior was halted immediately. Both leaders appeared somewhat taken aback by this frank criticism, which they were unused to. Africa Watch pressed both leaders for at least an artillery cease-fire and free passage with protection of humanitarian assistance.

Following the first mission to Somalia, Africa Watch had a series of meetings at the State Department and the U.S. Congress to encourage similar frank condemnations. We encouraged Senator Kassebaum to contemplate a visit to Mogadishu. Africa Watch also lobbied for a greatly expanded humanitarian effort in Somalia, both to relieve the famine and to remove one reason for fighting.

A second focus of Africa Watch's work has been to highlight the failure of the U.N. system. Africa Watch was highly critical of the bungled intervention of some U.N. officials, the negligence and indifference shown by the specialized agencies, the failure of the Security Council to pay adequate attention to the crisis, and of the Secretary General to implement the provisions of a Security Council resolutions relating to the deployment of the humanitarian protection force, and the forced resignation of Mohamed Sahnoun. Africa Watch stressed the lack of accountability within the U.N. system as a key reason for the organization's failure in Somalia. Starting in August, Africa Watch has called repeatedly for an independent public inquiry into the conduct of the U.N. in Somalia.

Africa Watch also criticized African leaders for failing to respond adequately to the Somali crisis. The principal Africanreaction has been to try to keep Somali refugees from entering their countries. No African leader has visited Somalia, and the only significant African diplomatic initiative was a mission by the Eritreans in January. The Arab and Islamic countries have also neglected Somalia.

After July, the international media belatedly focused on Somalia. Africa Watch was heavily involved in informing journalists about the nature of the crisis, and trying to correct some misconceptions about the origins of the famine and the role of the international community. Africa Watch argued that any international reaction that ignored the contribution of Somalis to the resolution of conflict and the relief of distress was likely to impair the chances for future recovery.

In August, Africa Watch visited Yemen to investigate the abuses suffered by the 60,000 Somali refugees there, both in their attempts to reach Yemen by boat, and in their treatment by the Yemeni authorities on their arrival. A 30-minute documentary based on the trip was shown on British television.

Africa Watch is working on a report on the impact of land mines in northern Somalia.
SOUTH AFRICA

Human Rights Developments

Nineteen ninety-two was another turbulent year in South Africa. In March, hopes soared following the all-white referendum favoring the continuance of negotiations to establish democracy. By late June, however, when negotiations between the African National Congress (anc) and the government broke down, fears grew that the transition process would fail and political violence would spin out of control. Although formal negotiations are likely to resume early in 1993, the prospects for a successful transition have become bleaker.

Multilateral negotiations for a transition to majority rule began in 1991. Known as the Convention for a Democratic South Africa (Codesa), they made some progress in the first half of 1992 but stalled in May after a series of disagreements between the government and the anc. Following the killing of 42 residents of the township of Boipatong in June, the anc instituted a program of mass action and suspended its participation in Codesa until the government satisfied certain preconditions.

In September, after troops of the nominally independent homeland of Ciskei killed 28 anc demonstrators, the government finally agreed to meet the anc's demands, including the phased release of over 500 political prisoners, the fencing off of certain hostels for migrant workers, and the banning of the public display of dangerous weapons, thus laying the basis for the resumption of formal negotiations. However, other groups, including the Natal-based Inkatha Freedom Party (Inkatha), led by Chief GatshaButhelezi, Chief Minister of the KwaZulu homeland, and the regimes in Ciskei and Bophuthatswana, rejected the agreement. Multilateral negotiations have not yet resumed; however, in November, State President F.W. de Klerk announced plans to hold multiracial elections in April 1994. The anc rejected this timetable as unacceptably slow. Until an agreement is reached and implemented, black South Africans do not have the right to vote.

Escalating violence, especially in Natal province and around Pretoria and Johannesburg in the Transvaal ("the pwv area"), has become the single most important issue facing political leaders. Politically related violence resulted in over 3,000 deaths nationally from January through October 1992. Patterns of violence evident in 1991 continued, and targets included many participants in the peace process that was initiated with the signing of the National Peace Accord in September 1991. There was also an increase in the number of attacks on commuter trains and in violence between township residents and hostel dwellers in the pwv area.

In its October 1992 figures for the year to date, the independent Human Rights Commission (hrc) reported that 1,147 people had been killed in political violence in Natal, including 32 killed by the security forces. Attacks on prominent grassroots organizers continued and in many cases blocked local efforts to establish peace. The Natal violence has been ongoing since the 1980s and is closely related to rivalry between the anc and Inkatha. A major factor contributing to the violence is the conduct of the KwaZulu Police (kzp) who have shown a strong pro-Inkatha bias and have been repeatedly accused of instigating attacks. Few kzp members have been prosecuted for misconduct. No public investigation of kzp activities has yet been undertaken.

Through October, the hrc recorded 1,663 deaths in the pwv area. With the exception of train attacks, which accounted for 257 of these fatalities, the level of violence dropped in the second half of the year. Most of the train attacks took place during the morning or evening rush hours. Attackers shot commuters on platforms and boarded trains to shoot, hack and stab passengers to death. Many passengers lost their lives jumping from moving trains in an attempt to flee attackers. After two years of such attacks, only one successful prosecution has been launched. Only in March 1992, 21 months after the train attacks began, did the government finally prohibit the carrying of dangerous weapons at railway stations and on trains.

One important effort to end violence that the government supported was the establishment of the Goldstone Commission. Formed in 1991 and led by Justice Richard Goldstone, it has conducted numerous investigations into public violence and developed a reputation as an independent and impartial body. In 1992, it publicly recommended steps the government should take to end the violence. These recommendations are not binding and the commission has complained that many have been ignored. In January 1992, the Goldstone Commission announced that it would investigate train violence. Following this announcement, both police and Spoornet, the commuter railway operator, increased efforts to end trainviolence. In July, the commission's interim report on train violence identified many problems with the physical condition and layout of trains and stations that contributed to the large number of deaths.

Violence between hostel dwellers and township residents was particularly serious in the pwv area in 1992. In March, the violence was so intense in Alexandra, north of Johannesburg, that many township residents were forced to flee their homes and at least 52 people were killed and 389 injured. The violence centered around the Madala Hostel, following a recruitment campaign by Inkatha, and residents now want the hostel to be closed. In Soweto, a similar pattern of violence between local residents and inmates of the Jabulani, Nancefield, Dobsonville and Mzimhlope Hostels has resulted in at least 200 deaths since January 1991. Initial demands that the hostels be converted to family units are being dropped in favor of demands for their demolition. In May 1991, the government agreed to upgrade the hostels, but no action was taken. The government's reluctance to act on the hostels issue can be explained in part by Inkatha's vigorous opposition to these proposals.

The pressure on the government to take steps to halt the bloodshed grew dramatically after the massacre of 42 people in Boipatong in June. Witnesses alleged that hostel dwellers, with police assistance, entered the township at night and hacked and stabbed men, women, children and infants to death. The Goldstone Commission heard evidence from witnesses that police casspirs (armored vehicles) escorted armed hostel dwellers into the township. Police arrested 93 residents of the nearby KwaMadala Hostel. In July, the commission recommended that the government place fences around hostels and provide security to ensure that people carrying weapons cannot enter or leave hostels.

The Goldstone Commission also recommended a total ban on the carrying of dangerous weapons in public, an issue that became highly politicized in 1991 when Inkatha vigorously defended the right to carry "cultural weapons" such as spears and sticks. The government has wavered on this issue. In 1991, it banned dangerous weapons in public but excluded Zulu "cultural weapons," despite the numerous violent incidents involving these weapons. In September 1992, the government finally agreed both to fence the hostels and to ban the public display of "cultural weapons." Chief Buthelezi, the Inkatha leader, immediately vowed to defy the ban, which has not been enforced.

The South African government has shown a new willingness to permit international involvement in the country's problems. Most important, in June, a Special Representative of the United Nations Secretary-General visited South Africa for the first time and produced a report, considered by the U.N. Security Council in July. The report made several recommendations, some of which focused on the need to strengthen the National Peace Accord structures to enable them to operate effectively. U.N. monitors were sent to South Africa to work with the National Peace Secretariat duringmass protests and demonstrations in August and September, and were instrumental in some cases in reducing violent incidents.

The Goldstone Commission has also received international assistance. In May, Justice Goldstone announced the appointment of a multinational advisory panel to examine the policing of public demonstrations. The panel produced a detailed report in July and made many recommendations, including new training for police officers in public relations, communication and the use of non-lethal equipment to control demonstrations. It also recommended that legislative changes be implemented to facilitate the holding of peaceful demonstrations, transferring authority to impose conditions on demonstrations from police to local magistrates and suggesting appropriate criteria.

The commission also invited Dr. Peter Waddington, a British criminologist, to review the police investigation of the Boipatong massacre. He sharply criticized the South African Police (SAP), calling their response to the attack and subsequent investigation "woefully inadequate" and "incompetent." He found serious shortcomings in command and control and in contingency planning. The police ignored the main conclusion of the report, which was that "the SAP is an unaccountable police force."

Following press reports of numerous deaths in detention, and allegations in August by a senior independent pathologist, Dr. Jonathan Gluckman, that he believed police to be responsible for many of these deaths, the government announced it would permit the International Committee of the Red Cross to examine prisons in South Africa for the first time. Deaths in detention continue and remain a serious obstacle to the creation of public trust in the much-discredited SAP. The hrc reported that 113 people died in detention through October.

During 1992, evidence implicating the security forces in the violence devastating the black townships continued to emerge, much of it uncovered by the Goldstone Commission. Evidence was produced to the commission showing that sadf Military Intelligence had funded companies in the past that had provided training and arms to Inkatha and township gangs that were later involved in violence. In November, a British-born former Inkatha official who had been deported to Britain in July confirmed these reports by revealing that he had imported arms for Inkatha from Mozambique to fuel a terror strategy designed to prevent the anc from taking power.

In May, the commission investigated the conduct of 32 Battalion, a white-led unit composed mainly of black soldiers recruited in Angola. The commission found that the battalion had acted, in Phola Park squatter camp in April, in a manner "completely inconsistent with the functioning of a peacekeeping force, and, in fact, became perpetrators of violence." After initial resistance, the government announced in July that the battalion would be disbanded, together with two other notorious foreign units.

Also in May, a South African newspaper reported that it had evidence linking the head of Military Intelligence, General C.P. van der Westhuizen, to the 1985 murder of four prominent anti-apartheid activists, including Matthew Goniwe, who was a teacher and an important figure in the United Democratic Front. The paper claimed it had a copy of a transcript of a conversation suggesting that these activists should be "permanently removed from society as a matter of urgency." The document was also apparently approved by the State Security Council, a body composed of members of the cabinet and senior military officers. President de Klerk was compelled to reopen the inquest into Goniwe's death following these disclosures. However, four months after the inquest was reopened, the investigators had not interviewed van der Westhuizen, who continues to carry out his duties.

In October, the inquest into the murder in 1989 of Johannesburg academic David Webster was reopened. Evidence was presented to the inquest concerning covert security force involvement in the shooting of Webster outside his home, and in the killing of other opposition figures. A witness to the inquest admitted that he had lied to the 1990 Harms Commission of inquiry into the operation of hit squads.

In November, in one of the most spectacular revelations of covert security force activity, the Goldstone Commission announced that it had seized files indicating that Military Intelligence had recruited a convicted murderer, who was also a former hit-squad member suspected of Webster's murder, to undertake operations to discredit the anc, including the use of prostitutes, drug dealers and other criminal elements. President de Klerk reshuffled the command of Military Intelligence following the commission's report, but did not fire or suspend any of the officers implicated in the scandal.

The Goldstone Commission continues its investigations. It has requested additional powers to investigate the South African Defence Force (sadf), the SAP, the kzp, Umkhonto we Sizwe ("Spear of the Nation," the armed wing of the anc) and other paramilitary groups and private security firms. The government refused to grant the additional powers, but has promised to supply more police personnel to the commission. The commission currently has no independent power to compel testimony or the production of evidence and it has no power of prosecution. On several occasions it has recommended that charges be brought against police officers and others, but with one exception, no prosecutions have taken place.

The failure to ensure accountability for security force violations of human rights remains a serious problem, despite exceptional cases in which individual officers have been successfully prosecuted. Even when police officers are implicated in violence, they are often not suspended pending trial and receive lenient sentencing if convicted. Two police officers, convicted and sentenced for several murders, were released early from prison in 1992 after serving only months of 17- and 18-year sentences. In a case known as the "Trust Feeds case," which was heard in April, the court found one white police captain and four black special constables guilty of the murder of 11 people in 1988. However, evidence at the trial indicated an earlier cover-up of police complicity.

In October, the government introduced legislation that would extend its existing powers to grant indemnity from prosecution. Unexpectedly defeated in the Indian house of the racially divided tricameral parliament, President de Klerk forced the bill into law through the President's Council, a rubber-stamp body with the power to overrule parliament. The legislation will allow the government to exempt unconditionally members of the security forces from prosecution for offenses they have committed, including the most serious human rights violations. No details of the offenses forgiven need be disclosed. The act was condemned by the anc and by national and international human rights organizations.

In March, the government announced that a moratorium on hangings of prisoners sentenced to death, in effect since the end of 1989, would be lifted. However, it was forced to back down after numerous denunciations by national and international human rights groups, churches and the anc. The moratorium was reinstated, pending the conclusion of constitutional negotiations and agreement on a bill of rights. In Bophuthatswana, three convicted murderers were to be hanged in November, but were granted a 90-day reprieve. Three hundred prisoners remain on death row.

Although many of the most important statutes that formed the basis of apartheid were repealed in 1991, much repressive legislation remains in place, including the Internal Security Act, which, as amended in 1991, permits police to detain a person without trial for up to ten days, and the Public Safety Act, which permits the Minister of Law and Order to declare an area to be an "unrest area." In an "unrest area," police can impose curfews and impose restrictions on entry and exit from the area, conduct warrantless searches and seizures, detain suspects without trial for up to 30 days, and enjoy indemnity against prosecution. The press may also be excluded. For the first seven months of 1992, 49 declarations of "unrest areas" were made.

New legislation of concern was also passed during 1992, including the Criminal Law Second Amendment Act, which amends existing legislation to broaden the definition of the crime of "intimidation" and shifts the burden of proof to the defendant on the often-critical issue of intent. This measure is inconsistent with the presumption of innocence. The government also introduced the Interception and Monitoring Prohibition Bill, which gives the police extensive powers to intercept mail or tap telephones. The bill is drafted very broadly, and South African human rights groups have condemned it.

The legislation establishing the ten black homelands remains in force. Although it is assumed that the "non-independent" homelands will be superseded under a new constitutional order for South Africa, the question of reincorporation of the four nominally independent homelands (Transkei, Bophuthatswana, Venda and Ciskei) has not been resolved. The South African government maintains that it is up to each "independent" homeland to decide whether to retain its "sovereignty." Although Transkei and Venda have stated that they favor reincorporation, Bophuthatswana maintains that it will remain "independent," while Ciskei has equivocated. Theposition of the anc is that the consent of the homeland administrations is irrelevant and alleged legal difficulties in reincorporation of no validity.

In Bophuthatswana, the high level of repression has continued. Police brutality is extreme and virtually unchecked, and has increased over the last two years. The rights to freedom of assembly and association are not respected: any meeting of more than two people requires government permission, and those who have not registered themselves as citizens of the homeland are forbidden from taking part in political activity. Numerous "illegal gathering" cases have been prosecuted. In October, the Bophuthatswana parliament approved the Prevention and Control of Mass Action bill, which will effectively prohibit public demonstrations in the bantustan. Detentions of anc members and officials and others, including students at the University of Bophuthatswana, continue to take place, though usually for limited periods. While most long-term political prisoners who had been held in Bophuthatswana were released by the beginning of 1992, at least six remain in jail. Two of these, Christopher Makgale and Petrus Mothupi, undertook a hunger strike to protest their continued detention. Discussions between the anc and the homeland government offer the hope of some improvement in the situation.

The situation in Ciskei remains critical. Brigadier Oupa Gqozo, the military ruler who came to power in a coup in 1990, has continued to restrict freedom of expression, assembly and association, and tension between the anc and the homeland government has remained high. Detention without trial is common. Incidents of violence within the homeland have also been on the rise, with attacks on appointed headmen leading to retaliation by the homeland police.

On March 11, the anc and allied organizations officially launched a "Popular Front for Peace and Democracy in Ciskei," despite a "truce" between the homeland government and its opponents in which Gqozo had agreed to review Ciskei's security legislation restricting freedom of assembly. This campaign led to serious clashes between the anc and police, notably in the township of Mdantsane on August 2, and in the "Bisho massacre" of September 7, when a peaceful demonstration of approximately 70,000 anc supporters was fired on by members of the Ciskei army and police. Twenty-eight died and approximately 200 were wounded. The officer in charge of the Ciskei forces was a seconded sadf officer, Brigadier Marius Oelschig, and large numbers of sadf troops were present near the site of the march, but took no action. The Goldstone Commission published a report condemning the actions of the homeland armed forces as "morally and legally indefensible," and unjustifiable as a response to anc actions.

Among the "non-independent" homelands, the situation in KwaZulu is of most concern. Political violence is extremely severe. The police force of the homeland is deeply implicated in the perpetuation of this violence, and is independently guilty of the summary execution and torture of detainees in its control. Chief Gatsha Buthelezi, the president of Inkatha, is also the chiefminister of the homeland. Membership in Inkatha is virtually compulsory for all involved in the administration of the homeland, and freedom of expression and association are severely compromised.

The Right to Monitor

Human rights organizations have been free to monitor human rights abuses in South Africa to a greater extent than in the past. However, the Internal Security Act still permits the Minister of Law and Order to ban certain organizations or forbid specific gatherings.

In the homeland of Bophuthatswana, the Black Sash and the Transvaal Rural Action Committee, South African-based human rights organizations, continue to be banned. The Mafikeng Anti-Repression Forum (maref), a local human rights group, was refused permission to visit political prisoners on hunger strike in Bophuthatswana prisons.

A provision of the Police Act of 1958, which prohibited the media from reporting on police actions and imposed the onerous burden of proof on editors to produce sworn evidence supporting reports of police misconduct, was repealed. The provision had severely inhibited the ability of the press to report on police matters. As a result of this repeal, it became possible to cover stories such as the report by Dr. Gluckman alleging police responsibility for deaths in detention.

Still, journalists remained subject to restrictions in 1992. In April, the editor and a journalist from the New Nation were subpoenaed to appear before a court to reveal their source for an article alleging police involvement in a taxi war in the Western Transvaal. In May, the Commissioner of Police obtained an injunction against the Vrye Weekblad, which prevented the paper from publishing a report on police activity. In September, a former agent of a covert security force unit obtained a court order preventing the Weekly Mail from publishing details of his activities. On several occasions, journalists were attacked and injured when attending township funerals. In August, a South African journalist narrowly escaped death and an American journalist was injured when they were shot by youths while covering the general strike.

U.S. Policy

In 1992, the U.S. government continued to urge all political parties in South Africa to negotiate a transition to democracy. It publicly welcomed the overwhelming "yes" vote in the all-white March referendum on whether President de Klerk should continue democracy negotiations. When negotiations broke down in June, the Administration urged both the government and the anc to resume talks. In July, the U.S. supported sending a U.N. mission to South Africa in an effort to restart democracy negotiations but said that the purpose of the U.N. was "not to diagnose the origins of the violence in South Africa, nor to impose conditions on those who bear the responsibility for the violence."

While the administration has not previously publicly acknowledged the South African government's role in the violence, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Herman Cohen, in testimony before the House Foreign Affairs Committee on July 23, said:

The government must do more to address allegations of complicity in the violence by members of the security forces. A peaceful climate is not possible as long as people lack confidence in the impartiality of the police. In addition, we are concerned by Justice Goldstone's recent report stating that the South African Government has failed to implement his recommendations.

Secretary Cohen also criticized the anc and Inkatha for their role in the violence without attempting to apportion relative blame. In the past, the administration, while criticizing both groups, has given undue emphasis to abuses suffered by Inkatha supporters.

In September, following the Bisho massacre, the administration delivered a strong condemnation of security force action. State Department spokesman Richard Boucher said, "The South African government is ultimately responsible for the actions of the homelands." However, the anc organizers of the demonstration that led to the massacre were also criticized on the grounds that their actions were a distraction from the primary issue, namely, negotiations with the government.

Although most U.S. sanctions against South Africa were lifted in 1991, certain trade sanctions remain in place. Exports to the SAP and sadf of arms and related material, and imports to the United States of arms, ammunition and military equipment manufactured in South Africa, remain prohibited. The U.S. executive director of the International Monetary Fund is still instructed to oppose any application for the extension to South Africa of a loan unless the loan serves basic human needs. Support for exports that would enable the South African government to maintain apartheid also remain banned. A large number of state and local governments also maintain their own sanctions against South Africa, most of which have not yet been lifted.

In 1992, the U.S. government lifted some remaining sanctions to improve South African economic prospects. Restrictions on the provision by the Export-Import Bank of credits for U.S. exports to the South African government were lifted. These credits may also be provided to South African companies if the Secretary of State certifies that the company complies with the Fair Labor Standards Act. In March, the State Department also announced that South Africa was a "friendly country" and therefore eligible for Trade and Development Program development planning services. The State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1991, issued in January 1992, correctly acknowledges that violence threatens the negotiation process, but is misleading because it suggests that the violence is the result either of factional conflict or criminal elements using factionalism as a disguise. Itcompletely ignores the repeated allegations made of government and security force complicity in the violence. While the report notes many instances of alleged police misconduct and numerous failures by the criminal justice system to prosecute police for unlawful activities, it does not suggest that this or the failure of the government to take effective measures to end the violence are factors that contribute to the violence. The report also credits the government for being "somewhat responsive" to claims of police brutality by instigating some investigations when all the government had done was establish an internal team of police investigators.

For fiscal year 1992, $80 million was budgeted for assistance to South Africa. The administration initially requested $70 million to be provided to nongovernmental groups, mostly for scholarships in South Africa and the United States. Congress also provided an additional $10 million targeted for distribution to black opposition groups that had renounced violence. These additional funds were intended to assist political groups to acquire the technical support facilities needed for effective organization.

The Work of Africa Watch

In December 1991, Africa Watch published a detailed newsletter on human rights in Ciskei, the first international report on that homeland. In August 1992, the Human Rights Watch Prison Project made a trip to South Africa to visit prisons. A follow-up visit is planned for 1993 when a report will be released. In October 1992, a newsletter was issued on the provisions of the Amnesty Law, which protected from prosecution members of the government security services and the anc who have been responsible for human rights abuses in the past.

Several detailed letters were sent to the South African government and to the homeland administrations protesting the continued imprisonment of political prisoners in Bophuthatswana and the excessive use of force by the Ciskei Defence Forces in September.
SUDAN

Human Rights Developments

During 1992, Sudan suffered an extraordinary range of human rights abuses committed on a huge scale. The military government headed by General Omer al Bashir remained firmly in power and resolutely committed to the transformation of Sudan into an Islamic state, by whatever means necessary. The policy has resulted in the suppression of all forms of civil society, the arrest, detention and torture of dissidents, a war in the south of extreme brutality, and the relocation and deprivation of hundreds of thousands of people. In the south, the rebel Sudan People's Liberation Army (spla) also has shown itself to be contemptuous of human rights.

Without doubt, the major cause of human rights abuse in Sudan has been the war in the south, now nine years old. In March, the government launched its largest offensive yet against the spla. Its aim was to break key lines of communication by seizing strategic garrison towns, and to cut off sources of relief supplies to civilians in spla-held areas. The offensive proved successful, and by July a string of important spla-held towns, mainly on the east bank of the Nile, had fallen to government attack. They included the towns of Bor, Torit and Kapoeta-key conduits for Operation Lifeline Sudan, the cross-border relief operation mounted from Kenya and Uganda, which was severely impaired. On capturing the town of Pochalla of March 29, a relief operation mounted by the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc) was also closed down. United Nations relief airlifts were progressively suspended from March to August, and only partially reinstated in September. At the end of November, only one town in the spla-controlled areas was receiving U.N. food relief.

The offensive produced numerous abuses of human rights, including arbitrary killing and looting of civilians. The town of Kapoeta was bombed on March 13, killing two. After new government garrisons were established in the towns of Rumbek and Yirol, Sudanese troops practiced scorched-earth policies, burning all villages within a 20 kilometer radius. Over 100,000 people were displaced by these atrocities.

The government offensive struck at a region already weakened by spla internecine strife and abuse of human rights. In August 1991, two leading commanders (the "Nasir faction") had split from the mainstream spla of Colonel John Garang (the "Torit faction"), accusing him of holding more than 40 political detainees, forcibly recruiting child soldiers, and ruling the organization in a highly authoritarian manner. These accusations were largely correct. Despite some attempts by Garang to improve his image in late 1991 and early 1992, no significant improvements in the front's human rights record were noted. Prisoners remained in captivity and, in August, several thousand refugee children were spirited away from a camp in northern Kenya, almost certainly to serve on Garang's front line.

The split in the spla led to some of the worst human rights abuses that the south has witnessed since the outbreak of war. Both sides were responsible. Between November 1991 and February 1992, a series of attacks by forces loyal to the Nasir faction left at least 5,000 civilians dead in the Bor-Kongor area. About 200,000 civilians were displaced, their cattle stolen and their villages burned. In the villages of Pagerau and Adermuoth and the cattle camp of Wun Rit on January 21-22 alone, 189 civilians were killed, including leprosy patients, 20 to 30 women and children were abducted, and 4,000 cattle were stolen. The immediate consequence was widespread hunger throughout the area.

The counteroffensive by Garang's forces also yielded widespread killings of civilians. For instance, over 80 were believed killed at the village of Baliet in April. Garang's forces also took punitive action against groups that supported thegovernment. For instance, in retaliation for the support to the army given by a Toposa militia, Garang's forces burned a number of Toposa villages, killed over 100 civilians, and drove much of the population from their land into Kapoeta town.

One of the Nasir faction's charges against Garang was that he favored his own ethnic group, the Bor Dinka, over all others. However, the Nasir faction also showed itself prone to ethnic favoritism. The great majority of its support was drawn from the Nuer. There is evidence that they discriminated against smaller groups in their territory, such as the displaced Uduk people, by denying them access to relief, looting their crops and fish, and not prosecuting Nuer who committed crimes against them. Ultimately the Uduk were forced to abandon their camp close to Nasir and cross into Ethiopia to register as refugees.

Attempts to heal the rift in the spla met with only moderate success. On September 28, the spla fractured further when Garang's senior commander, William Nyuon, broke away. Shortly afterward, a Norwegian journalist and three expatriate U.N. workers were murdered in unclear circumstances, causing the U.N. to suspend relief flights to much of southern Sudan. Africa Watch repeatedly condemned both the government and the spla for their abuses of human rights and obstruction of relief.

The most severe human rights abuses in the south occurred in the southern capital, Juba. In reaction to military reverses elsewhere in the south and his endangered position within the spla, Garang launched an all-out attack on Juba on June 6. The offensive was repulsed, but Garang attacked again on July 7, and this time his forces remained entrenched in and around the city. At least 30 civilians were killed and 200 injured in the cross fire. However, the most severe atrocities started with the army's reaction. Several quarters of the city were leveled by the army in an attempt to create a free-fire zone. Over 100,000 residents were forcibly displaced and crowded into the northwest part of town, where they had minimal sanitation and shelter, and were wholly reliant on international airlifts of food. The spla repeatedly shelled the airport and said that relief flights landed at their own risk. Following an incident in which a plane with U.N. insignia was used by the government to fly in arms and ammunition, the spla also threatened to shoot at relief planes. The airlift continued intermittently nonetheless, but by late September the majority of children in the city were reported to be seriously malnourished.

The army undertook repeated sweeps through the city, picking up civilians it suspected of sympathizing with the spla. Suspected spla soldiers were shot on sight, including wounded soldiers hiding in houses. The civilians who allegedly sheltered them were also often executed on the spot. Hundreds were arrested, and many were tortured, some fatally. Methods of torture included beatings, electric shocks, pulling nails, crushing testicles, throwing victims into very hot water, and having hot irons pressed against their body. About 300 people are believed to have been summarily executed by the army, including 30 army officers. One of those executed was Andrew Tombe, a Sudanese employee of the U.S. Agencyfor International Development (usaid), who was accused of treason for allegedly using his radio to direct the shelling of the city by the spla. He was killed on about September 15, and his death announced one week later. It is unclear whether he was tried, but if he was, it was before a military tribunal, with no right of counsel or right of appeal. The U.S. government strongly protested his execution, and the reported execution of another usaid employee around the same time.

The spla persistently shelled the city of Juba. Its shells were aimed primarily at military installations, but also fell on civilian areas nearby.

In late October, the Nasir faction of the spla, together with forces loyal to the Nuer prophet Wurnyang, captured the city of Malakal. The spla had given no thought to the supply of provisions for the 180,000 inhabitants. Many civilians fled for the town of Waat, where severe starvation was reported. Others were too weak or frightened to leave. In mid-November, the army retook the city. Mass arrests, torture and executions reportedly followed.

The cumulative effect of the war and human rights abuses in southern Sudan has been to bring the region, once again, to the brink of a major humanitarian disaster. In 1988, a belatedly publicized famine is estimated to have killed up to 250,000 people before Operation Lifeline Sudan was launched to feed civilians on both sides. Operation Lifeline was coordinated by the U.N. and depended on government permission for all its deliveries. The government has consistently used this control over the operation, exercised in the name of national sovereignty, to obstruct the operation. Permission for relief flights is granted only on a monthly basis, and the government always waits until the last moment before announcing which, if any, flights may proceed. As a result, medium-term planning has been impossible.

The events of 1992 have brought the program to an effective end. Throughout the year, junior U.N. staff in Khartoum and Nairobi, and their counterparts in the voluntary sector, struggled to keep open the small trickle of aid. In September, U.N. Under-Secretary General for Humanitarian Affairs Jan Eliasson visited Sudan and made a short trip to Juba. He obtained permission for greater U.N. access, initially to assess needs. However, this initiative immediately foundered because of government obstruction, the execution of Tombe, and the killing of the four expatriates by the spla. Eliasson and the U.N. declined publicly to condemn either side for its famine-creating actions.

With the demise of Operation Lifeline and the massive displacement and disruption caused in 1992, several areas in the south are rapidly descending into a famine on the scale of 1988. The areas most affected are Juba, the vicinity of Bor and Kongor and the areas to which the people displaced from these towns have gone, and parts of Bahr el Ghazal region that have been subjected to scorched-earth policies by the Sudanese army. The plight of civilians in and around Malakal is of serious concern, and it is likely that 1993 will see a large flow of refugees to Ethiopia.

The Nuba Mountains lie in southern Kordofan, which is part of northern Sudan. The Nuba themselves are non-Arab people, numbering about one million, who practice a mixture of traditional religion, Christianity and Islam. They are well-known for body-painting, wrestling, music and dance. However, the very qualities that have attracted Western anthropologists to the Nuba have drawn the concern of a succession of conservative Arab-oriented Islamic governments in Khartoum. The Nubas' anomalous position-non-Arabs in the north-has made them a target for discrimination in jobs, education and building permits.

In 1987, the spla sent a battalion to the Nuba Mountains to try to open a new front in the war. This move has sparked such abuses by the spla as forcible conscription, the stealing of food, and the killing of village chiefs who have advocated staying out of the war. However, the response of successive governments in Khartoum has been far more destructive. Military operations in the Nuba Mountains have led to killings of hundreds of civilians, and perhaps more, and destruction of their property. In addition, the government has armed the local Arabs, traditional rivals of the Nuba, and formed a local Popular Defense Force (pdf). The pdf has been responsible for many of the worst abuses, such as the massacre of 150 Nuba civilians at the town of Lagowa in October 1989. Many members of the pdf seek to expropriate Nuba land for themselves.

In 1991, evidence emerged of a stepped-up campaign against the Nuba, including the systematic "disappearance" of educated Nuba men. Africa Watch obtained evidence of more than 40 such men who had disappeared.

In 1992, the campaign against the Nuba reached a new height. In early January, the governor of Kordofan declared a "Jihad" or Holy War in the Nuba Mountains, while the military commander vowed to "cleanse" every area "sullied by the outlaws." The size of the military forces assembled suggested that the government had planned an action that was far beyond what was required to combat the small spla forces alone. Killings and burnings mounted. In June, the government began the forcible relocation of the Nuba. Nuba civilians were first herded into camps close to the regional capital, Kadugli, or other towns. Only pro-government Islamic relief agencies were permitted to operate in these camps. From there, some were relocated to "peace villages" within the Nuba Mountains; these are essentially work camps attached to newly established mechanized farms owned by the Khartoum elite, on land previously farmed by Nuba villagers. Others were relocated outside the Nuba Mountains altogether. Starting in June, "Peace Convoys" with military guards began transporting tens of thousands of Nuba northwards, dispersing them in small towns in northern Kordofan. Many are reported to have died from disease and starvation. By early September, more than 40,000 had been moved.

Africa Watch received reports that the authorities planned to segregate men and women, sending the men to work as laborers on "production sites" and the women and children to work in the households of wealthy northern families. If carried through, this policy would lead directly to the complete eradication oftraditional Nuba culture, language and society, as well as the death and suffering of many Nuba.

Another large-scale abuse perpetrated by the Sudanese government was a systematic attempt to relocate the population of squatters and displaced people that over the previous decade had grown up around the national capital, Khartoum, as a result of repeated drought, chronic war and the concentration of services and economic development in Khartoum. The problem had become severe because of a lack of town planning, so that between one and two million people were living in "unplanned" areas. These areas ranged from wholly undeveloped sectors to semi-planned suburban sites equipped with services. Most of the "squatters" originated from western Sudan, most of the "displaced" from the south or the Nuba Mountains. The government regarded these settlements not only as a blot on the landscape but also as a threat to the Arab-Islamic identity of Sudan's capital city.

Attempts to regularize or relocate the squatters and displaced had been made for some years. In 1991, the military government introduced an amendment to the Civil Transactions Act that forbad legal actions on behalf of the squatters and provided that the government had an absolute right to dispose as it wished of the land they occupied. In the last months of 1991, on the basis of this extraordinary piece of legislation, the government began the latest and most systematic round of forced relocations.

In a typical operation, the residents of a certain area are given warning of a day or so before the army moves in to bulldoze and burn the area. Residents are forced onto trucks with what possessions they can salvage and removed to new sites. On December 21-22, 1991, the army opened fire on residents of Kurmuta, south Khartoum, who tried to resist the demolitions, killing 21. Since that display of force, residents offered no systematic resistance, although the army reportedly still occasionally killed or wounded those to be displaced. By the middle of 1992, the program had become more systematic, with houses to be demolished marked well in advance, and residents given some warning that they were to be relocated.

No compensation is paid to those whose houses have been destroyed. The land is reallocated to long-time residents of Khartoum and others. In one demolished site, Mayo, UNICEF had formerly maintained a large project providing water to the residents; this will now benefit the new owners. Schools and clinics have been closed and demolished.

The displaced are relocated to transit camps at some distance from the city. The government has said that it plans to relocate them a second time, to "production sites," where they will presumably be reduced to the status of wage laborers on mechanized farms. The squatters are removed to "Peace Cities" outside the city. For much of 1992, the conditions in the transit camps and Peace Cities were appalling, with inadequate water, no shelter, no services and little food. In the early months of 1992, the relocated people were forced to dig holes in the sand to provide a minimum of protection from the cold for their children; there weresome deaths from exposure. Those relocated there could only continue with their employment in Khartoum by spending most of their income on public transportation to and from the city. Soldiers and guards kept the people in their new homes with electric cattle prods, whips and guns. The government strictly limited outside access to the new camps, permitting only certain Islamic relief agencies to supply services. Many of those relocated, particularly the large Christian minority, saw these restrictions on outside access as an attempt to encourage Islamic proselytization. Toward the middle of 1992, material conditions in the camps were improving.

By September, the government had relocated about 750,000 people, and was implementing a "replanning" program for further areas of the city that would lead to the destruction of the homes of about 500,000 more. The government succeeded in outmaneuvering the U.N. by repeatedly promising to slow down the relocations and to improve humanitarian access to the camps. The U.N. responded by undertaking a series of general investigations into the program and the problem of urban replanning, finally recommending a small pilot program of voluntary relocation in May. However, while these negotiations and prevarications went on, the demolitions and relocations proceeded. By the time the U.N. realized that it had managed to achieve nothing, the majority of the program was a fait accompli. On his visit to Sudan in September, Under-Secretary General Eliasson privately condemned the relocations, but failed to make any public statement-in effect continuing the failed policy of "quiet diplomacy."

Despite an amnesty declared in April 1991, in which 299 political prisoners were released, detention and torture remain routine in Khartoum and the other major cities of northern Sudan. The Sudanese government has changed its strategy of detention. Rather than holding a certain number of well known political opponents and trade union activists in regular prisons for long periods, it is implementing a program of "rolling detention"-a form of harassment. Suspected dissidents are required to present themselves regularly (often daily) at the headquarters of the security service, where they are kept waiting all day and told to report back the next day. Sometimes they are questioned. This arbitrary treatment keeps people in a state of vigilance and fear, and prevents them from earning an income.

Suspected opponents are also arrested and taken not to regular prisons but to unofficial detention centers known as "ghost houses," four of which exist in Khartoum. Occasionally they are subjected to torture, but in general the regime inside the ghost houses appears to be an attempt to demoralize and degrade the detainees. Inmates are under continual surveillance, and their sleep is regularly interrupted. Every day they are required to perform strenuous and humiliating drills, such as standing on one leg with arms outstretched for a long period, or placing one finger of the right hand on the ground and spinning around it very fast. The detainees are also subjected to degrading verbal abuse,including threats of sexual assault. The only respite allowed is during prayer.

Several hundred detainees are kept in ghost houses. Their families are not informed of their whereabouts-indeed, the government denies their very existence-and they receive no visitors. When they are released they are also subjected to surveillance.

Though less dramatic in scale than the atrocities in the south, human rights abuses against Sudan's civil and political elite have continued unabated. The actions taken when the junta seized power against all elements of civil society-trade unions, political parties, the press, the judiciary and the university-still stand.

In 1991, the government introduced a new penal code allegedly founded upon Islamic principles. Most of the prescribed hudud punishments, such as amputation or stoning to death, have not been implemented to date. The exception is flogging, which has been regularly practiced since 1983. However, other significant sections of the code that relate to treason and other offenses against the state, and which reduce non-Muslims to second-class citizens, have been implemented.

Nineteen ninety-two saw several trials of political opponents. Brigadier Nasur Hassan Bashir Nasur was condemned to death for treason for allegedly plotting a coup following a trial in a military tribunal. Sid Ahmed el Hussein, a prominent politician in the former parliamentary regime and a close associate of U.N. Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, was tried for the same offense in September 1992 but eventually acquitted following a high-profile campaign in the Arab world.

Provisions in the penal code that discriminate against non-Muslims reflect an increasing campaign against Sudan's Coptic community that is designed to compel them to leave the country. Coptic Christians have lived in Sudan for over a century, usually in urban areas as traders and administrators. Although most Coptic families originate from Egypt, they have become Sudanese citizens over the generations. Under the current government, they have been subjected to harassment-denied employment in government, refused trading licenses, and confronted by threats against their churches. Thousands have left the country, although violence by radical Islamists against Copts in Egypt-their obvious refuge-is also growing.

Of the institutions of civil society most threatened by the government in 1992, Sudan's universities rank high. Sudan's three main universities-Khartoum, Juba and Gezira-were once among the most liberal in the Arab world. The current government has embarked upon a program intended to transform them into centers of exclusively Islamic learning, following the doctrines of the Muslim Brothers.

The Right to Monitor

The Sudan Human Rights Organization remains banned in Sudan, its place taken by a government-created body of the same name, whosesole function appears to be to defend the government from criticism of its human rights record. The genuine Sudan Human Rights Organization is now active abroad. Africa Watch has been helping the Organization with office space and technical assistance, until it becomes financially self-sufficient. The Sudan Bar Association is similarly banned, and its place taken by a government-sponsored organization that is eager to defend the government's record. Strict censorship of all newspapers prevails, and the media plays no role in monitoring human rights abuses. However, a few courageous individuals, who must necessarily remain anonymous, continue to monitor human rights abuses clandestinely.

In the south, there is little open expression of dissent. A rare exception is Bishop Paride Taban of Torit, who has been an outspoken advocate for the release of political detainees, as well as for peace and reconciliation between the two factions of the spla.

U.S. Policy

The United States has had an extremely cool relationship with Sudan over the past three years. The Sudanese government has supported Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait and remained friendly with Libya; it has also provided bases for radical Palestinian groups such as Abu Nidal, and has worked closely with the Islamic fundamentalists in Algeria and Egypt. For these reasons, the U.S. has been unwilling to upgrade relations with Sudan, despite repeated attempts by the latter (most recently manifest in hiring a Washington, D.C., public relations firm to lobby on its behalf).

Sudan is prohibited from receiving economic or military aid by the Brooke Amendment, which prohibits countries in arrears on loan payments to the U.S. from receiving economic assistance, and Section 513 of the Foreign Assistance Act, which imposes the same prohibition on military rulers who have overthrown an elected government. The U.S. routinely opposes development assistance to Sudan through the World Bank, and the State Department is hostile to Sudan's readmission to full membership in the International Monetary Fund. The U.S. administration has been quick to condemn human rights abuses in Sudan, such as the forced relocations from Khartoum and the execution of the usaid employee, Andrew Tombe. It has been particularly vocal in its criticism of obstruction of humanitarian relief. It has also been ready to condemn the spla for its abuses. At the same time, the U.S. has continued to provide humanitarian assistance to the Sudanese people through voluntary agencies working on both sides of the conflict.

In late October, James Kunder, the director of the State Department's Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance, made a particularly important contribution by pressing the Sudanese government to admit more relief personnel to the besieged southern capital of Juba. He also requested and received permission to visit Juba himself, which he did in late October. Kunder had requested permission to visit the Nuba mountain area as well but was denied access.

In October, the U.S. Senate adopted a resolution on humanitarian relief and human rights in Sudan, calling upon the administration to raise the crises in Sudan at the U.N. Security Council. It remains to be seen whether this will be done; however, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Herman Cohen has reportedly spoken in very strong terms to Minister of Finance Abdel Rahim Hamdi, and U.S. Ambassador Watson in Khartoum has condemned the Sudan government's human rights record in extremely strong language.

The Work of Africa Watch

Africa Watch issued newsletters on the Nuba mountains, the forced relocations from Khartoum, conditions in the "ghost houses," academic freedom and the Coptic community, as well as press releases and appeals concerning the south.

ZAIRE

Human Rights Developments

In 1992, for the first time, Zaire made real progress in the transition to democracy nominally begun in 1990, despite sustained attempts by President Mobutu Sese Seko to thwart this process. The year began with Mobutu's suspension of a National Conference called to discuss the nation's future. However, popular pressure forced him to allow it to reconvene, and on August 31 the first government in 27 years that had not been designated by Mobutu assumed office. An agreement between Mobutu and his opponents provides that Prime Minister Etienne Tshisekedi will preside over two years of transitional government, while Mobutu will remain as President until elections take place. Mobutu is still using his immense personal fortune to try-with some success-to buy off opposition leaders. He is also refusing to cooperate fully in the transition, and is encouraging ethnic violence to destabilize the transition, apparently so that he can present himself, as he did in the 1960s, as the only national figure capable of holding Zaire together. By the end of November, relations between Tshisekedi and Mobutu had reached crisis point. On December 1, Mobutu issued decrees purporting to dissolve the transitional government, and troops surrounded ministry buildings.

On April 24, 1990, in the wake of changes in eastern Europe and South Africa, President Mobutu announced the end of the period he had designated Zaire's "Second Republic," and of Zaire's one-party state. However, there was initially little indication that fundamental change in the government's policies would occur. In May 1990, only two weeks after Mobutu's democracy speech, students on the campus of the University of Lubumbashi demonstrated against a further speech in which Mobutu had backtracked on his promises. They were attacked by security forces, and a still undetermined number was killed. Mounting internal opposition and internationalpressure provoked by this massacre eventually forced the convening of a "Sovereign National Conference" to discuss the future of the nation.

The Conference first met in August 1991, and effectively collapsed within a month. In September, soldiers in Kinshasa and elsewhere engaged in serious looting which brought much of the economy to a standstill. Following these disturbances, the Conference was recalled for early December, shortly after Mobutu's term of office as President officially expired. On December 12, the Conference elected as its president Catholic Archbishop Laurent Monsengwo Pasinya, the respected chair of the Bishops' Conference, and prepared to begin its substantive work in the new year. However, on January 19, 1992, as it became clear that a real effort would be made to achieve a change of government, Prime Minister Nguz Karl-i-Bond suspended the Conference. Mobutu had appointed Nguz, a former opponent, in November 1991. Once again Mobutu seemed to have blocked an attempt to erode his power.

The suspension of the Conference galvanized the opposition. Numerous strikes paralyzed what remained of the economy. In an apparently related development, during the night of January 22, soldiers announced that they had taken over the Voix de Zaire radio station, and called for the resumption of the National Conference and the resignation of the Prime Minister and President. Many later believed that this "mutiny," described by the government as an attempted coup, was rather an attempt to discredit the opposition, since it was used as a pretext to round-up suspected opposition figures and to take control of radio and television broadcasts for the next several days. Eleven of the lowest-ranking soldiers involved were subjected to a show trial in March. While the military court sentenced nine of the eleven to prison terms, it found no evidence of an attempted coup. The remaining soldiers were reported by the government to have fled and were sentenced to death in absentia. The Zairian Human Rights League expressed fears that they may already have been killed.

On February 16, as many as one million Zairian Christians marched through the streets of Kinshasa in a "March of Hope" to demand the resumption of the National Conference. Mobutu's security forces responded with lethal force, and at least 30 demonstrators died and hundreds were wounded. Injuries also occurred at protests in other cities. Organized by an ad hoc committee of priests and lay people outside the Catholic hierarchy, the march-probably the largest demonstration in Zairian history-together with the international response to its suppression, forced Mobutu to allow the Conference to reconvene in early April. On April 24, the second anniversary of Mobutu's formal ending of the one-party system, Bishop Monsengwo announced that the real work of the Conference would finally begin.

In the following months, frequently stormy negotiations between Mobutu's government and the Conference resulted in a compromise agreement, concluded on August 3. Under the agreement, Tshisekedi-a leading figure in the opposition coalition known as the "Sacred Union"-assumed the post of Prime Minister. However, heis required to "cohabit" with Mobutu, his long-time enemy, who remains President. A "Transitional Charter" set the terms of power-sharing, replacing Mobutu's constitution. Although the Prime Minister and his government supposedly have full control over the economy, Gendarmerie and Civil Guard, defense and foreign policy are areas of "collaboration" between the President, the government, and the "High Council of the Republic," which will replace the National Conference as a transitional parliament.

Despite this agreement, the power struggle between Mobutu and Tshisekedi for political control continued. One of the flash points of this struggle was the Conference's vote in August, repeated in September and October, to change the name of the country back to Congo, in symbolic rejection of Mobutu's rule and, in particular, the drive in the 1970s for "authenticity." Another dispute erupted in early October, when Tshisekedi attempted to fire the governor of the Central Bank, a Mobutu appointee at the center of illegal diamond deals that are blamed in part for the free-fall of Zaire's currency. His action provoked a crisis in relations between Mobutu and his opponents.

On October 4, troops loyal to Mobutu surrounded the bank and the nearby National Assembly building, where they remained for the following two weeks. On October 9, the governor of the bank announced that his suspension was illegal and that he was still in office. Mobutu attempted to reconvene the Assembly, which had been dissolved six weeks earlier for the period of the transition, to override restrictions on his power imposed by the National Conference. Lacking a quorum, the Assembly nevertheless held a session in which Mobutu's supporters claimed that the constitution of the Second Republic was still in force. In late October, the High Command of the Armed Forces announced that it was withdrawing from the Conference, following a decision-protested by the Zairian Human Rights League-to deprive the military of the right to vote.

In November, the Conference adopted a new draft constitution, to be approved by referendum in April 1993, which provides for a bicameral parliamentary system in which the president will have only a symbolic role. Mobutu rejected the right of the Conference to adopt such legislation, and demanded that the Conference conclude its proceedings by the end of the month. On December 1, Mobutu issued two decrees purporting to dissolve the government and require Tshisekedi to form a new government of national unity. The central bank, in defiance of the government's anti-inflation policy, simultaneously began distributing banknotes with a face value of five million zaires (worth less than three U.S. dollars). In a defiant address to the Conference, Tshisekedi rejected Mobutu's power to dissolve his government, but security forces responded by sealing off access to ministry buildings and throwing several officials out of their offices. Radio and television broadcasts of the Conference proceedings, where committees established to report on corruption and rights abuse under Mobutu were reporting, were cut off.

Since April 1990, the most visible forms of state repression in Zaire have diminished, at least in the major cities, and long-term political detention has ceased. A vigorous press has also developed. However, suspicious deaths and disappearances are reported, and there have been attacks on opposition figures and on journalists. For example, in January 1992, Jean-Marie Katonga Kabuluku, an opposition supporter, disappeared in Kinshasa. In May and June, two Belgian expatriates were killed by uniformed soldiers. In August, hours after the resignation of Prime Minister Nguz, a rocket attack was launched on the residence of Frederic Kibassa, president of the Sacred Union.

Examples of harassment of the press in 1992 included the arrest and detention of publishers and journalists working for the opposition paper Elima, raids on newspaper offices by unidentified forces, the cancellation of the license for one paper in June 1992, and the arrest of the editor of another in July after he ignored an order to suspend publication. On the night of November 7, a printing press used by a number of publications was burned down by armed and uniformed men. However, none of these activities has apparently prevented the publication and distribution of newspapers. While government control over radio and television remained strict throughout the period of the National Conference-for example, the transmission of the resolution to change the name of Zaire to Congo was prevented-broadcasting has since become more open. However, in November, two journalists were forced into hiding, following the transmission of a news program alleging abduction and torture by members of the armed forces in Shaba province.

Even before the confrontation at the end of 1992 between the National Conference and Mobutu, supported by parts of the armed forces, soldiers frustrated at the non-payment of their wages had been at the center of the many cases of looting and disorder that have paralyzed the economy since the major disturbances of September 1991. Moreover, the "specialized security forces" created under Mobutu, each serving under the personal leadership of one of his close collaborators, continue to exist. Since 1991, there have also been credible reports of an unacknowledged strike force operating in Kinshasa, known as "Les Hiboux," or "The Owls." In September 1992, a South African newspaper reported that Mobutu was recruiting mercenaries in Johannesburg.

Of particular concern has been violence in the interior of the country, especially in Shaba province, formerly Katanga. The governor of Shaba, Kyungu wa Kumwanza, has repeatedly incited violence against non-Shabans, and the situation steadily worsened in 1992. In January, riots erupted in several towns in Shaba; in March, the governor sent supporters into Lubumbashi to destroy independent newspapers sold at newsstands; and in August, Kyungu ordered his supporters to oppose all demonstrations in support of the new Prime Minister, leading to the death of at least eight people in the disturbances that followed.

The situation in Shaba is being used by supporters of Mobutu to threaten the transition process. After he was obliged to resign as Prime Minister on August 17, Nguz Karl-i-Bond immediately returned to Shaba, his home province, where he stated that Shabawould not recognize the new premier or accept a replacement of Kyungu as governor. Zaire's exiled secessionist movement declared its support for Nguz in a statement from Angola, and Mobutu subsequently condoned Nguz's actions by appointing him "Minister of State," a specially created non-cabinet position. The violence continues: according to a September 18 government statement, 20 people were killed and 60 wounded in disturbances in Shaba during the previous week. Other reports stated that 60 died in the month of September, and that up to 30,000 took shelter from the violence in military bases and school compounds. A curfew was imposed in mid-October by governor Kyungu.

There has also been violence in the northeast province of Kivu, where soldiers of the 41st Brigade were sent on a "disciplinary promenade" in early 1992 to counter rebel activity. More than 30,000 refugees fled to neighboring Uganda, reporting the devastation of their villages. In October, soldiers again looted towns in that province, and the government announced that it would pull out its "commandos," stationed there since 1986. It also accused army leaders of distributing money to soldiers to carry out looting in Kisangani. Further looting was reported in Mbandaka, in the northern province of Equateur.

The Right to Monitor

Since April 1990 a number of significant human rights organizations have come into existence in Zaire, including La Voix des Sans Voix ("The Voice of the Voiceless," which previously operated underground), the Zairian Human Rights League, the Zairian Association for Human Rights (known by its French acronym, azadho), the Committee for Democracy, and Amos. These five organizations are affiliated through a coordinating body, Human Rights Now.

Although harassment of activists continued through 1991 and early 1992, it is no longer impossible to monitor of human right violations openly, as it was during the "Second Republic." For example, monitors from all of the major Zairian human rights groups were present at the February 16 March of Hope, and news of its suppression immediately reached the national and international press, perhaps the first time in the history of Zaire that this had been possible. Similarly, lawyers associated with the Zairian Human Rights League succeeded in becoming defense counsel for the soldiers accused of involvement in the "mutiny" at the Voix de Zaire. Buana Kabue, director of the League, was detained by police after the March of Hope, and his office and home were ransacked. He was again threatened with arrest in May, but no further harassment of monitors has been reported.

U.S. Policy

Zairians hold the United States most responsible among the Western states for President Mobutu's rise and continued hold on power. Mobutu received massive support from the U.S. throughout the period of the cold war, despite evidence of corruption, mismanagement and serious human rights abuse. Recent support for the work of the transition government is therefore all the more welcome.

Even following the Lubumbashi massacre of May 1990, the U.S. response was weak in comparison with the action taken by France and Belgium, Mobutu's other main supporters. While Congress reduced and eventually cut off aid to Zaire, the Bush administration consistently opposed this step, and as late as the budget proposal for fiscal year 1992 continued to urge military aid. In April 1991, President Bush delivered a letter to Mobutu, assuring him that "despite the restrictions imposed by Congress, Zaire remains one of the principal beneficiaries of U.S. aid in Africa."

The Bush administration began to harden its position toward President Mobutu after the outbreak of looting in September 1991. In testimony on November 6 before the Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee on Africa, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Herman Cohen said: "Recent events have proved beyond any doubt that the present regime under President Mobutu has lost the legitimacy to govern Zaire during the transition to democracy." However, he maintained that Mobutu's continued presence in the country was necessary for the transition to succeed.

In January 1992, after Prime Minister Nguz suspended the National Conference, the U.S. joined Belgium and France for the first time in a joint statement opposing the suspension. The U.S. also promptly and strongly condemned the February 16 attack on the March of Hope. However, this protest was undercut a few days later, when Secretary Cohen stated that Mobutu "continued" to support democratic transition. In the last week of March, the U.S. Embassy delivered a letter from President Bush to President Mobutu. Although the contents of the letter were not made public, Mobutu announced the reconvening of the National Conference soon after, and many Zairians believe the letter was in part responsible.

In late June and early July, Archbishop Monsengwo toured several European states, Canada and the United States, looking for support for the work of the National Conference and the government that would succeed it. In Washington DC, he spoke with Secretary of State James Baker, Secretary Cohen, and National Security Council staff. Following this visit, the U.S. government stated that it supported the process of democratization, rather than any particular personality, and that the National Conference should lead the country to free and fair elections through the formation of a new and credible transition government.

Secretary Cohen was present again in Zaire on July 31 and August 1, and announced that he was "impatient to see the start of the transition in Zaire." Two days later, on August 3, an agreement on the transition was reached between the National Conference and President Mobutu.

On October 7, following the unsuccessful attempt to dismiss the governor of the Central Bank, the State Department issued a strong statement of support for Prime Minister Tshisekedi. In particular, it "call[ed] upon all Zaire's political forces to support a transition government with full authority to achieve political economic and social recovery, including control over public finances and key appointments."

On December 1, following Mobutu's order to Tshisekedi to dissolve his government, the U.S. joined Belgium and France in issuing a strong statement of support for Tshisekedi and the democratization process. The statement urged the transition government "to assume full control over the central bank, major public enterprises, and all other activities essential to Zaire's economic recovery." Ambassador Melissa Wells went to the prime minister's office in Kinshasa to offer her support.

The Work of Africa Watch

Africa Watch began to monitor Zaire in 1992. In April, an Africa Watch researcher traveled to Zaire to collect information, and in July, Africa Watch published its first report, entitled Zaire: Two years without transition.

AMERICAS WATCH OVERVIEW

Human Rights Developments

The Western Hemisphere's steady advance toward democracy since the mid-1980s suffered some serious reversals in 1992-setbacks that shook confidence that the path to democracy in the region is assured and that the rule of law is taking hold. The ouster of Haiti's first freely elected president on September 30, 1991 has not been reversed, and that nation continues to be ruled by military thugs. In February 1992, a bloody uprising by a faction of the Venezuelan armed forces almost brought down the government of Carlos Andrs Prez, and its aftermath continues to threaten one of Latin America's longest-running democracies. On April 5, 1992, President Alberto Fujimori of Peru dissolved the Congress, destroyed the independence of the judicial branch, suspended the Constitution, and assumed dictatorial powers.

Not by coincidence, those countries also experienced a serious deterioration in the human rights situation, as their rulers deliberately eliminated important safeguards, either to perpetuate and expand their power or to respond to the genuine threats against democracy. After the tragic experiences with absolute power in Latin America in the 1970s, it is disappointing to see that, with honorable exceptions, the political, military and social elites continue to combat challenges to democratic rule, not by strengthening democratic institutions, but by restricting their role in the protection of rights.

To be sure, democracy and the rule of law are in trouble not only in Haiti, Peru and Venezuela. Elsewhere in the region, periodic elections and transfers of power have not automatically led to an improvement in the quality of democracy experienced on a daily basis by the majority of citizens. Impunity for serious human rights violations committed by state agents is still appallingly pervasive; for the most part, military and police forces are accountable to courts and to civilian authority on paper only. The courts fail miserably in providing citizens with a fair and impartial forum for the resolution of private disputes, and even more miserably in protecting them from abuse at the hands of the state, or in redressing those abuses. Growing social problems and the perception of accelerating urban crime exacerbate authoritarian tendencies in important segments of public opinion, which in turn handicaps civil society in its efforts to devise solutions to these challenges. At times, even political leaders with solid democratic credentials have shown themselves intolerant of dissent and all too ready to impose curbs on freedom of information and expression.

Still, that most Latin American countries continued to live under democratic rule in 1992 has undoubtedly facilitated the identification and correction of human rights violations. Freedom of expression is vigorously exercised in most countries today and some independent journalists and media have been willing to use and test the limits of existing political space to investigate and criticize official actions. In many countries, the press has thereby increased its credibility with the public. More important for our concerns, the press has been more willing to cover humanrights matters, often sparking debate about human rights violations and what to do about them. In democratic societies, such a debate is essential before governments can be expected to adopt corrective structural reforms. However, journalists and the press were attacked many times in 1992, generally for trying to cover human rights matters or for revealing corruption in government circles. Americas Watch intervened repeatedly on behalf of persecuted journalists, and in the process advocated reform of press laws to provide greater protection for artists, journalists and opinion writers. In the case of Horacio Verbitsky, for instance, Argentina's best known investigative journalist, we objected to the use of contempt laws (desacato) to punish him for publications considered disrespectful. With the assistance of Americas Watch, Verbitsky pursued a case before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States. At the first appearance before that body, the Argentine government agreed to repeal the desacato statute.

Democracy in the region has also seen the flourishing of civil society-independent political organizations whose members promote public policies through genuinely pluralistic discourse. Particularly encouraging has been the continued growth in Latin America of a rich, dynamic, multi-faceted human rights movement. As this report shows, monitoring human rights violations is still a dangerous activity in some countries, and an often misunderstood calling in others. Nonetheless, we are pleased to report that human rights monitoring and advocacy in Latin America are ever more sophisticated, effective and credible, and play a role of growing significance in the region's progress on human rights. For the same reason, the work of our colleagues throughout the region continues to be the single best hope for justice for the architects of the severe abuses that plagued the region in the past.

In many Latin American countries where the rule of law is weak despite the existence of elected governments, human rights violations persist, often in the form of ghastly prison conditions, police brutality, and rural violence. In 1992, Americas Watch conducted studies in Brazil and Argentina of police violence directed against suspected common criminals, or often simply against young males living in poor, crime-ridden neighborhoods. Police agents responsible for killing these victims in supposed "confrontations" are almost never investigated, much less disciplined or prosecuted. Police investigators still resort almost routinely to torture as an interrogation technique. Unlike the strong public condemnation that often attends the torture of a political opponent, torture and even murder by the police of young slum dwellers frequently yields only public indifference-or even outright support for the police-which vastly complicates efforts to mobilize corrective pressure.

In Paraguay and Venezuela, Americas Watch focused attention on discriminatory conscription of young men into military service. Americas Watch believes that international law does not prevent states from instituting a universal draft, provided that recruitment procedures are clearly spelled out in the law and are implemented in a non-discriminatory manner. In Paraguay and Venezuela, and possibly also in other countries, the draft asimplemented violates those standards, because it is carried out in an arbitrary fashion. Typically, young people from poor families are rounded up, often violently; they are not given a fair opportunity to show why they should be exempted from military service; they frequently are forced to serve longer terms than required by law; and they are arbitrarily deprived of contact with their families. In Paraguay in recent months, the problem has reached scandalous proportions, with draftees reportedly being forced to work for the private gain of military leaders.

Prison conditions in most Latin American countries continued to deteriorate in 1992. In Peru and Brazil, major prison riots were put down by the authorities with excessive force and, evidence suggests, the deliberate, brutal killing of some inmates. Americas Watch investigated both massacres in the course of fact-finding trips and as part of its continuing interest in fostering worldwide debate about prison conditions. These killings highlighted a problem found in all countries where we have investigated police violence and prison conditions: that internal control mechanisms are woefully inadequate. Throughout Latin America, police and security forces are permitted to police themselves, without civilian authority or community input; courts and prosecutors have been unwilling to investigate and punish criminal actions when committed by agents of the state. The problem of official violence and the role of civilian review in its control is not unique to Latin America. Indeed, a report published by Americas Watch in August 1992 noted the lack of independent review of the behavior of agents of the United States Border Patrol-an important factor in the impunity enjoyed by those agents for many serious acts of unjustified violence against suspected undocumented immigrants.

In some Latin American countries, disputes over land use and tenure continue to be resolved by violent, often deadly means. Most of the murders are committed by private armies and hired guns, although often the perpetrators are off-duty members of the security forces. Even when they are not, complicity between powerful landowners and local or regional authorities, and the failure of courts to provide redress, give rise to governmental responsibility for these abuses. Rural violence often occurs when landless peasants occupy lands in the expectation that agrarian reform laws will be implemented, and then are evicted by force and without due process. Rural workers are also sometimes subjected to forced labor through deceit and violence. In 1992 Americas Watch continued to monitor different forms of rural violence and forced labor, particularly in Brazil; as in the past, we have made it clear that we take no position on the issue of title to the land, but insist that states have a responsibility to ensure that land conflicts are resolved peacefully and with full guarantees of due process.

The most severe human rights violations in Latin America continue to take place in the context of armed conflict. For that reason, the cease-fire agreement that put an end to the long, bloody conflict in El Salvador represented a breakthrough for human rights in the region, even if the accord is yet to be fully implemented. Unfortunately, attempts at negotiations in Guatemala and Colombia failed to produce concrete results, and civil warscontinued to rage there as well as in Peru. In all three countries, Americas Watch monitored violations of the laws of war committed by both sides to the conflict. As in the past, we continued to apply the standards developed in the Geneva Conventions of 1949, which create clear obligations for government forces as well as for insurgents to protect the civilian population and to respect the life and physical and moral integrity of the enemy who has been placed hors de combat by his surrender or capture.

As described in the later chapters of this report, insurgent forces in Peru, Colombia and Guatemala commit violations of international obligations by carrying out indiscriminate attacks, failing to exercise due care to minimize harm to civilians and selectively assassinating political adversaries. For their part, security forces in counterinsurgency operations frequently carry out indiscriminate bombing and aerial and ground attacks, retaliatory attacks on civilians, forced disappearance of persons suspected of collaboration with guerrillas, and forced displacement of the rural population. In reporting on these practices, Americas Watch hopes to promote greater observance of the basic principles of international humanitarian law, which in turn will facilitate peace negotiations. These rules, which Americas Watch has applied consistently since 1983, bind insurgent groups while explicitly conferring on them no legal recognition.

Accountability for violations perpetrated in counterinsurgency settings is made more complex by the increased use of paramilitary forces, self-defense groups and civil patrols. Some governments and armed forces actively promote and encourage the creation of these forces, frequently blurring any distinction between voluntary and forced participation. These groups actively take part in intelligence gathering and arrests, and in the process apply "dirty war" tactics, such as murder, torture and disappearance. The security forces then deny responsibility for crimes committed by groups outside the chain of command, even though these groups are sponsored, encouraged and protected by the government.

In addition, the existence of active insurgencies provides the excuse for emergency legislation that destroys the fundamental principles of fair trial and due process. "Faceless" judges and prosecutors, diminished access to counsel, the use of secret witnesses and other evidence, and the renewed insistence on using military courts to try civilians, have continued to feature prominently in the arsenal of devices created by governments to deal with politically motivated crimes. In turn, these special courts and procedures destroy basic tenets of democracy such as the independence and impartiality of the judiciary. In Colombia, where members of the judiciary have faced relentless attack for attempting to prosecute drug-related cases, the government has ceded to the temptation to use special courts also to try a broad range of dissidents engaged in nonviolent protests. In striving for an elusive "efficiency" in defeating insurgencies, Latin American governments lose sight of the need to preserve, strengthen and expand democracy as the most effective way to protect it.

In recent years, the growth of the illicit drug trade has occasioned violence the cruelty and scope of which rivals that of the continent's most intractable insurgencies. Powerful criminalenterprises have been formed to organize the complex business of growing coca and heroin, to process the leaves in clandestine laboratories and to transport the illicit drugs to markets in the United States and Europe. The illegal nature of the trade prompts the actors to settle all their disputes by violent means. As a result, the trade generates powerful private armies, death squads and hired guns. In Colombia, the drug cartels have not only directed this violence against each other, but they have also engaged in political violence, alternately siding with powerful business concerns in rural and mining areas, or attacking the state and murdering well known political figures who they perceive threaten their interests. The Colombian cartels exercise their influence in other countries in Latin America, either because those countries have extensive coca-growing fields, or because they are increasingly used as transit points to final markets or as money-laundering centers. For this reason, the violence and corruption associated with the drug trade has experienced a steady growth in many Latin American countries.

The response to this criminal phenomenon has itself created serious problems for human rights in the region. In rural areas, programs promoted by the Bush administration to interdict drug transshipments or to eradicate crops are designed and implemented as military rather than law-enforcement endeavors. The U.S.-driven policies take on the characteristics of military occupation and counterinsurgency operations. In the Upper Huallaga Valley of Peru, where most of the world's coca is grown, growers and traffickers coexist alongside Sendero Luminoso guerrillas. This coexistence contributes to the additional blurring of any distinction between drug interdiction and counterinsurgency, serving further the impetus to employ "dirty war" tactics. In other countries, pressure for results in interdiction operations, in both urban and rural areas, have resulted in an increase in the torture and murder of those suspected of involvement in drug trafficking. Latin American governments have also felt pressure to create special judicial procedures to avoid corruption or intimidation of the courts by drug traffickers.

The Bush administration has offered large sums in military and police assistance to Latin American security forces to promote this "war on drugs." Eager to maintain this military approach, the administration has downplayed or misrepresented the human rights violations committed by the armies and police of recipient countries, and has temporarily suspended aid only when the U.S. Congress has insisted. One notable exception was Peru after President Alberto Fujimori's April "coup," when the administration itself suspended aid as a protest. The State Department has also pushed a large Administration of Justice program, ostensibly to improve the performance of courts and prosecutors. While judges and witnesses in the volatile and dangerous fields of drug trafficking and counterinsurgency must be protected, Americas Watch does not accept that defendants be deprived of anything resembling a fair trial, especially when U.S.-supported courts in Colombia and Peru more often target political enemies involved in legitimate, peaceful dissent.

This unfortunate abdication of leadership by the United Statesin the realm of justice was compounded in 1992 by the outrageous Supreme Court decision in Alvarez Machain. In that landmark case, the highest U.S. court affirmed the legality of the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration's (dea) abduction of a Mexican doctor from his home in Mexico and his transport to California to stand trial for the murder of an American dea agent who was investigating drug cartels in Mexico. The decision caused an unprecedented wave of protest throughout Latin America, especially among judges and democratic leaders who have been pressing their institutions to live up to their role in a democratic society, and who had for years looked toward American precedents to expand protections for the physical integrity and due process rights of criminal defendants. The open flouting of international law standards in the majority opinion in Alvarez Machain convinced many Latin Americans that the United States is not serious about promoting the rule of law.

In other matters, U.S. policies toward Latin America have been much more constructive. As illustrated in the following chapters, there were many occasions in 1992 in which U.S. diplomats cooperated with human rights monitors, including Americas Watch, and either privately or publicly expressed their concern over important human rights developments. The end of the cold war derailed anti-communism as the sole engine of Washington's Latin American policy and has undoubtedly contributed to a more multi-faceted view of regions such as Central America. For the same reason, the U.S. government has been more willing to take up forceful positions in defense of democracy when the stability of elected governments has been at stake. In so doing, the Bush administration has made important contributions to preserving democracy through its pronouncements on Haiti, Peru and Venezuela. The administration also apparently offered important support to the government of President Alfredo Cristiani of El Salvador in the face of military resistance to the peace process.

Unfortunately, some of the Bush administration's most effective statements made on the occasion of Alberto Fujimori's auto-golpe or self-inflicted coup on April 5 were later negated by the acceptance of token gestures toward restoration of democracy, such as the administration's apparent acceptance of the nominal elections convened by Fujimori for a Constitutional Congress in November as significant progress toward democracy, even though they raised important issues of fairness as described in the following chapter on Peru.

Likewise, in Haiti the administration's initially strong opposition to the 1991 military coup gave way to competing interests. First, yielding to pressure from U.S. manufacturing interests who use cheap Haitian labor, the administration unilaterally softened the embargo on Haitian trade that had been imposed by the Organization of American States-a move with symbolic consequences well beyond its economic effect. Later, when the flow of "boat people" from Haiti continued to grow in the face of persistent repression, President Bush ordered their forcible return to Haiti without first screening to exempt those who qualified as refugees, in blatant violation of U.S. obligations not to return refugees to face persecution.

Overall, in the late 1980s and early 1990s, the U.S. government has stood firmly on the side of representative democracy in the hemisphere, and made it clear to potential coup plotters that the days of Washington's support for anti-democratic adventures are over. This welcome development, which marks a distinct departure from the policies of the 1970s, was reinforced in 1992, and it is now clear to most Latin American political actors that respect for popular will expressed in elections is encouraged from Washington. On the other hand, there have been few signs that the Bush administration insists on the substantive content of democracy in addition to the holding of elections. For example, Washington was again silent in 1992 on the important question of accountability for gross human rights abuses of the past, an issue that defines the kind of democracy that Latin Americans are building. There has been no opposition to amnesties and pardons that have the effect of leaving egregious crimes unpunished, and precious little has been said about the need to investigate, prosecute and punish ongoing human rights violations as a means of preventing their repetition. The U.S. government has tended to blame only structural weaknesses in the administration of justice for the impunity enjoyed by human rights abusers rather than also placing responsibility for human rights violations where it belongs: on the governments and military leaders who lack the political will to punish violators.

The U.S. government has adopted a similar attitude toward non-politically motivated abuses, refraining from criticism because it considers them "internal affairs" of allied governments, or because discussion of them complicates pursuit of other U.S. interests. For example, United States Trade Representative (ustr) Carla Hills has consistently refused to suspend trade benefits to countries that do not meet labor rights standards mandated by law. In fact, Hills has often refused even to review serious labor rights violations when it has been petitioned by labor and human rights groups, including Americas Watch. For instance, Americas Watch was forced to file petitions calling for a review of Salvadoran labor rights practices for four years before its petition was finally accepted for review in 1990; the outcome of that review is still pending. In one petition that was accepted-filed by Americas Watch seeking review of the Dominican government's use of forced labor on its sugarcane plantations-Hills in 1990 cited nonpublic embassy material to dismiss extensive documentation of continued use of forced labor to find that the Dominican Republic was "taking steps to afford their workers internationally recognized worker rights," allowing trade benefits to continue uninterrupted. In one positive development in 1992, the labor rights petition submitted by several human rights and trade union organizations on Guatemala was accepted for review.

The Bush administration has also been slow to condemn violations of freedom of expression, including official harassment of journalists and the failure of governments to protect dissidents from threats and physical attacks, even though freedom of expression is a cornerstone of any substantive definition of democracy.

The growing threats to democracy in 1992 presented a serious challenge to the Organization of American States (oas) which wasfounded on the premise that collective action was needed to protect democracy and human rights in the hemisphere. In Nicaragua, the oas's Commission on International Verification and Support (ciav) continued to provide a mechanism for conflict resolution and to provide critical assistance and support to demobilized contra rebels.

For the most part, however, despite renewed rhetorical expressions of support for democracy, the oas failed miserably to make democracy more secure in the region. At the General Assembly held in Santiago, Chile in 1991, the countries of the oas solemnly pledged to take collective action to prevent any step away from representative government. Within the next year, the Santiago Declaration was tested in Haiti and Peru, and in each case the oas showed itself to be helpless in the face of anti-democratic forces. oas initiatives to restore elected President Jean-Bertrand Aristide have proven particularly futile. Most recently, the Unit for the Promotion of Democracy, a little known office of the oas, sent a small team of functionaries with no experience in human rights to monitor violations on the ground. They have not left Port-au-Prince. Negotiations brokered by oas Secretary General Joo Baena Soares between Aristide and the de facto regime in Port-au-Prince are going nowhere.

The oas Council of Ministers went to work immediately after the April 5 coup in Peru. After several diplomatic missions by Secretary General Baena Soares and Uruguayan Foreign Minister Hctor Gros Espiell, the oas initiative to restore democracy in Peru, through dialogue between President Fujimori and the opposition, has reached a dead end. The most that has been achieved is a unilateral call by President Fujimori for November elections for a Constitutional Congress, under terms and conditions designed to create a body that Fujimori can control; the election was boycotted by a majority of the opposition forces. Fujimori has also destroyed the independence of the judiciary, and has continued to trample on the courts, a matter apparently ignored by the oas diplomatic team. This almost complete failure, sufficiently troublesome in itself, is compounded by the oas's declaration of success. On both Haiti and Peru, the diplomacy of the United States supported these self-delusional policies by the oas majority.

The oas has also failed to strengthen existing mechanisms for the protection of human rights in the hemisphere. The Inter-American Commission and Court on Human Rights offer promising fora for the treatment of violations through judicial and quasi-judicial proceedings in a non-political, non-ideological setting. Unfortunately, many governments in the region find these mechanisms threatening, and have taken steps to undermine the work of both bodies. In two consecutive General Assemblies, for example, the Court has been unable to obtain support from the supreme political organ of the oas to induce Honduras to comply fully with the judgment issued in the Court's landmark decisions on disappearances, Velsquez and Godnez. As a result, Honduras has felt free to refuse to pay more than two-thirds of the damages owed to the two families, and has sought ways to discredit the Court.

In September, a pathetic covert operation designed to create the impression that the two disappeared persons addressed by thejudgment were in fact alive reached a bizarre and nearly fatal end. Orlando Ordez Betancourt, a Honduran citizen with a criminal record who had been paid substantial sums by the Honduran government, claimed to have information establishing that Godnez and Velsquez were in fact still alive. If true, the revelation would have vindicated the Honduran military and discredited the Inter-American Court and Commission. Ordez managed to deceive several high ranking officials of the Honduran and Costa Rican governments who were obviously more interested in disproving the disappearance of Velsquez and Godnez than in verifying Ordez's wild reports. More shameful was the involvement of the Honduran military, which despite its responsibility for the disappearance of the two men and their full knowledge of their fate, supported a common criminal in spreading a baseless story. At a meeting with the Costa Rican Minister of Government and Security, the head of the Honduran military intelligence, a Honduran bishop and the Mexican ambassador in Costa Rica, Ordez kidnapped all four and eventually secured his safe transportation to Mexico in exchange for the lives of his hostages. Honduras did not demand his extradition.

The incident created a major scandal in the three countries, and especially in Costa Rica, where the government had been one of the Court's staunchest supporters in the region. (The Court is based in San Jos, Costa Rica). But the incident also called attention to the need for the political organs of the oas to support the Court more vigorously, especially by insisting on compliance with its decisions.

The other organ of protection in the region, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, fared even worse in 1992. The Commission was subjected to a persistent attack by several governments, as well as attempts to limit its access to the agenda of the oas General Assembly, to which it must turn to obtain compliance with its rulings. The Commission was deliberately excluded from any significant role in the Haiti and Peru crises, despite the existence in both cases of significant human rights issues in which the Commission's expertise would have proven valuable. At the 1992 General Assembly in Nassau, Bahamas, representatives of several democratic governments launched an unprecedented series of verbal attacks on the Commission. Argentina and Uruguay, irritated by a Commission ruling that amnesty laws by those governments in the 1980s (as well as President Carlos Sal Menem's pardon of those who conducted the infamous "dirty war") were inconsistent with the obligations under the American Convention on Human Rights, sought the Court's help in discrediting the Commission. These two governments have submitted a request for an advisory opinion to the Court, seeking a ruling that would limit the Commission's jurisdiction to de facto violations, thus precluding it from commenting on laws and judicial decisions.

Although such a position is patently unfounded as a matter of international law, that Argentina and Uruguay would raise such a claim is indicative of the pressures that the Commission faces. The Permanent Council of the oas is entertaining attempts to rewrite the American Convention, also presumably with the intent of undermining the Commission and the Court. Diplomatic missions tothe oas frequently pressure the General Secretariat hierarchy to prevent the Commission from acting on cases against their governments. In October, another blow was dealt to the Inter-American system of human rights when Peru threatened to rescind its adherence to the American Convention.

To its credit, the U.S. mission to the oas is one of the most supportive of the Commission and the Court. However, the United States is seriously handicapped by its failure to ratify the American Convention on Human Rights, the treaty that gives life to both bodies. Given the diplomatic and political pressures, the Commission has sometimes allowed itself to be bullied into inaction. However, in its most recent session in September 1992, the Commission showed signs of a renewed will to withstand pressure and act according to its mandate as a body of legal experts on human rights. Against the wishes of some governments, the Commission received controversial witnesses at hearings, and issued precedent-setting decisions in important cases. Despite woefully inadequate funding, the Commission also demonstrated willingness to put in motion the mechanisms contemplated in the Convention, such as the "friendly settlement" procedure and the submission of new cases to the Inter-American Court.

In the face of a complex human rights picture on the continent, Americas Watch continued in 1992 to promote greater respect for fundamental freedoms through investigative missions, publications, and communications with governments. In many countries, we benefitted from ample coverage of our initiatives in the local press. Our increased name recognition and credibility has allowed us to foster and participate in a debate about human rights problems that often results in heightened awareness. This media presence also opened doors for us to discuss our concerns with governments. In general, we have found greater disposition in official circles to listen to us and to engage us in a serious debate about our findings and recommendations. There are, of course, exceptions to this generally positive trend: Cuba still refuses to allow Americas Watch to visit for research purposes or to observe trials; and President Fujimori of Peru falsely accuses us of a pro-Sendero bias, as he does all international and domestic human rights monitors.

In 1992 we conducted missions to Venezuela and Bolivia, countries that we had not covered until now. Reports on both missions will be published by early 1993. We also endeavored to maintain an intense level of scrutiny in countries where we have had a presence for many years, and to bring their human rights problems to the attention of international public opinion. We have offered testimony to the U.S. Congress on Cuba and on acts of violence by the U.S. Border Patrol against undocumented immigrants. In 1992, Americas Watch published two reports on violations for which authorities in the United States were responsible. The first, entitled Brutality Unchecked: Human Rights Abuses Along the U.S. Border With Mexico, was published in May. The second, Dangerous Dialogue: Attacks on Freedom of Expression in Miami's Exile Community, was published in August jointly with the Fund for Free Expression. These reports, in addition to work conducted by Human Rights Watch on prisons in the United States, our publicly statedpositions against the Bush administration policies on Haitian refugees, and our participation as amicus curiae in the Alvarez Machain case, have enhanced the reputation of Americas Watch throughout the continent as an impartial, independent critic of human rights abuses wherever they occur.

Americas Watch has continued to devote considerable effort to the use of mechanisms in international law for the protection of human rights. In close cooperation with the Center for Justice and International Law (cejil), Americas Watch continued to litigate cases before the Inter-American Commission and Court on Human Rights. In all these cases, cejil and Americas Watch act as co-counsel with domestic human rights organizations from several Latin American countries. In 1992 we appeared before the Court in preliminary hearings about two major cases against Peru: one concerning the 1988 massacre in the Andean village of Cayara, and the other involving the disappearance of inmates from El Frontn prison in Callao, during the bloody riots of 1986. In October 1992, the Commission decided to submit its first case against Colombia to the Court, for the 1989 disappearance of a rural teacher and labor leader in the war-torn Magdalena Medio region. cejil, Americas Watch and the Andean Commission of Jurists-Colombian Section will act as counsel for the relatives in the case.

Also in October, Americas Watch obtained a landmark victory in the struggle against impunity for known human rights abuses. After five years of litigation, the Inter-American Commission ruled that the laws passed by Uruguay (Ley de Caducidad) and Argentina (Punto Final and Obediencia Debida) and the Argentine presidential pardon, all of which had the effect of preventing prosecutions for crimes against humanity committed by the military, were inconsistent with those countries' obligations under the American Convention. The cases had been brought by domestic groups from those two countries, and litigated with our assistance. The Commission's decision marks the first time that an expert body on international law directly addressed in its holding the issue of impunity and recognized the legal obligation of states to seek truth and justice about gross abuses.

An important focus of our work continues to be the quest for accountability for gross human rights violations. In October, Americas Watch published a report on the conviction by a Paraguayan court of several of General Alfredo Stroessner's highest-ranking police authorities for the torture and murder of a political opponent in 1977. In the same month, we sent an observer to the final stages of the trial in Bolivia of former General Luis Garca Meza, who was responsible for atrocities after seizing power by force in 1981. In the Southern Cone countries, we have continued to monitor implementation of the governments' duty to investigate state crimes, to disclose the truth regarding these crimes to the families and the public, and to offer reparations to the victims.

We have had occasion to review the relationship between human rights and peace as we monitored efforts to find negotiated solutions to long-standing armed conflicts in El Salvador, Guatemala and Colombia. In all three cases, the issue of human rights has become an integral part of the search for solutions, as the mediators and the warring parties have realized that a lastingpeace cannot be achieved until violations that fuel the conflict are brought under control. However, continued vigilance is still necessary so the peace process does not bury the matter of accountability for crimes against humanity under the rug of "national reconciliation." True reconciliation, we have insisted, can come only after truth and justice. For example, in Nicaragua, where our objections to blanket amnesties went unheeded in 1990 when the war came to an end the acts of violence between former contras and Sandinistas that continue to plague the country can be traced in some measure to the lack of resolution of accountability issues. The peace process in El Salvador has provided new fertile ground to test these principles, as we discuss in the chapter on that country. El Salvador has also given us the opportunity to monitor the way in which the United Nations has begun to carry out new roles and functions assigned to it by the international community in the aftermath of the Cold War.

Americas Watch increased its efforts to document non-politically motivated violence, to analyze the structural reasons for its persistence, and to recommend policies to put a stop to it. Inevitably, we have had to comment on the sad state of the administration of justice in many democratic countries, and the inability of the courts to provide redress to victims of abuse. This breakdown in the institutional response to violence applies to a wide variety of violations, including domestic violence against women, prison conditions, police killings and torture, rural violence in disputes over land, and abuses against ethnic minorities. We believe that this violence is indicative of an official failure to address the content of democracy and not simply its forms. Fortunately, our work in this area finds receptive ears, particularly among our colleagues in the human rights movement, who have in many cases shifted focus to address such violations and to insist on citizen participation to curb them. But we have also found that public opinion and some governments have come to pay closer attention to these problems as well, which makes us hopeful that in a democratic setting solutions can be found.

As in previous years, we have dedicated important efforts to strengthening our relations with our colleagues in the hemisphere. This has helped us understand the evolution of human rights problems in the Americas, and it has made our research and analysis more rigorous. We have also had occasion to note that human rights monitoring remains an extremely hazardous activity in several Latin American countries. In relevant sections of this report we discuss in detail attacks and threats against our colleagues, and actions we have taken in an attempt to provide some protection for their courageous work. When monitors have been publicly and unfairly attacked, we have not hesitated to defend their reputation and their right to monitor. On occasions, we have taken urgent steps to ensure their safety, by intervening directly with governments to provide protection, by applying for protective measures before international bodies, and by seeking similar intervention from U.S. embassies and members of the U.S. Congress.

In 1992, the Latin American human rights movement suffered two tragic losses through causes unrelated to persecution. In February, Augusto Conte took his own life in Buenos Aires. The father of ayoung desaparecido in the 1970s, Conte was the founder and vice chair of the Centro de Estudios Legales y Sociales (cels), a pioneering human rights organization. In 1983 he was elected to the Argentine Congress on a human rights platform. In October 1992, a helicopter accident in Brazil claimed the lives of Severo Gomes and his wife, along with democratic leader Ulysses Guimares and his wife. A former cabinet member and senator, and at his death a member of the Council of the Republic, Gomes had lent his considerable influence and prestige to the promotion of human rights causes as the head of Ao pela Cidadania.

Americas Watch owes a great debt of gratitude to Augusto Conte and Severo Gomes, not only for helping us understand the problems of Argentina and Brazil, but also for their leadership and ideas that have helped to shape the human rights movement. As we face the still daunting challenges to human rights in the region, we, like our colleagues in Latin America, will sorely miss them.
BRAZIL

Human Rights Developments

Despite weathering one of the most serious political crises in the country's recent history and successfully beginning impeachment proceedings against President Fernando Collor de Mello, Brazil remained a nation in which gross violations of human rights by police, unofficial death squads and hired gunmen persist on a large scale. In 1992, the most serious human rights problems were: police violence against suspected criminals; grossly substandard prison conditions; the killing of street children by death squads that include former and off-duty police officers; state tolerance of forced prostitution of young girls; inadequate investigation and prosecution of crimes against women; an increase in the registered incidents of forced labor; and impunity for those responsible for grave violations of human rights.

For a country that only recently emerged from a quarter century of military rule, the impeachment proceedings provided a powerful example of how a mobilized public and a free press can enforce popular demands for integrity and accountability in government. Unfortunately, this impressive demonstration of the strength of Brazil's democratic institutions has not coincided with an improvement in the country's dismal human rights record. Illustrative was October 2, the day both that Vice President Itamar Franco temporarily assumed the presidency, and that the So Paulo state military police committed the largest massacre of prisoners ever recorded in the country's history, killing at least 111 inmates at the Casa de Deteno prison.

According to witnesses interviewed by Americas Watch during a visit to the prison shortly after the massacre, the state military police fired randomly into cells in Pavilion Nine of the prison after a disturbance in that section. Although Americas Watch found no evidence that the prisoners posed a threat to the lives of themselves or others, the police responded with grossly excessive force, killing prisoners who were offering no resistance, including prisoners who had complied with orders to strip naked. Afterretaking the prison, the police forced several inmates to walk, run or crawl through a gauntlet of armed police officers who struck the inmates with sticks. Some prisoners were forced to carry the bodies of the dead, and some of these inmates were in turn executed.

Typical of the impunity that prevails in Brazil, the authorities have shown no willingness to conduct a serious investigation or to take steps to preclude future killings. No one had been arrested for the slaughter through early December.

Although the Casa de Deteno massacre is unique in its magnitude, it was not the only time in 1992 that the police responded to prison uprisings with deadly force. In July, the military police in Rio de Janeiro responded to a rebellion at a jail in So Joo de Meriti, in which inmates had taken two guards hostage, by killing 12 inmates. One guard was also killed in the incident.

These prison killings demonstrate the dangers posed by the degrading conditions that persist in most Brazilian prisons and jails. At the time of the Casa de Deteno massacre, 7000 prisoners were crowded into a facility designed to house half that number. The overcrowding creates a volatile atmosphere conducive to revolts, and fuels the callous indifference that characterizes official attitudes toward prisoners.

Official contempt for criminal suspects is not limited to detention centers. In the state and city of So Paulo, in particular, police violence has assumed staggering proportions. In 1991, according to official statistics, the So Paulo military police killed 1,140 criminal suspects, while 78 military policemen were killed. As of October 2, 1,264 suspected criminals had been killed in 1992; the number of police deaths in that time was unavailable.

A closer look at the statistics helps reveal the nature of the killings. According to statistics from the military police, in the first half of 1992, the So Paulo military police's Tropa de Choque (Shock Troop), which includes the infamous Rondas Ostensivas Tobias de Aguiar (rota) battalion, killed 170 civilians and wounded only six. During the same six-month period, no policemen from these battalions were killed and only eight were wounded. The pattern repeats itself in the same period in the greater So Paulo area. At least 660 suspects were killed and 89 wounded in this six-month interval, while only one police officer was killed and 38 wounded.

The extraordinarily high ratios of civilians killed to civilians injured, and of civilians killed to police killed are evidence that the So Paulo police are deliberately assassinating suspects. If shoot-outs were the cause of the deaths, the number of suspects wounded would ordinarily exceed those killed, while a less substantial discrepancy would exist between suspects and police killed. This pattern of deliberate assassination of criminal suspects is reinforced by the impunity enjoyed by the police. In the vast majority of cases of homicide committed by the military police, the cases are dismissed, the officers are found innocent, or the matter is so protracted that the case is effectively buried in the military justice system, which is the only court responsible for trying military police officers.

The torture of criminal suspects in police stations alsocontinues to be a problem. Although deaths in pre-trial detention in police precincts appear to have diminished and extensive torture-such as the use of the "parrot's perch"-is less common than in prior years, beatings and other forms of torture continue. Several human rights observers believe that beatings, especially of poor suspects or those with prior criminal records, are so common that the victims themselves do not bother to file complaints.

Though authorities appear to be making some progress in eliminating torture, sos Criana, a branch of the So Paulo government that deals with children, registered 21 complaints of torture involving minors between June and September 1992. In Rio de Janeiro, the director of the human rights branch of the state Attorney General's office told Americas Watch that he receives as many as thirty torture complaints a month, most of which he believes are true. In a recent positive development, the Rio state government established a special police station to investigate torture complaints.

The killings of children and adolescents, often committed by private death squads, is also a major problem in many of Brazil's cities. Although accurate statistics are impossible to compile, between 7 and 10 million children are estimated to live permanently on the streets of Brazil's largest cities. They survive by various means: selling candy and newspapers, "guarding" parked cars, begging, engaging in prostitution and petty theft, and serving as lookouts and messengers for drug dealers.

Because of Brazil's soaring crime rate (fueled by economic recession, severe unemployment, poverty, and drastic inequalities in wealth) shop-owners and other citizens who feel threatened by crime have arranged to "take the law into their own hands" by hiring private security firms-death squads-to "clean up" their neighborhoods.

Children and adolescents are often the victims of these death squads, whose ostensible purpose is to "eliminate" criminals, although the groups themselves are often also involved in criminal activity. Many children and adolescents who live and work on the streets of Brazil's cities are automatically perceived as real or potential criminals, and thus become subject to these efforts to eliminate criminals. Children and adolescents are also often the victims of fights between drug gangs, or are killed by organized criminals who perceive the children as "nuisances" that might draw attention to their actions.

Although the total number of deaths of minors is difficult to calculate, a variety of studies give an idea of the scope and nature of the killings. A federal congressional commission that concluded a nine-month investigation into the killings in March 1992 found that 4,611 children, mostly males between ages 15 and 17, were murdered between 1988 and 1990, an average of four killings a day. The investigation also found a racial bias in the figures, noting that 82 percent of the victims were black. The Rio de Janeiro state government has stated that 306 children were killed in the state in 1991. In the state of So Paulo, according to official statistics, 674 minors were killed in 1991, and 306 children and adolescents were killed in the first half of 1992 alone.

The same pattern of impunity can be found in the official response to the death squads. Investigations are wholly inadequate, in part because of the active participation of off-duty policemen and also because witnesses fear reprisals for testifying against death squad members. An investigation conducted by a Rio de Janeiro state congressional commission characterized as "rare" the death squad that "does not include members of the police in its formation." According to a report by the Brazil Network, of 118 individuals identified by name by the federal congressional commission as having been involved in the murder of street children, fewer than 30 have been apprehended or tried.

In the most serious attempt to combat the problem, the Rio de Janeiro state government has set up a special telephone "hot line" to receive anonymous denunciations of death squad activities and to mount special criminal investigations. Representatives of the Rio government claim that this hot line has led to a significant decrease in the number of death squad killings, but one Brazilian human rights organization has disputed the official statistics.

A lack of criminal prosecution is also a critical factor in the persistence of acts of violence directed against landless peasants, leaders of rural unions and those who campaign for agrarian reform. Large landowners often come into conflict with peasant farmers who occupy unused land claimed by the landowners, or with the rural landless and their supporters who press for the expropriation of unused land. Conflicts often end in violence, committed largely by private gunmen (known as pistoleiros) hired by landowners. Peasant farmers and settlers are also frequently victims of violence when they are evicted from land that they are farming; evictions are often carried out with excessive force by pistoleiros acting without a court order, or by the military police.

According to the Catholic Church-linked Comisso Pastoral da Terra (cpt, or Pastoral Land Commission), from January 1, 1964 to January 31, 1992, there were 1,681 murders. Only 26 of these killings yielded criminal trials, and only 15 ended in convictions of the assailants. Despite repeated attention to this problem by Americas Watch and other human rights organizations, violent acts against peasants and rural activists continue. As of September, 20 landless peasants, rural activists and small farmers had been assassinated in 1992. These rural killings continue to be characterized by unsatisfactory investigations and prosecutions, and the failure of government authorities to take death threats seriously or to provide adequate protection to those threatened for political reasons.

Impunity for those behind this rural violence persists even when there has been a high degree of national and international attention, as in the case of multiple killings in the violence-plagued town of Rio Maria, in the southern part of the state of Par. Despite continued attention to these murders by Americas Watch, the cpt and the Comit Rio Maria (Rio Maria Committee), there has been little progress in bringing to trial those responsible for a series of murders of leaders of the Sindicato dos Trabalhadores Rurais (str, or the Rural Workers' Union), some of which occurred as long as 12 years ago. In the case of the murderof Expedito Ribeiro de Sousa, which occurred on February 2, 1991, one day after the release of an Americas Watch report urging his protection, the scheduled trial of those accused of the crime has been moved from Rio Maria to the state capital at Belm, where it is hoped that pressure against witnesses will be less intense. In the case of a March 1991 assassination attempt against Carlos Cabral Pereira, Ribeiro de Sousa's successor as the str's president, the judge has yet to take the case to trial despite the confession of the gunman. In two other related cases from 1990, including the killing of two sons of murdered str president Joo Canuto, trials have yet to occur and some of the gunmen responsible have escaped from prison in suspicious circumstances. In fact, only one defendant remains in custody in all of these cases. Nevertheless, in late October 1992 it was announced that the Federal Police were considering dropping police protection for Carlos Cabral and several other rural activists in Rio Maria.

The year 1992 also saw a reversal of the conviction of the man responsible for ordering the assassination of Chico Mendes, the internationally recognized union and environmental leader. On February 28, 1992, an appeals court, claiming lack of sufficient proof, reversed the conviction of Darly Alves da Silva, who had been found guilty of ordering the 1990 assassination. This case was previously held up as an example of how international attention can yield criminal convictions of the killers of rural activists. Lawyers for Mendes's family are appealing the decision.

There has also been little progress in curtailing the use of forced labor. Offending enterprises typically send labor contractors to poverty-stricken towns where they offer workers good wages for work on far-away fazendas (ranches or plantations). Once the workers arrive at the site, they are told that they owe money for their transportation, tools, shelter and food, and are threatened with death if they attempt to leave before paying their "debt." Uncompliant workers are often beaten by gunmen hired by the fazenda owners, and in some cases are killed.

According to figures compiled by the cpt, there has been a dramatic increase in reported cases of forced labor. In 1990, the cpt registered 12 cases affecting 1599 workers. In 1991, the number of victims rose to 4,883. As of September, the cpt has recorded 10,736 workers on seven fazendas who have been subjected to forced labor in 1992. Dr. Jos de Sousa Martins, a prominent sociologist at the University of So Paulo, estimates that there may be as many as 60,000 workers who annually become victims of forced labor practices. Despite considerable public attention to the problem, including a complaint filed with the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States and a report by the International Labor Office, there has yet to be a single conviction of a fazenda owner, labor contractor, or gunman for involvement in the use of forced labor.

A series of investigative reports in the Folha de So Paulo newspaper and a subsequent book by journalist Gilberto Dimenstein brought to Brazil's attention another gruesome facet of the forced labor problem: the forced prostitution of young girls. After investigating for six months, Dimenstein determined that hundreds of young girls, some as young as nine years old, are enticed intoprostitution and kept in virtual slavery by promises of well-paying jobs in restaurants or bars in remote locations surrounding gold-mines in the Amazon. Once they arrive at the work site, often hundreds of miles from their homes, the girls are told that they owe money for transportation and that they have to pay off their debt by working as prostitutes in local bars. Girls who refuse are beaten and threatened with death.

Dimenstein not only detailed the extensive practice of forced prostitution, but also documented the collaboration of local police. At the gold-mining town of Cui-Cui, in the state of Par, Dimenstein found that local bars and brothels each paid the police four thousand cruzeiros a week (roughly one or two dollars) to keep quiet. The chief of police confirmed that he knew that there were at least 65 prostitutes in the town, many of them girls held involuntarily, but stated that they could not leave until they had paid their debts. Although Dimenstein's revelations eventually led to a raid by the Federal Police who freed 22 girls and arrested 10 bar owners, no police were arrested.

Americas Watch also continues to be concerned about inadequate investigations and prosecutions of those responsible for other forms of violence against women. Few instances of violence are investigated by the police, and even when prosecutions and convictions occur, sentences are light. However, there has been some increased training for police forces on how to respond to violence against women.

In a move that could potentially protect Brazil's indigenous communities against violence, on May 25, 1992, President Collor signed a decree ratifying the demarcation of 9.6 million hectares inhabited by the Yanomami. This action, which came after much delay and strong opposition from the military and logging and mining interests, followed the earlier ratification, in October 1992, of 71 other indigenous areas. Because Brazil's Indian communities are often victims of violence committed by miners and loggers who invade their traditional lands, it was hoped that the demarcation of reservations would assist in removing outsiders from indigenous areas and prevent further violence. Unfortunately, despite the ratification of the demarcation of the reservations, the actual demarcation process has been hampered by a lack of funding. According to the official Indian agency, only 16 percent of indigenous lands are free of outsiders. Indigenous rights organizations report that large numbers of gold miners have once again entered the Yanomami area.

Violent attacks against indigenous communities have long been met with official indifference and impunity. According to the Catholic Church-based Conselho Indigenista Missionrio (cimi), which monitors indigenous rights, 166 Indians were assassinated between 1988 and 1991; of these 27 were killed in 1991. Of the killings in 1991, cimi knew of only eleven cases in which any investigation was conducted, and suspects were arrested in only two of the killings. According to cimi, at least 26 Indians have been assassinated in 1992.

In November, a former sergeant with the army's intelligence service became the first military officer publicly to reveal details of human rights abuses committed during the 1960s and1970s. In a lengthy magazine interview, Marival Dias Chaves do Canto provided detailed testimony about the torture, killing and dismemberment of political prisoners, particularly the torture and killing of eight members of the Brazilian Communist Party. Chaves stated that their bodies were tied to concrete blocks and dumped in a river on the outskirts of So Paulo.

The Brazilian government quickly opened an investigation into Chaves's allegations, promised him police protection, and stated that if the allegations were true it would pay reparations to the relatives of the victims. However, spokesmen for the military and the government have stated that they anticipate no prosecutions due to an amnesty law enacted in August 1979.

The Right to Monitor

The Brazilian government imposes no formal obstacles to human rights monitoring, and many local and national organizations actively seek to defend the rights of rural workers, the urban poor, women, children, indigenous communities, and other victims of human rights abuses. International human rights organizations, including Americas Watch, have conducted missions to the country without interference or obstruction by the government.

However, local groups that defend the rights of disadvantaged populations, especially the rural and urban poor, are sometimes intimidated and harassed. Rural activists, in particular, are frequently threatened with death by privately hired gunmen. For example, Father Ricardo Rezende, an outspoken champion of human rights with the cpt in Par, has been repeatedly threatened and has had his house shot at. In 1992, human rights activists received telephone and in-person threats, were fired on, beaten, and arbitrarily arrested.

Several incidents implicated the police, not only in their failure adequately to investigate private attacks on human rights monitors, but also in the outright mistreatment of monitors. For example, on September 24, two workers with the Center for the Defense of Human Rights in the city of Manaus were beaten and arrested after they protested the police beating of a fellow bus passenger. In another case, writer and journalist Caco Barcellos was repeatedly threatened and harassed by members of the So Paulo military police after he published a book detailing the history of the abusive rota police battalion.

Illustrative of private attacks was the case of Nivaldo Vieira do Nascimento, a cpt activist in Conceio do Araguaia in the state of Par, who was shot at twice in his backyard. According to Vieira, two bullets barely missed him, one of them lodging in a wall several centimeters above his head. The day before the assassination attempt, Vieira had been threatened by a local fazenda owner, Francisco da Silva Rabelo. During a phone conversation Rabelo told Vieira three times, "I'm going to kill you, boy." Although Rabelo was arrested on August 16, the local judge released him from custody less than two weeks later, despite a request for his continued detention by the police officer who oversaw the investigation.

A particularly troubling infringement of the right to monitor was the slander prosecution of a rural human rights activist thisyear. On September 3, 1992, the coordinator of the Paran state branch of cpt, Darci Frigo, was convicted of slander. The conviction arose from statements made by cpt accusing a local politician, Lucianno Pizzatto, of using forced labor in 1984. A group of boys had been taken without their knowledge or consent to a piece of land owned by a company that Pizzatto owned and managed, where they were forced to work against their will under threat of death by armed guards. The boys were eventually found by a local human rights group which reported their treatment to the local police. However, no investigation was ever completed. In 1986, Pizzatto ran for election as a state deputy, and Frigo, on behalf of the cpt, held a press conference to publicize Pizzatto's use of forced labor. Pizzatto responded by bringing a slander suit against Frigo. Frigo's lawyers plan to appeal the conviction, on the grounds that the boys' allegations were never disproved. Frigo's conviction for denouncing forced labor is particularly disturbing in light of the lack of any convictions for those responsible for subjecting over 10,000 workers to forced labor in 1992.

U.S. Policy

Despite close economic and political ties with Brazil, the U.S. government has failed to use its significant influence to pressure Brazilian leaders on human rights issues. As of November, the State Department was unable to inform Americas Watch of any public protests issued about human rights violations in Brazil, with the exception of the State Department's annual Country Report on Human Rights Practices. Although direct U.S. aid to Brazil is low compared with other countries in the region, the United States is Brazil's largest trading partner, purchasing $13 billion in Brazilian exports. Direct U.S. investment in Brazil reportedly totaled $15.5 billion in 1990. Direct U.S. aid has consisted almost entirely of anti-narcotics assistance, which totaled an estimated $3.5 million in fiscal year 1992.

Unfortunately the United States has missed several opportunities to publicly criticize Brazil's human rights record. In February 1992, U.S. Defense Secretary Richard Cheney met with President Collor during the Secretary's ten-day tour through Latin America. In a meeting described by the Brazilian government as "very cordial," Cheney praised the Collor government's promise not to develop nuclear weapons or export advanced missile technology. The State Department was unable to inform Americas Watch whether human rights concerns were discussed at the meeting. Similarly, when President George Bush visited Rio de Janeiro during the 1992 United Nations conference on the environment, he made no public mention of the human rights situation in Brazil.

Although the State Department could not cite any public criticism of Brazil's human rights record, officials told Americas Watch that human rights are frequently brought up in private meetings with Brazilian officials. In addition, in March 1992, a political officer from the U.S. embassy in Braslia traveled to the violence-plagued area of southern Par, where he met with human rights monitors, trade unionists and victims of assassination attempts, and local officials. Similarly, after the October prison massacre in So Paulo, an official at the U.S. consulate in thatcity interviewed relatives of the victims. Americas Watch believes that while private pressure is important, the failure to make unequivocal public statements, especially in the wake of dramatic abuses such as the October prison massacre, limits the effectiveness of U.S. pressure and signals to Brazilian officials that human right concerns are not a priority for the United States.

The Work of Americas Watch

In May 1992, on the eve of the United Nations Conference on the Environment and Development (unced), held in Rio de Janeiro, Americas Watch released The Struggle for Land in Brazil: Rural Violence Continues. The report, based on a mission to Brazil in November and December 1991, updated Americas Watch's 1991 report, Rural Violence in Brazil, and focused on forced labor and violent abuses in the states of Par, Paran, Maranho, and Mato Grosso do Sul. The report also discusses how unchecked violence at the hands of wealthy landowners contributes to both human rights abuses and environmental devastation.

In August 1992, in So Paulo, Americas Watch and the Women's Rights Project of Human Rights Watch released Injustia Criminal: Violncia Contra a Mulher no Brasil, the Portuguese translation of the 1991 report Criminal Injustice: Violence Against Women in Brazil. The release was accompanied by a round-table discussion at the So Paulo offices of the Brazilian Bar Association and yielded widespread newspaper and television coverage.

For ten days during August and September, Americas Watch investigators traveled to Rio de Janeiro to investigate police abuses. The information gathered during the trip, together with extensive information collected during two months spent in So Paulo, will form the basis of a report to be issued jointly with the Ncleo de Estudos da Violncia of the University of So Paulo, comparing police violence in Rio de Janeiro and So Paulo.

On September 23, Americas Watch, together with Father Ricardo Rezende of the cpt, and the Center for Justice and International Law (cejil), appeared at a hearing and filed two complaints before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States. The complaints charged Brazilian authorities with failing to investigate adequately and punish those responsible for the killing of rural activist Joo Canuto in 1985, and with failing to investigate forced labor at two fazendas in the southern part of Par. In a positive development, two days after the petitions were filed, Brazil became a party to the American Convention on Human Rights, thus enhancing the role of the Inter-American Commission in the oversight of Brazilian human rights practices.

In October 1992, just days after the massacre of at least 111 inmates at the Casa de Deteno Prison in So Paulo, Americas Watch, together with the Prison Project of Human Rights Watch, sent an investigator to So Paulo. The investigator met with local human rights organizations and representatives of the state government, and spent four hours interviewing inmates and observing conditions at the Casa de Deteno.

On October 21, Americas Watch issued a newsletter, in English and Portuguese, condemning the So Paulo authorities for the use ofexcessive and brutal force at the prison, as well as for its failure to investigate adequately those responsible for the massacre. Americas Watch, along with the Comisso Teotnio Vilela and cejil, also filed a petition regarding the massacre with the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights on October 21. Both the petition and the newsletter garnered significant media attention in Brazil's major daily newspapers and main television networks.
COLOMBIA

Human Rights Developments

Peace talks between the government and leftist guerrillas floundered in May amid mutual accusations of bad faith. In their wake, military operations increased throughout the country. President Csar Gaviria has increased funding to the armed forces and police by levying a special "war tax" in an effort to destroy the guerrillas militarily. Far from retreating, however, guerrillas mounted two nationwide offensives in late May and October. Abuses by both sides have led to a dramatic worsening of an already serious human rights situation, among the worst in the hemisphere.

On November 8, President Csar Gaviria declared a "state of

internal commotion" after guerrillas from the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (farc), Colombia's largest guerrilla organization, killed 26 policemen guarding an oil pumping station near Orito, Putumayo and staged a wave of bombing attacks in several cities, including Bogot. The Colombian constitution allows the president to invoke emergency powers in case of foreign attack or serious threat to public order, but in neither case does it permit the suspension of any right established in the constitution. Such a prohibition notwithstanding, President Gaviria announced several new executive decrees that do restrict certain civil rights. One prohibits broadcast journalists from disseminating any information received from the guerrillas. The executive decrees also authorize military intelligence to investigate suspects and present evidence against civilians in court, a responsibility previously reserved for the Judicial Technical Police.

Although the emergency measures were taken to strengthen counterinsurgency efforts, Colombian human rights groups noted the extreme dangers inherent in giving the Army the power to investigate and bring cases before the courts. Army involvement in investigations is highly suspect; on repeated occasions, the Army has detained, murdered and disappeared civilians they suspected of guerrilla sympathies, and has later presented the victims as "guerrillas killed in action." Human rights groups also fear for their work, especially since the Army has frequently accused them of being "guerrilla fronts" and now has additional powers to investigate and bring cases against them.

Although the government asserts that human rights violations decreased in 1992, local human rights groups recorded noticeable increases over 1991. In the first eight months of 1992, there were 91 massacres carried out by state security forces, guerrillas and paramilitary groups, causing 477 deaths, the majority peasants, youths and workers, according to the Permanent Committee in Defenseof Human Rights. This figure represents a 20 percent increase over 1991. The total number of victims of political violence threatens to increase in 1992, surpassing last year's record of over 10 victims per day. By September, the number of unresolved disappearances had climbed to 75.

Overall, the Andean Commission of Jurists-Colombian Section found that 40 per cent of the cases of political killings reported by September were attributable to state agents, 30 per cent to paramilitary groups acting in collusion with the security forces, 27.5 per cent to guerrillas, and the remaining 2.5 per cent to others including drug traffickers. In addition to its substantial role in committing these murders, the government remains unable to investigate crimes and punish perpetrators satisfactorily. Despite apparently good intentions and a stated willingness to introduce reforms, little has so far been accomplished.

To the contrary, Colombia's new constitution put the military and police, the leading agent of human rights violations, further from civilian control by reaffirming the jurisdiction of military courts over crimes committed by members of the armed forces and extending that jurisdiction to the National Police. The new constitution also permits officers to employ the defense of obedience to superior orders to avoid responsibility for their abusive acts. Military courts have yet to produce credible inquiries or fair trials. Instead, abusers remain in their posts and impede other investigations in a twisted example of esprit de corps.

As part of the peace accord in 1991 with the Popular Liberation Army (epl), the Revolutionary Workers' Party (prt) and the Quintn Lame guerrillas, the government funded a Commission on Ways to Overcome Violence, composed of respected academics, human rights monitors and former officials. In its massive report, the commission concluded that because violence has different origins and manifestations in different parts of Colombia, efforts to overcome it must be applied according to each region's particular history and social landscape. While valuable and representing the best efforts of civil society to come to grips with political violence, the commission's report threatens to be forgotten in a new militarization of Colombian society. Other structural reforms may in the long-term produce improvements, but have yet significantly to alter a tragic record; these include the appointments, for the first time ever, of civilians as Minister of Defense and head of the Administrative Department of Security (das), a law enforcement and intelligence body under the president's control.

Americas Watch continues to be concerned about governmental measures that restrict basic freedoms. For instance, in 1992 the Gaviria administration proposed to Congress a law to regulate states of exception that was justifiably criticized by Colombian human rights groups. The bill would allow local police chiefs to order the administrative detention of any person for up to 36 hours; this in effect does away with the requirement that no one be arrested without a judicial warrant unless caught in the act of committing a crime. The proposed law also gives the executive branch extraordinary powers to restrict freedom of speech,movement, and assembly, and to ban strikes.

The victims of political violence are a cross-section of Colombian society, including members of leftist political parties, suspected guerrilla sympathizers, civilians caught in conflict zones, teachers and members of the judiciary, and those killed in "social cleansing" campaigns. "Social cleansing" murders of the homeless, drug addicts, petty thieves, and homosexuals can properly be classified as political violence because they are widely believed to be carried out by police agents acting as death squads or by gunmen who enjoy protection from the police. The Center for Investigation and Popular Education (cinep) estimates that there were 338 victims of "social cleansing" killings between January and September 1992.

Particularly hard hit was the Patriotic Union (up), a legally authorized political party that is loosely linked to the farc. According to the up, over 2200 party members have been killed since 1985, 28 of them in the first nine months of 1992. A strongly worded report by the office of the Defensor del Pueblo (ombudsman) released in October revealed that, of over 700 killings of up members investigated by the courts, convictions resulted in only ten cases.

As counterinsurgency operations have increased in the wake of failed political dialogue, the brunt of the government offensive has been led by Army Mobile Brigades, elite counterinsurgency units made up of professional soldiers. The Mobile Brigade operates by isolating an area where guerrillas are active, "softening up" suspected bases by bombardment and strafing from the air, and then sending in units for ground pursuit. Mobile Brigade soldiers are known by the population as carapintadas (painted faces) or bolsillones (deep pockets, since they carry money to buy information).

In practice, however, the Mobile Brigade strategy has meant terror for the civilian population. While guerrilla units withstand or evade the siege, civilians are trapped in a hellish war zone, subject to attacks, detention as "suspected subversives," torture, rape and on-the-spot executions. In the department of Meta, for example, a campaign by Mobile Brigade I against the farc resulted in a flood of human rights abuses. One letter from the local authorities of La Uribe listed nine separate acts over a 14-day period in February, including the torture and disappearance of two men from El Tigre village; the sacking of a peasant house in Las Gaviotas village; and bombardment and strafing of five separate villages. On May 13, an 11-year-old girl was shot and killed by soldiers in Santander village. Press reports indicate that a large number of women were among the injured during the May campaign, shot as they fled the cross fire. That month, an official commission investigating Brigade abuses in Meta was led by a delegate from the Procuradura, an independent investigatory body that prosecutes disciplinary actions against state agents. The commission was fired upon by an Army helicopter, although no one was injured.

Civilians have been forced to act as guides, to wear Army uniforms, and to walk in front of soldiers to detonate mines planted by guerrillas. Often, civilians are prevented from leavingthe area or transporting more than a day's worth of food for their families. In Dabeiba, Antioquia, the press reported that five young civilian men detained by soldiers were later found dead, claimed by military authorities to have been "guerrillas killed in action."

Mobile Brigade actions cause massive internal displacement. Peasants hide in the hills until they can flee to larger city centers. For instance, in the Magdalena Medio, 1,700 people fled San Vicente de Chucur on February 10 after intense air bombardment by Mobile Brigade II in a campaign against the National Liberation Army (eln). Although military authorities claim peasants are free to report abuses to local authorities for investigation, witnesses in practice are threatened, caused to disappear and killed.

In their wake, Mobile Brigades leave increased violence and fortified "self-defense," or paramilitary, organizations, even though such organizations were supposedly outlawed in 1989. Paramilitary agents, directed and paid by large landowners and drug traffickers and acting with the collusion of the police and Army, attack community activists, union leaders, human rights monitors, peasant and indigenous leaders, and people linked to leftist political parties, particularly the Patriotic Union and the Communist Party. Despite government assertions that such organizations are on the wane, many serious cases involving paramilitaries were reported in 1992, suggesting that in some areas, particularly Meta and the Magdalena Medio, this activity is on the increase. For example, a preliminary investigation by the Procuradura in late 1992 found that an Army general and six other officers had promoted and supported paramilitary groups in Santander department.

In addition, on June 3, a paramilitary band ambushed and killed five up members-including the former mayor, the current mayor, and three municipal officials-and their driver near El Castillo, Meta. Witnesses later reported that the attackers wore Army clothing and used fragmentation grenades. Human rights monitors believe this killing and many others were orchestrated by Victor Carranza, an emerald dealer and large landowner who is said to boast of maintaining the largest private contingent of armed men in the country. In 1989, Camilo Zamora Guzmn, one of his hired killers, testified to a judge that Carranza had ordered the killings of up members, suspected guerrillas, and community leaders; these were then carried out in cooperation with the police, Army officers and police and military intelligence agents. In addition, in October, Carranza reportedly offered a bounty of 8 million pesos, about $12,000, for the murders of three leading members of the up in Meta. Nevertheless, Carranza is not currently charged with any crime.

According to the Regional Committee for the Defense of Human Rights (credhos), which covers the Magdalena Medio, the paramilitary group known as mas (Muerte a Secuestradores, Death to Kidnappers) is gaining in power, and now controls towns like El Carmen de Chucur. mas members, or "Masetos," charge monthly "war taxes" and force peasants to patrol under threat of death. Despite decrees cracking down on paramilitary groups, the mas has continued to enjoy open support from the police and military, which supplies them with weapons, munitions and uniforms.

In one revealing incident, an official delegation led by judicial officials and protected by elite police units flew to El Carmen de Chucur on March 29 to arrest 27 paramilitary agents implicated in 183 murders over a five-year period. Far from assisting the commission, the Army and police based there actively hampered their search and roused the population to attack them. Commission members were finally forced to flee for their safety with only one detainee.

Peasants who flee the Magdalena Medio often must pay handsomely. One family told the Intercongregational Commission for Peace and Justice that the Masetos charged 200,000 pesos, about $300, for "permission" to abandon their farms. Such payments are levied at paramilitary checkpoints, set up with the consent and often protection of the military and police. Some families that have attempt to return discover that members of paramilitary groups have taken over their homes and farms. Since opening in 1988, a credhos-sponsored shelter for the displaced in nearby Barrancabermeja received over 2,000 people, but the shelter had to be closed in June 1992 because of frequent threats, harassment and unauthorized searches. Violence does not stop in the countryside. In Barrancabermeja, there were 273 violent deaths in the first six months of 1992, more than one a day in a city of only 158,000 inhabitants.

Only rarely do paramilitary agents or their handlers in the security forces face justice. For instance, in August, the Procuradura released the results of an investigation linking an Army colonel, officer and non-commissioned officer to the paramilitary murder of 20 peasants on March 4, 1988 at the La Negra and Honduras ranches in Urab. Public Order Court 103, presided over by a "faceless" judge, had already convicted 13 civilians of carrying out the massacre, including Henry de Jess Prez, the president of the Association of Cattlemen and Agricultural Producers of the Middle Magdalena (acdegam), a notorious paramilitary group, and Fidel Castao, alias "Rambo," a paramilitary leader from Crdoba. However, neither Prez nor Castao was detained. Prez was later murdered in circumstances that suggest an internal feud within acdegam. Castao, who is also wanted in relation to other massacres, remains at large and is reportedly protected by Army officers on active duty.

Originally, the Public Order Court also indicted Major Luis Felipe Becerra Bohrquez and two junior officers attached to the Voltgeros Battalion in the Urab massacre. However, in 1991 a military tribunal assumed jurisdiction, on the grounds that the soldiers were duty-bound to prevent the massacre and thus could be tried for "dereliction of duty." Even though Major Becerra was supposed to be under arrest, he was promoted to Lieutenant Colonel, traveled to the United States to attend a training course, and at last report was serving in the Department of Public Relations (E-5) at the General Command of the Army.

Another case, involving the 1988 massacre of 43 peasants in Segovia, Antioquia by paramilitary groups in league with soldiers assigned to the Bombon Battalion, resulted in a similarly mild reaction from the Procuradura's Delegate for the Armed Forces: a 30-day suspension from active duty for two officers who had printedand distributed flyers threatening the population and announcing the imminent arrival of a paramilitary group that would kill "guerrilla sympathizers." Lieutenant Colonel Hernando Navas Rubio, the Army brigade intelligence commander at the time of the Segovia massacre, was subsequently named to head Colombia's prison system. A warrant for his arrest was issued on October 24 in connection with the escape from prison of drug king-pin Pablo Escobar.

Other well-known cases that remain unpunished include the 1987 murder of Alvaro Garcs Parra, the mayor of Sabana de Torres, Santander; the murder of journalist Sylvia Duzn Senz and three peasant leaders in 1990; and the massacre of at least 20 Pez Indians in 1991.

Guerrillas committed frequent atrocities and serious violations of the laws of war, including summary executions, kidnappings, indiscriminate bombings, attacks on the press and the levying of exorbitant "war taxes." According to the police, guerrillas were responsible for 165 kidnappings in the first five months of 1992; Colombian human rights groups have reported a far lower figure, approximately 90 for the first nine months of the year. For example, units of the farc reportedly kidnapped Japanese businessman Koji Nakagawa in early 1992, releasing him only after receiving what police said was a ransom of $500,000. A dissident faction of the epl, some of whose members accepted a government amnesty and formed a political party in 1991, continues to murder former colleagues. At least 90 ex-combatants who belong to the Hope, Peace and Liberty party have been killed since the amnesty, by paramilitaries, members of the farc and dissident epl members. In addition, guerrillas continue to carry out killings of civilians who they claim are Army informants or paramilitary supporters.

From January to September 1992, the eln attacked the Cao Limn-Coveas pipeline more than 30 times, causing deaths and serious injuries to workers and other civilian non-combatants. Repairmen have been attacked and killed, while others have been blinded and maimed by "foot-breaker" mines (quiebrapatas) left by guerrillas. In February, an eln bomb killed two children and injured one in San Vicente de Chucur, Santander. In May and June, the eln kidnapped at least seven police officers, disarmed them, and then killed them, a clear violation of the laws of war protecting those who are hors de combat.

Continuing political violence by both sides took place in the context of rampant criminal violence, much of it linked to drug trafficking. Despite the intensity of political violence, politically motivated killings probably represent only 13 percent of murders nationwide. In Colombia, there are roughly seven murders a year for every 10,000 people, as compared to the U.S. rate of one murder for every 11,000 people.

The surrender of Escobar and 14 associates on June 19, 1991 was at first billed as a victory of President Gaviria's policy of negotiating with rather than threatening traffickers with extradition to the United States. But Escobar's escape with nine associates on July 22 revealed that in fact it was he, not his supposed captors, who ran the specially built prison. An investigation of the escape revealed that it had been arranged with the collusion of guards and some of the more than 400 soldiersstationed outside the prison walls. Investigations resulted in the resignations and dismissals of at least 40 officials, including the deputy justice minister, four senior military officers, two wardens, and eleven soldiers and prison guards. Although most of Escobar's colleagues had surrendered a second time by the time by the end of November, he remained at large.

After Escobar escaped, the press reported that throughout his incarceration, Escobar maintained control of his cocaine empire; he even ordered the kidnapping of rivals for hearings in a makeshift prison "court," then ordered their murders. After his escape, a stepped-up campaign by the Medelln cartel against police cost the lives of 19 police detectives in September alone. In apparent retaliation, local human rights groups noted that agents described as off-duty police officers would fire into groups of young men gathered on street corners in the poor neighborhoods, or comunas, where the cartel recruits young hired killers known as sicarios. These attacks and counterattacks are not new. Between November 1991 and March 1992, one Medelln-based human rights group documented 184 killings linked to the Judicial Technical and National Police.

The generally grim human rights picture in Colombia does have some encouraging aspects. For instance, the new Code of Criminal Procedures categorically prohibits incommunicado detention, typically the time when torture and disappearance occur. The International Committee of the Red Cross had access to military and police detention centers for the first time; previously, it could only visit prisons run by the Ministry of Justice. The Procuradura set up regional offices in Bogot and Medelln to respond to human rights charges within these cities. A proposal to create a similar office in Barrancabermeja, pooling resources from several state agencies, has been approved, but has yet to be implemented.

In departments like Putumayo, violence has receded after concerted local action, including initiatives by mayors, city councils, the Catholic Church and neighborhood communal action groups. Local residents told the Andean Commission of Jurists that 1,000 people were murdered in the Putumayo region in 1990 and 1991, the equivalent of one murder for every 500 people; although not all of these deaths were political killings, the state made no effort to investigate or put a stop to them. Through nonviolent grassroots protests and marches against the mas and their military handlers, the community mounted a successful effort to expel the most notorious hired killers this year. By June, the number of murders had fallen by over two-thirds. In October, community leaders met in a departmental forum to find ways to continue to solidify a respect for human rights. But the fragile peace disappeared in November after new clashes between the government and the guerrillas, demonstrating the futility of local efforts to combat violence in the absence of national political will.

To its credit, the Gaviria administration has attempted to protect judges investigating controversial cases. Despite these measures, however, the Colombian judicial system continues to be undermined by attacks on those who dare probe cases involving drug-traffickers and human rights abusers. After his escape, Pablo Escobar unleashed a new wave of attacks against rivals, police and the "faceless judges" responsible for prosecuting him and his band.On September 18, men allegedly hired by Escobar killed "faceless" judge Miriam Roco Vlez Prez and her two das bodyguards. Judge Vlez was responsible for the case linking Escobar to the 1986 murder of journalist Guillermo Cano. One previous judge assigned to the case was murdered while two were forced to leave the country after receiving threats.

The Right to Monitor

Agents of the state and paramilitary forces in 1992 continued their relentless persecution of human rights monitors. The Middle Magdalena and Meta Department continue to be the most dangerous areas for human rights advocates. In 1992, two credhos members-Blanca Cecilia Valero de Durn and Julio Csar Berro-were murdered in circumstances suggesting official involvement. Two weeks after Valero's murder, General Roberto Emilio Cifuentes, commander of the Fifth Army Brigade, charged that credhos was used by guerrillas to "slander" and undermine the Armed Forces. Dr. Jorge Gmez Lizarazo, director of credhos, was attacked numerous times; although he was assigned seven das bodyguards, he was forced to leave the area temporarily for his safety. Another noted defender of human rights, Dr. Eduardo Umaa Mendoza, was forced to leave the country temporarily after receiving threats for his work on the case of the killing of five members of the Palacios family and two other men in Fusagasug in 1991.

The above-described case of El Carmen de Chucur is of special concern because of its implications for the human rights community at the national level. In June, after the failed attempt to arrest alleged paramilitary members, two national newspapers, El Tiempo and La Prensa, published articles claiming that the official commission had actually been arranged by the eln to target innocent people. El Tiempo went on to suggest that human rights groups-including the Intercongregational Committee for Justice and Peace, cinep, the Human Rights Commission, the Solidarity Committee with Political Prisoners, and various associations of the detained and disappeared-were "guerrilla sympathizers."

In an unpublished rebuttal sent to El Tiempo, Father Javier Giraldo of Justice and Peace accused the journalists of publishing uncorroborated information from the military, an opinion widely shared by Colombian human rights groups. Several monitors felt so threatened by being labelled guerrilla sympathizers that they left the country.

In Meta, citizens who support the Civic Committee for Human Rights were systematically harassed and threatened by paramilitary agents controlled by Vctor Carranza and members of the B-2, Army intelligence. Some human rights monitors are wary of asking for police bodyguards, because they fear that the guards, rather than protect them, will gather intelligence on their movements for a future attack. Such suspicions are not unfounded. For instance, on the day the five El Castillo officials were killed, their one police bodyguard had mysteriously not shown up for work.

There have been important developments in the case of Alirio Pedraza, a human rights lawyer who disappeared after his arrest by security forces in Bogot on July 4, 1990. After an investigation by the Procuradura, two detectives in the Judicial TechnicalPolice were arrested and charged with the abduction. Their superior, a former das officer who most recently was Chief of Investigations in the Attorney General's office (the Fiscala), has been dismissed from his job but not yet criminally charged.

U.S. Policy

During 1992, Colombia's human rights record largely avoided scrutiny by the Bush administration due to its strong support for Colombia's anti-narcotics efforts. With the exception of loud complaints over the escape of Pablo Escobar and the official opposition to extradition, the U.S. government has generally submerged human rights criticisms in the name of fighting the drug war.

During fiscal year 1992, $50 million in Economic Support Funds were obligated for Colombia, with a similar amount planned for fiscal year 1993. In fiscal year 1992, $47 million in Foreign Military Financing (fmf) were obligated for Colombia, with $58 million requested for 1993-more than any other Latin American country. Colombia also receives approximately $2.5 million in International Military and Education Training assistance each year. In addition to fmf, the bulk of which goes to the National Police and Air Force, the police also receive International Narcotics Control assistance for training. In fiscal year 1992, that assistance amounted to $23.4 million; $22 million has been requested for fiscal year 1993.

During the fall debate over the International Narcotics Control Act (INCA) of 1992, the Bush administration opposed conditioning aid to Colombia on respect for human rights by threatening to veto the bill if conditions were included, as they had been in the 1990 INCA. Congress capitulated and human rights conditions were not included.

The U.S. government continued to fund the six-year, $36 million Administration of Justice, Justice Sector Reform Project during fiscal year 1992, with $12.5 million obligated for the program. The project's stated goal is to improve the effectiveness of the Colombian judicial system so that narcotics traffickers can be brought to justice without extradition to the United States. While Americas Watch understands the severe security constraints faced by members of the Colombian judiciary, we remain concerned that the special courts supported by this program, with so-called "faceless" judges, violate due process norms. For instance, in these Public Order courts, the prosecution can present evidence and witnesses that are kept secret from defense lawyers, who cannot cross-examine. According to the respected Colombian human rights group cinep, however, the Colombian government has used the Public Order courts in a wide variety of circumstances having little to do with terrorism or drug trafficking, including to punish those who have engaged in or organized nonviolent protests such as strikes, work stoppages, and demonstrations.

On the first day of the Drug Summit held in late February 1992 in San Antonio, Texas, Colombia proclaimed that only the National Police, not the Army, would receive U.S. anti-narcotics security assistance. The announced change was reportedly agreed to by the U.S. government and Colombian officials because of the Army'sunwillingness to participate in counter-narcotics activities or to meet the human rights and other requirements attached to that aid the previous year. As John Walters, deputy director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy, noted at a congressional hearing in July, "there were some questions about whether the resources provided to the Colombian Army initially were adequately dedicated to counternarcotics, given other concerns the Colombians had." Americas Watch supported the announced termination of assistance to the Colombian Army in light of its history of human rights violations during counterinsurgency operations.

Even though U.S. officials directed anti-narcotics aid away from the military, press reports in 1992 consistently stated that Mobile Brigades were equipped with many of the type of weapons donated and sold to the Colombian military. And, although both the Colombian military and U.S. officials deny that U.S. war materiel, including A-37 airplanes and Blackhawk and Iroquois helicopters with M-60 artillery, are being used against leftist insurgents, the monitoring of the ultimate user of U.S. security assistance to Colombia remains woefully deficient. In addition, the Colombian military has repeatedly stated that, despite U.S. restrictions on the use of anti-narcotics aid, their main mission remains combatting guerrillas.

It is revealing that the only public statements made by the U.S. Embassy in Bogot on human rights during 1992, apart from the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in 1991, issued in January 1992, were standard human rights paragraphs included in weapons contracts signed with the Army. Beginning with the Country Reports and continuing throughout the year, the State Department repeatedly mischaracterized the sources of human rights violations in Colombia. For example, when responding to a question about the human rights situation in Colombia during a March congressional hearing, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs Richard Schifter replied that the problem is "presented by, number one, the insurgencies, and number two, by narcotics traffickers." Secretary Schifter failed to mention any abuses by government forces.

The State Department's Country Reports also de-emphasized the security forces' responsibility for violations, but did contrast starkly with Secretary Schifter's refusal to acknowledge official violations. The report noted that "members and units of the army and the police participated in a number of human rights violations. Particularly in areas of guerrilla violence and little civilian government presence, members of the armed forces committed various abuses, including massacres, 'disappearances' and torture."

One important exception to U.S. disinterest in human rights violations has been the attention shown to the threats against credhos. Embassy officials met with leaders of credhos and assured them that they would discuss their plight with Colombian officials.

Pablo Escobar's escape from prison never appeared to threaten seriously Bush administration support for continued security assistance for Colombia, but it did evoke harsh criticism from administration and congressional officials. In the days following the escape, the U.S. government sent electronic surveillance gear and six Air Force and dea intelligence-gathering aircraft toColombia to help search for Escobar, but emphasized they would honor the Colombian constitution and had no plans to abduct Escobar for trial in the United States. Despite outrage from Colombians over the violation of sovereignty, the U.S. continued air surveillance through at least through November.

Despite Colombia's shocking record of human rights abuse and the impunity enjoyed by those responsible, both the United Nations Commission on Human Rights and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States have been slow to act in bringing the Colombian government to task for violations by state agents. In 1989, Americas Watch, the Andean Commission of Jurists-Colombian Section and credhos filed a joint complaint before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (iachr) about the disappearance at the hands of soldiers of rural teachers Isidro Caballero and Mara del Carmen Santana near San Alberto, Csar. In October 1992, the iachr finally determined that the Colombian government had violated the rights to life, personal security, and due process, and submitted the case to the Inter-American Court of Human Rights-the first Colombian case to be heard by the Court. The Commission has not acted on several other Colombian cases, including the 1990 disappearance of Alirio Pedraza, discussed above. In addition, despite two recent visits to Colombia, the Commission has yet to prepare a comprehensive report on the human rights situation there.

The Work of Americas Watch

In April, Americas Watch published Political Murder and Reform in Colombia: The Violence Continues, a comprehensive overview of the status of human rights, the peace process, the drug war, institutional reforms, and U.S. policy. Americas Watch registered frequent protests with Colombian government officials about innumerable human rights cases in 1992. Together with the Andean Commission of Jurists Colombian Section and the Center for Justice and International Law, Americas Watch continued to represent past victims of abuse by pressing cases before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. Americas Watch representatives made four trips to Colombia during the year, meeting with Colombian and U.S. Embassy officials, human rights groups, and political and community leaders.
CUBA

Human Rights Developments

The human rights situation in Cuba, where civil and political rights are systematically violated in law and in practice, was punctuated in 1992 by reprisals against dissidents, particularly human rights monitors and peaceful pro-democracy activists. Trials staged in courts that lack independence ended in convictions and prison sentences that rank among the stiffest for thought crimes in the last ten years. Mobs organized by government agents beat dissidents and vandalized their homes. Critics of the government were fired from their jobs, and state-security police arrested, harassed and intimidated activists and their families.

Cuba lacks the laws and institutions that would protect basic civil and political rights. There is no free press; only state-owned media may operate legally. Free speech is curbed by laws that prohibit "enemy propaganda," "clandestine printing," and "defamation of public institutions." Peaceful dissenters are imprisoned on charges as serious as "incitement" and "rebellion." For insulting President Fidel Castro, Cubans are imprisoned for up to three years. Foreign journalists who interview political dissidents are frequently expelled from the country.

As in the past, Cuba does not extend legal recognition to civic or political organizations-such as labor unions or political parties-that are independent of the government or the Communist Party. Free association and assembly are punished under laws that prohibit "illegal association." Although the national legislative election system was reformed in 1992, there is no indication that the National Assembly will emerge as anything other than the rubber-stamp body that it has been, so long as political challenges to the Communist Party continue to be suppressed severely. There are no free and fair presidential elections.

Cuban courts are subordinate to the executive, and Cuban judges are required to demonstrate their "active revolutionary integration." Once brought to trial, defendants, especially in political cases, are almost always convicted.

The violation of the right to privacy is systematic and pervasive. Tight political control in Cuba is maintained through extensive monitoring of Cubans' daily lives. The monitoring is conducted by state-security police who commonly coerce or blackmail people into becoming informants; and by government-sponsored "mass organizations" such as the Committees for the Defense of the Revolution, which operate in the neighborhood and workplace. The failure to report criminal activity, including political "crimes," is punishable under Cuban law. Mass organizations, working together with state security police, stage protests by mobs that gather in front of the homes of supposed "counter-revolutionaries" in ostensibly spontaneous "acts of repudiation." The mobs typically yell insults, chant slogans, and frequently assault the dissidents and their supporters.

Prison inmates-both political prisoners and prisoners convicted of common-law crimes-reported that nonviolent protests in their cells, such as hunger strikes, spawned retaliation in the form of beatings, confinement in harsh punishment or isolation cells, denial of medical attention and confinement in prisons far from their families. There were frequent complaints of overcrowding, poor hygiene, sub-standard diet, and insufficient time outdoors.

The loss of trade and subsidies from the former Soviet Bloc has plunged Cuba into what the government acknowledges is its most dire economic crisis since the 1959 revolution that brought Castro to power. Tighter food rationing has forced Cubans to turn to the illegal but thriving black market; transportation has been drastically reduced by a severe fuel shortage; basic hygiene products are virtually unavailable. The ever-increasing difficulty of daily life has given rise to groups advocating democratic and other reforms. These, in turn, have elicited from the governmentonly ideological retrenchment and greater control and repression.

Widespread anxiety about the economy was exacerbated by the U.S. government's adoption in October of the "Cuban Democracy Act of 1992," which expanded the U.S. economic embargo against Cuba. This heightened U.S. hostility has provided the Cuban government with a pretext to tighten internal security controls against "anti-social behavior." According to the official press, the government has organized gangs of vigilantes into "rapid response brigades," not only to suppress any signs of discontent, but also to monitor possible paramilitary exile incursions from Miami. The Cuban press also reports that Cuba has trained and organized six million civilians-more than half the population-into militia units, and armed many of them. It has also built underground "civil defense" tunnels where Cubans can seek refuge in the case of a U.S. invasion.

In a positive development in 1992, the Cuban government released a number of political prisoners after Manuel Fraga Iribarne, the president of the Spanish autonomous region of Galicia, interceded on their behalf. At least nine of the 19 prisoners whose cases were raised by the Galician president have been released since his September 1991 visit to Cuba. Most have been released on the condition that they leave the country.

At the same time, however, the authorities continue to harass, arrest and imprison its opponents:

 Nine professors, a researcher and a secretary at the Jos Antonio Echevarra Superior Polytechnic Institute of Havana were fired from their jobs in January and February 1992, after signing a letter calling for academic freedom, the release of political prisoners, and democratic reform. Five others affiliated with the Institute were fired when they endorsed the letter. Three other signers-two professors at the Superior Pedagogical Institute Enrique Jos Varona and a graduate of the school-were also fired.

 In a similar case, three drafters of the "Socialist Democratic Project," a document calling for democratic change and constitutional reform, were fired from their jobs after submitting the proposal to the Communist Party Central Committee. They are Nestor Baguer, a journalist; Manuel Daz Martnez, a poet; and Vladimiro Roca, an international affairs expert. An act of repudiation was subsequently held at Roca's Havana home. Reprisals were taken against two other signers: Enrique Julio Paterson was summoned to state security police headquarters for questioning, and a group of officially sponsored thugs physically assaulted Rolando Prats. Dimas Cecilio Castellanos, a professorat the Superior Institute of Agricultural Sciences, was fired from his job in April for possession of a tape recording of the document.

 In February in Santiago, police arrested Eduardo Vidal, Jorge Vzquez and Rigoberto Carcelles, three members of the pro-democracy group, Liberacin, a Christian Democratic movement that advocates reform of the Cuban Constitution. In June, they were sentenced on charges of "enemy propaganda" to prison terms of five and six years.

 Yndamiro Restano, head of the social-democratic, pro-democracy Harmony Movement (mar), was arrested in Havana in December 1991 and tried in May 1992 along with Mara Elena Aparicio, another mar member. They were convicted of rebellion for their peaceful advocacy of democracy, and sentenced to prison terms of ten and seven years, respectively-among the harshest sentences imposed on peaceful activists in the last decade.

 Marco Antonio Abad and Jorge Crespo, artists and filmmakers, who were arrested at the end of 1991, were tried in October on charges of offending Fidel Castro ("contempt") and "enemy propaganda." Each faces eight years in prison for making an independent film that is deemed by the authorities to be "damaging to the honor and dignity of our Head of State."

The Right to Monitor

Human rights monitoring is illegal in Cuba. Despite numerous petitions for official recognition submitted to the Ministry of Justice by the various human rights monitoring groups currently attempting to function in Cuba, none has gained legal status. Laws restricting free expression and association, combined with near-constant surveillance by the state-security police, ensure that human rights monitoring is frequently punished.

Cuban rights activists are routinely harassed, questioned, intimidated and threatened by the state-security police, and frequently arrested. Since 1989 Cuban authorities have made more than 230 arrests of human rights monitors and pro-human rights political activists. At least 50 rights monitors and political dissidents are currently believed to be serving prison terms of up to ten years for their peaceful advocacy. Scores of others have been subjected to acts of repudiation or beatings by thugs.

State-security police frequently search the homes of human rights monitors, confiscating possessions such as typewriters, tape recorders and documents. Many human rights monitors have been firedfrom their jobs. At various times they have been either prevented from leaving the country or pressured to flee. Members of human rights groups are officially denounced as "counter-revolutionaries."

 On January 15, state security police arrested Gustavo Arcos Bergnes, his brother Sebastian Arcos Bergnes, and Jess Yanes Pelletier, leaders of the Cuban Committee for Human Rights, one of Cuba's two main human rights groups. A mob reportedly held an act of repudiation at the Havana home of Gustavo Arcos shortly before his arrest. The protest was reportedly staged in an ostensibly spontaneous reaction to a televised segment of the trial of three exiles who had been caught at the end of December 1991 entering the country illegally with arms and explosives. In that segment, the defendants read the names and addresses of the three activists, whom they testified they were instructed to contact if they ran into trouble. Gustavo Arcos and Jess Yanes were released without charge a day later. Sebastian Arcos was kept in detention and tried in October on charges of spreading "enemy propaganda." He was sentenced to four years and eight months in prison.

 On January 16, an act of repudiation that lasted more than 24 hours was staged at the Havana home of Elizardo and Gerardo Snchez of the Cuban Commission for Human Rights and National Reconciliation (ccdhrn), Cuba's other leading human rights group. Human rights activist Mara Celina Rodrguez was badly beaten by members of the mob, forced into a police car and held for several hours, for trying to reach Snchez's home.

 On January 31, a mob staged an act of repudiation at the home of detained activist Luis Alberto Pita Santos of the Association of Defenders of Political Rights. His home was ransacked and family members were detained by state security police for several hours. Pita, who had been imprisoned since October 1991, was tried in March 1992 on charges of offending the head of state, "clandestine printing," and "illegal association." He was sentenced to five years in prison.

 On March 4, Elizardo Snchez was beaten by a rapid-action brigade as he and another rights activist, Lzaro Loreto, went to visit theircolleague, political dissident Jos Luis Pujol. The mob, which was staging an act of repudiation at Pujol's home, forcibly brought Snchez to a police station, while Loreto and Pujol were arrested by police. Snchez and Loreto were released the next day. Pujol was kept in detention and later tried and sentenced in July to three years in prison on charges of "contempt" for offending the president.

 Other human rights activists who were subjected to acts of repudiation, briefly detained, summoned for questioning by the police or harassed at their homes by members of mass organizations included Francisco Chaviano Gonzlez, Gladys Gonzlez, Rodolfo Gonzlez, Lzaro Linares Echevarra, and Aida Valds.

 Bienvenida Ccalo Santana, of the Cuban Humanitarian Women's Movement, was arrested in December 1991, reportedly tried in September 1992, and sentenced to three years in prison for spreading "enemy propaganda."

 Juan Jos Moreno of ccdhrn was arrested on September 21 by state security police in Holgun province. He was one of some 15 people who were detained in the provincial prison and accused of spreading "enemy propaganda."

 Police again arrested Elizardo Snchez of ccdhrn on October 9. While Snchez was taken into detention, police searched his home-which doubles as the office of the Cuban Commission-and confiscated typewriters, tape recorders, and a camera. Meanwhile, an act of repudiation was staged outside. Snchez, who was released without charge on October 12, is thought to have been detained to prevent him from attending two social functions-a party at his home to celebrate the fifth anniversary of the ccdhrn, to which a number of diplomats were invited, and a reception at the Spanish embassy to which he was invited.

International human rights monitoring has been severely curtailed since a brief opening in 1988. Despite repeated requests, Americas Watch has yet to receive permission from the Cuban government to conduct the kind of open investigation it undertakes routinely elsewhere in the region. Over the years, members of the Americas Watch board and staff have been allowed access to Cubaonly under the auspices of other organizations.

The Cuban government refused to cooperate with the resolution adopted in March 1992 by the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, which authorized the appointment of a special rapporteur for Cuba to investigate human rights conditions and report his findings to the next commission session. The Cuban government's 1988 agreement with the International Committee of the Red Cross granting access to Cuban prisons and political prisoners remains suspended after being broken by the Cuban government in 1990.

U.S. Policy

In 1992, relations between the United States and Cuba focused on the debate over the "Cuban Democracy Act of 1992," which broadened the trade embargo against Cuba in an attempt to speed the collapse of the Castro government and establish democracy in Cuba. The explicit intent of the law is to foster democracy by punishing the Castro government while rewarding the Cuban people. It extends the current embargo by prohibiting foreign-based subsidiaries of U.S. companies from trading with Cuba. This extra-territorial effect of the law could translate into a loss of hundreds of millions of dollars for the Cuban government. At the same time, the law allows food to be donated to nongovernmental organizations-such as the Catholic and Protestant churches-and individuals. Medicines and medical supplies may be exported as long as the Cuban government allows on-site inspection to ensure that the supplies "benefit ... the Cuban people" and are not sold for re-export. The law also allows the U.S. government to provide "assistance, through appropriate nongovernmental organizations, for the support of individuals and organizations to promote nonviolent democratic change in Cuba."

While Americas Watch commends efforts to pressure the Cuban government to improve its human rights practices, it has objected to provisions of the law, as well as the pre-existing embargo, that continue to impede human contacts by maintaining restrictions on travel by U.S. citizens and on telephone communications. Under the 1975 Helsinki Final Act and successive accords reached by the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (csce), the United States agreed to lift restrictions limiting "human contacts," including bans on travel and telephone communications. The principles set forth in the instruments would clearly favor the removal of any barrier to such contacts raised by a csce government in its relations with other nations.

Although the embargo allows U.S. citizens to travel to Cuba, they are prohibited from spending any money there without the permission of the U.S. Treasury Department. If citizens defy this restriction, they can be prosecuted for "trading with the enemy," imprisoned for up to 12 years and fined up to $250,000; corporations are subject to $500,000 fines. Further, the Treasury Department may now impose a civil penalty of up to $50,000 against violators of the "Cuban Democracy Act."

Exceptions are made for only four categories of visitors to Cuba: U.S. or foreign government officials or officials of any intergovernmental organization of which the U.S. is a member; family members with relatives in Cuba; academics and researcherswith Cuba-specific expertise; and news media personnel. No other American can travel to Cuba, except as a guest of the Cuban government. The travel ban also applies to Americans who since 1988 have been permitted to import "informational materials" from Cuba-books, films, records and, since April 1991, art. Would-be importers may not travel to Cuba to arrange for these materials to be sent to the United States. The "Cuban Democracy Act" does not affect this ban. The embargo also impedes telephone communications between Cubans and Americans by blocking payment of revenue due to Cuba for completing calls. The Cuban Democracy Act does not alter this arrangement. On November 24, the U.N. General Assembly adopted a non-binding resolution, by a vote of 59 to 3, with 71 abstentions, calling on the U.S. to discontinue the embargo against Cuba.

The United States continues to fund TV-Mart, the U.S. Information Agency's (usia) television broadcasts to Cuba, even though its transmissions have been successfully blocked by Havana and cannot be seen in Cuba. The Cuban government has retaliated by attempting to block the usia's widely listened-to Radio Mart broadcasts, which Cubans can now receive only by short-wave radio.

On three occasions in the last year, Cuban exile groups based in Miami entered Cuban waters with the intent to commit acts of violence in Cuba. In at least one case, the target was a civilian hotel-a wholly inappropriate target even in the midst of an armed conflict.

In one case in December 1991, three men on a small boat, in possession of weapons and explosives, were captured by Cuban authorities. They confessed to belonging to a U.S.-based exile terrorist organization and to undertaking a mission to commit acts of sabotage in public places in Cuba. They were convicted and sentenced to death by a Cuban court in January 1992. Within three weeks of their capture, one was executed by firing squad, while the two others had their sentences commuted to 30 years in prison. Americas Watch opposed the death sentences, particularly in light of the absence of a trial before an independent judiciary. An anti-Castro exile group, Comandos L, claimed responsibility for the mission.

In another incident, on July 4, 1992 four men entered Cuban waters but were picked up by the U.S. Coast Guard after their boat stalled. The men, who were found by the Coast Guard to be in possession of weapons, were members of Comandos L. In the third incursion, in October, the Melia Varadero beach hotel on the northern coast of Cuba was strafed by machine-gun fire coming from a speedboat. Comandos L claimed responsibility for the attack.

The U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation is investigating the cases, and one of the men implicated in the second incident has been arrested. Vigorous prosecutions and public condemnations would send an important signal that the United States is not only uninvolved in these activities-a frequent accusation by the Cuban government-but that it will not tolerate such acts, particularly against civilians.

The State Department, in conjunction with the U.S. Interests Section in Havana, has been producing consistently reliable human rights reports on Cuba since 1989. The State Department's CountryReports on Human Rights Practices for 1991, issued in January 1992, provides an accurate account of human rights violations in Cuba. The State Department also regularly issues statements condemning the arrests and unfair trials of human rights and pro-democracy activists.

The U.N. Response

The U.S. delegation again led the campaign to censure Cuba before the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva in February and March. Headed by Ambassador Kenneth Blackwell, the U.S. effort lacked the selective, highly ideological rhetoric that characterized the campaigns waged by the previous U.S. Ambassador, Armando Valladares, a former long-term Cuban prisoner. The U.S. delegation also balanced its initiative on Cuba with forceful efforts against other violator countries.

At the previous Commission session in 1991, Rafael Rivas Posada of Colombia was appointed special representative to Cuba. Ambassador Rivas was the Latin America representative in a 1988 visit to Cuba by a Commission delegation. Although the Cuban government did not permit the special representative to travel to Cuba, he produced a substantive report detailing 128 cases of abuse, based on information available from nongovernmental sources. Ambassador Rivas met in October 1991 with a broad spectrum of human rights monitors who follow developments in Cuba, including Americas Watch.

The Commission's 1992 resolution on Cuba raised the pressure on Cuba by upgrading the special representative to a special rapporteur. Cuba was also sharply criticized in a resolution that passed by a vote of 23 to 8, with 21 abstentions, and one commission member absent. As with the special representative, the Cuban delegation immediately announced that Cuba would not cooperate with the special rapporteur.

Ambassador Rivas was offered but declined the position of special rapporteur. Carl Johan Groth of Sweden, an Ambassador to Cuba from 1969 to 1971, was named rapporteur by U.N. Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali. Mr. Groth was expected to produce an interim human rights report to the General Assembly in late November and a full report to the Commission in 1993. Americas Watch has met with him and provided him information on human rights conditions in Cuba.

The Work of Americas Watch

Americas Watch was not permitted by the Cuban government to visit Cuba in 1992. In April, Americas Watch requested permission to observe the trials of Yndamiro Restano, the pro-democracy activist, and Sebastian Arcos, the human rights monitor, but never received a response from the Cuban authorities.

In February, Americas Watch published a lengthy newsletter on Cuba, "Tightening the Grip, Human Rights Abuses in Cuba," which covered the period from August 1991 to February 1992. The release of the newsletter was timed to coincide with the meeting of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights in Geneva.

On August 12, Americas Watch testified on human rights violations in Cuba before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee inhearings on the "Cuban Democracy Act."

Americas Watch continued to campaign on behalf of individual political prisoners. In 1992, imprisoned poet Mara Elena Cruz Varela, serving a two-year term on charges of "illegal association" and "defamation of state institutions," received the Hellman-Hammett Award for persecuted writers from the Fund for Free Expression, a division of Human Rights Watch.

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

Human Rights Developments

The human rights situation in the Dominican Republic in 1992 continued to be dominated by official mistreatment of Haitian migrants who crossed the border into the Dominican Republic. The Dominican government's continued reliance on forced labor by Haitian workers on its state-owned sugarcane plantations was shaped by two events in 1991. The first was the government's summary deportation of as many as 6,000 Haitians and Dominicans of Haitian origin, and the flight to Haiti of tens of thousands of others who sought to avoid forced deportation, between June and September 1991. The second was the bloody September 30, 1991 military coup in Haiti, which ousted the first democratically elected Haitian president, Jean-Bertrand Aristide. The military takeover led thousands to cross the border, some returning to the country that only months earlier had grievously mistreated them. Some voluntarily took up work on the government's sugarcane plantations, diminishing but not eliminating the government's need for forced labor. The shortfall continued to be made up by compelling Haitians to cut sugarcane.

The mass deportation of Haitians and Dominicans of Haitian origin was the Dominican government's response to heightened pressure from international human rights groups. The forced "repatriations" began abruptly in June 1991 after the forced labor practices became the focus of a report by "Primetime Live," the U.S. television news program. The expos led later to U.S. congressional hearings.

Bands of soldiers, often abusive and corrupt, raided Haitian communities throughout the Dominican Republic and rounded up anyone deemed to "look" Haitian, including Dominicans of Haitian origin ("Dominico-Haitians"). Victims were separated from their families, belongings were stolen, and personal documents were confiscated or destroyed. The victims were taken to makeshift immigration detention centers and, within days, transported by bus across the border to Haiti, with little or no attempt to determine their citizenship or immigration status. Domestic laws on the right to a fair hearing before deportation were openly and systematically flouted.

At the same time, tens of thousands (estimates range as high as 50-60,000) of Haitians and Dominico-Haitians fled to Haiti, a foreign country to many who spoke Spanish as a first language or had few if any remaining relatives there. Many Haitians left "voluntarily" to avoid the arbitrary and abusive nature of the round-ups. The forced deportations and concurrent exodus to Haitiended only with the coup in Port-au-Prince.

Although the Dominican Republic may promulgate nondiscriminatory immigration laws, it cannot escape responsibility for its long-term active encouragement of Haitian migration into the Dominican Republic. The Dominican government and its State Sugar Council (cea) did not require Haitian workers to obtain visas or immigration permits before hiring them to engage in the arduous work of harvesting sugarcane which Dominicans refused to perform. Nonetheless, it now alleges the lack of such documentation as a basis for their summary deportation.

During the 1992 harvest, most of the cea's recruits traveled from Haiti to the border "voluntarily," some because they had no hope of earning a living in Haiti after the coup, and others to flee the persecution and violence unleashed by the Haitian army. Thus, unlike past years when the cea sent recruiters to Haiti, where they used force and deceit to secure a sufficient number of workers to supplement those willing to work on cea sugar plantations, recruitment in Haiti this year was unnecessary.

Nevertheless, many Haitians arriving on Dominican territory were subject to the same abusive treatment at the hands of cea employees and the Dominican army that has persisted for years. Upon crossing the border, the Haitians were often taken into the custody of Dominican border guards and held in military posts or makeshift detention areas until there were enough people to fill buses that transported them to plantations. Some Haitians and Dominico-Haitians were arrested by soldiers and armed cea guards while traveling on roads in the Dominican Republic and brought to government plantations. Once on the plantations, the recruits were forcibly confined to the plantations for the duration of the seven-month harvest. Restrictions on internal travel, arbitrary detention, and confiscation of belongings were regularly used as methods of confinement. Thus confined, they were forced to work to earn enough to feed themselves.

The use of forced labor persists in the Dominican Republic because of the government's failure to enforce its own decrees and laws prohibiting the practice. Offenders-whether soldiers, plantation security guards or cea employees-continue to profit from the labor trade with impunity. Victims have no recourse.

Despite ongoing abuses, the Dominican government did implement some meaningful reforms in its sugar industry in 1991 and 1992. It legalized sugarcane-cutter labor unions made up predominantly of Haitians and Dominico-Haitians, who it had long argued were not covered by existing labor laws. The new Labor Secretary, Rafael Alburquerque, began discussions with numerous newly recognized cane-cutter unions to consider additional reforms of the cea's labor practices, such as more frequent cash payment of workers to reduce their dependence on the usurious plantation stores. The government also distributed one-year renewable work permits to some Haitians, thus establishing their immigration status.

Forced labor by Haitian children, a recurrent problem in the past, was largely eliminated in 1992. An Americas Watch delegation in February-March 1992 neither found nor was told of any cases of forced child labor by local monitors. Although a few children could be seen picking up cane in the fields to help their families,efforts by the authorities to curb the hard labor of cane cutting by children seemed largely to have succeeded.

Some improvements were made with respect to living conditions. Small, dark rooms in run-down, concrete or wooden barracks-style housing continued to be the norm. However, the cea, together with private and foreign governmental development agencies, has undertaken projects to build latrines, modernize water systems, and improve access to health care and family planning. Cane cutters' wages were raised from eighteen pesos per ton (about U.S. $1.44 at the exchange rate in 1991) to twenty-five pesos per ton (about U.S. $2.00). Still, it is barely enough to buy one meal of rice and beans a day.

The draconian repression of the press in Haiti since the coup also spilled over into the Dominican Republic when the Dominican government barred a Catholic radio station from broadcasting news in Creole, the language of its Haitian listeners on both sides of the border. In February, the Dominican State Telecommunications Director, Leopoldo Nuez Santos, suspended the Creole-language programming of Radio Enriquillo, a popular Dominican station based in the southwest, near the Haitian border. Radio Enriquillo had been a main source of information for Haitians on developments in their own country, including its regular reports of human rights abuses by the army. By seeking to silence Radio Enriquillo's Creole broadcasts, Dominican authorities assisted the Haitian military's efforts to impose a blackout on all independent sources of information reaching the Haitian people.

President Joaqun Balaguer, in a press conference the following week, stated that the ban had been imposed after his government received complaints from "the Haitian authorities" that the radio station was broadcasting "subversive slogans that were creating a certain uneasiness among the Haitian population." Neither the telecommunications director nor the President offered any evidence of the "subversive" nature of Radio Enriquillo's reporting.

The banning of the Creole program also marked the beginning of a crackdown on local Dominican popular organizations that sought peacefully to demonstrate their support for Radio Enriquillo. After the ban on the radio station, local groups that previously had been allowed to hold similar peaceful marches in protest against the Haitian coup and in solidarity with the Haitian people were subjected to heavy-handed police intervention, including gunfire, beatings, tear gas, arrests and intimidation. A bystander, Bienvenido Moquete Ramrez, was shot and killed by the police during one such protest in February.

Following the suspension order, the director of Radio Enriquillo was told by the national telecommunications director that Haitian music would not be banned. Radio Enriquillo announcers then began to sing the news in Creole. Each song was also summarized in Spanish for Dominican listeners.

On July 14, the national telecommunications director himself traveled to Tamayo, where the station is based, accompanied by several soldiers, and submitted another order to suspend "any type of program in the Creole language," including music. After that, the station developed a new program called News Without Frontierswhich provided news stories that were read very slowly in "Creolized Spanish" that Haitian listeners could understand.

Radio Enriquillo finally had to suspend News Without Frontiers on October 29 under continuing pressure from the authorities. A month earlier, it had transmitted President Aristide's speech before the United Nations General Assembly, in which, among other things, he had criticized the Vatican for being alone in the world in recognizing the Haitian military junta. This transmission reportedly elicited complaints from the Apostolic Nuncio in Santo Domingo and the Haitian Church hierarchy-which does not actively oppose the de facto Haitian regime-as well as from the Haitian junta itself. The station also learned that four of its staff members, including the director, were considered "dangerous" by the authorities and would be closely watched. Fearing reprisals such as losing its powerful frequency, Radio Enriquillo was forced to suspend all of its Creole programming.

Torture in police custody, believed by local human rights monitors to be widespread, received national attention in 1992 after several cases were reported in the press. For example, Professor Felipe de Jess Medrano Garca, the director of the Cultural Promotion Department at the Santo Domingo Autonomous University, was arrested on January 16 at his home by agents of the National Police in connection with an investigation into a United States currency counterfeiting case. He was detained in police headquarters in Santo Domingo following a warrantless search of his home.

On the first day of his detention, he was forced by a police lieutenant to lie face down on the floor with his wrists handcuffed behind his back. He was then repeatedly beaten with a wooden bat on the buttocks and lower vertebral column. A medical examination after his release revealed severe trauma to his lower back and to the third finger of his left hand.

Medrano was finally released on January 24, as the police investigation found that "he had nothing to do with the case." He was never brought before a judge; there was no official explanation for his arrest; and he was never charged.

After Medrano filed a complaint, the two officers who beat him were subject to charges before an internal police court, although one was promoted to captain a month later. The proceedings now await a definitive medical evaluation to determine whether Medrano's injuries are treatable or permanent. He is currently being treated for a herniated disk. Doctors at the public hospital where he initially sought treatment were reportedly pressured by the police to drop his case.

The Right to Monitor

Dominicans generally enjoy the right to monitor human rights in their country. For years, there has been great public attention in the Dominican Republic to the issue of forced labor, and discussion about the deportations has been widely aired in the press. However, many domestic human rights advocates have traditionally proceeded with discretion, fearing legal and extra-legal reprisals from the authorities.

A young human rights lawyer was killed by plainclothes policein Santo Domingo on September 20. Rafael Efran Ortiz died of gunshot wounds that he sustained during a peaceful demonstration against the official commemoration of the 500th anniversary of the arrival of Columbus. According to human rights and press accounts, the police, posing as journalists, began shooting into the crowd when demonstrators discovered they were armed police and confronted them. Ten police officers implicated in the incident were dismissed from the police force and will be prosecuted by civilian courts.

U.S. Policy

The United States is by far the Dominican Republic's largest trading partner, purchasing approximately 67 percent of Dominican exports annually. In fiscal year 1991, the U.S. imported $2.02 billion worth of products, including $548.9 million under the Generalized System of Preferences (gsp) and the Caribbean Basin Initiative (cbi). The Dominican Republic continues to be allotted the largest segment, 17.6 percent, of the U.S. sugar import quota, or 232,555 metric tons of sugar.

In fiscal year 1991, the Dominican Republic received $1.7 million in military assistance and training and $18.9 million in humanitarian assistance; in fiscal year 1992, $2 million in military assistance and training, $6.7 million in budgetary support known as Economic Support Funds (esf), $15.3 million in humanitarian assistance, and a small amount of anti-narcotics assistance was provided; for fiscal year 1993, the Bush administration has requested $1.2 million in military assistance and training, $5 million in esf, and $32 million in humanitarian assistance.

In 1989, in response to a petition filed by Americas Watch, U.S. Trade Representative Carla Hills began a review of Dominican labor practices pursuant to a law that bars gsp trade benefits to countries that violate labor rights. Americas Watch's petition documented the Dominican government's practice of forcibly recruiting Haitian workers, confining them in poor conditions and physically abusing them.

On April 25, 1991, after a two-year review of Dominican labor rights violations, the Bush administration determined that the Dominican government "[has] taken or [is] taking steps to afford internationally recognized worker rights." As a result, the administration decided to maintain trade benefits to the Dominican Republic despite the persistence of the use of forced labor on state sugarcane plantations. The administration's findings were based at least in part on reports from the U.S. embassy in Santo Domingo that were never made public. The decision put an end to the formal review of Dominican labor rights practices and to a highly effective mechanism to pressure the Dominican government to improve its treatment of Haitian workers.

The State Department's January 1992 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1991-virtually the only administration statement on human rights in the Dominican Republic during 1992-correctly gives credence to reports of continuing abuse and thus contradicts the administration's own justifications for maintaining gsp benefits. The report's section on the "Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor" was less thorough than the previousyear's, yet it did summarize the main concerns raised by domestic and international human rights organizations:

There were credible charges in the 1990-91 sugar harvest that the Government and cea forcibly recruited Haitian seasonal agricultural workers and then restricted them to work on specific sugar plantations. In some cases, workers told of holding facilities under military guard, having personal effects confiscated, and being physically and psychologically abused by cea employees to restrict them to the plantations. There were also charges that the Government used the military and police to round up Haitians residing in the Dominican Republic and compelled them to work in the cane fields.

Commenting on the 1991 mass deportations of Haitians from the Dominican Republic, the Bush administration initially acted as an apologist for the Dominican government by parroting its denial of allegations of rights abuses. Later, however, the State Department in its Country Reports conceded that human rights violations had occurred during the forced repatriations.

The U.S. Congress should follow up on the investigation it began during its June 1991 hearings and express disapproval not only of the continued use of forced labor in the Dominican Republic, but also of the Dominican government's policy of indiscriminate expulsions of Haitians. While the improvements that have taken place over the last year-such as the elimination of child labor and the prompt payment of workers-should be recognized, sustained Congressional attention would assist greatly in keeping the spotlight on continued abuses. In a welcome gesture, Congress withheld $1 million of the $5 million in Economic Support Funds for fiscal year 1993 until the U.S. President reports on steps taken by the Dominican Republic to improve respect for labor rights.

Congress should also consider taking steps to ensure that the Dominican Republic is not permitted to export sugar to the United States as long as it employs forced labor to harvest its sugarcane. A threatened reduction in the Dominican Republic's share of sugar imports by the United States could be an appropriate and highly effective source of leverage to pressure the Dominican government to end its use of forced Haitian labor.

The Work of Americas Watch

Americas Watch, together with the National Coalition for Haitian Refugees (nchr), undertook a two-week mission to the Dominican Republic in February-March 1992, during the sugarcane harvest. The delegation conducted interviews with cane cutters at six of the cea's ten plantations. The delegation also met with human rights monitors, church workers, trade union organizers, and journalists, as well as with the Dominican Secretary of Labor, Rafael Alburquerque, the Director of the cea, Juan Arturo Biaggi, and the U.S. Ambassador Robert Pastorino. Requests to meet with the Director of Immigration, Jos Ramn Mota Paulino, were not granted.

In April, Americas Watch and nchr issued a newsletter, "Dominican Authorities Ban Creole Radio Program and Crack Down onProtesters," on the censoring of Radio Enriquillo. Americas Watch and nchr had visited the station and met with its staff a month earlier.

In October, the organizations published their fourth joint report on the Dominican Republic, "A Troubled Year: Haitians in the Dominican Republic." The report, which also incorporated findings from an investigative mission in July 1991 to document abuses surrounding the forced deportations, was issued to coincide with the Dominican government's commemoration of the 500th anniversary of the landing of Columbus.
EL SALVADOR

Human Rights Developments

On January 16, 1992, the government of El Salvador and the Farabundo Mart National Liberation Front (fmln) signed a historic peace accord that ended twelve years of bloody civil conflict. Negotiated under the auspices of the United Nations, the peace accord laid out sweeping reforms to permit the fmln to participate in political life; to transform the institutions that had accounted for major human rights violations; and to achieve greater equity in the social and economic life of the country. Not surprisingly, the end of the war has occasioned a major improvement in the observance of human rights, even though, by year's end, the implementation of the peace accord was in serious jeopardy and political tensions had dramatically increased.

Numerous aspects of the peace agreement itself stemmed from the recognition that human rights violations committed by agents of the state had stood at the very center of the conflict. The peace accord called for the dissolution of two of the most repressive security forces, the National Guard and Treasury Police, as well as of all five Army rapid-reaction battalions, some of which had been associated with the worst atrocities of the war. The accord specified that a new National Civil Police (pnc) would replace the existing National Police, and be open to a broad range of civilians as well as to former National Policemen and fmln combatants. The accord also called for a restructuring of the judicial system to make it more independent of political pressures and more professional. Most of these changes have been marked by serious delays or irregularities in compliance.

The Salvadoran government and the fmln also agreed to the formation of two commissions to help overcome impunity for past human rights violations. An Ad Hoc Commission of three civilians began work in mid-May to review the records of officers of the armed forces, in order to purge those implicated in human rights abuses and those whose professionalism or commitment to democracy and the peace process were in question. A Truth Commission began work in July, charged with investigating "grave acts of violence that [had] occurred since 1980" and issuing recommendations for prosecution.

After a three-month review, the Ad Hoc Commission issued its report to President Alfredo Cristiani and to the Secretary General of the United Nations in late September. According to pressreports, the list of over 100 officers included Minister of Defense General Ren Emilio Ponce and the Deputy Defense Minister General Juan Orlando Zepeda. The reaction in the military and the extreme right was predictable. A death squad communique issued in late October called the purge "intolerable," while senior officers maneuvered to avoid dismissal or transfer, jeopardizing the entire peace accord.

The Truth Commission took direct testimonies from victims and survivors of abuse in rural areas. It also received denunciations in its San Salvador office for a period of several months ending in late October. Like the Ad Hoc Commission, it also received documentation from a variety of nongovernmental organizations as well as from the Salvadoran government. The Truth Commission, with only six months to complete its investigation, will issue a public report in early 1993.

The work of both commissions was complicated by the Salvadoran Assembly's adoption on January 23, 1992 of an amnesty law covering most political crimes. Exempted from the Law of National Reconciliation were only the handful of cases decided by jury trial (the Jesuit case, the U.S. churchwomen's case, and the Zona Rosa massacre, for example), cases of kidnapping, and cases in which the Truth Commission might recommend prosecution. However, the law specified that the Assembly could "adopt the resolutions it considers appropriate" six months after the Truth Commission issued its findings, either extending the amnesty to all cases or preserving certain exemptions. If the Assembly adopts a blanket amnesty, it will not only undermine the principle of accountability but also ensure impunity in the handful of cases-including the Jesuit murders-in which members of the military have been prosecuted for human rights crimes.

One positive step toward coming to terms with the record of atrocities during the war involved the exhumation of remains of the victims of the 1981 El Mozote massacre in which an estimated 794 civilians were killed by the Salvadoran Army. After resisting the exhumation for months, the government ceded to domestic and international pressure, including that of the Truth Commission, and allowed a team of Argentine and U.S. forensic anthropologists, together with the Salvadoran Institute for Legal Medicine, to go forward in October. The initial discoveries included a large number of skeletons of small children, confirming eyewitness accounts of the massacre and graphically revealing that U.S. denials of the early 1980s that a massacre had taken place were patently false.

Since the beginning of the cease-fire on February 1, 1992, the number of human rights violations in El Salvador greatly diminished. Combat-related violations and violations of the laws of war, including attacks on the civilian population, forced recruitment, restrictions on freedom of movement, and detentions for suspected collaboration with the guerrillas, were reduced or eliminated altogether. Nonetheless, politically motivated killings, death threats, mistreatment of prisoners by government forces, and attacks aimed at opposition trade unions, popular organizations, and media continued, albeit at much-reduced levels. Late in 1992, as compliance with the peace accord began to cut deeply into the power of the armed forces, clandestine groups stepped up threatsagainst members of the fmln. The near-complete and ongoing paralysis of the judicial system continued to ensure that the Salvadoran state, if not guilty of direct involvement in abuses, was complicit by failing to investigate or to take preventive action.

While the end of the war accounted for some of the improvement in the human rights situation, part of the reduction in violations was clearly attributable to the presence of the United Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador (onusal). onusal began operations in El Salvador in July 1991 as the result of a human rights accord between the Salvadoran government and the fmln signed the previous year. It was empowered to "take any steps it deems appropriate" to defend human rights and, perhaps most significantly, was granted the power to visit any military installation or detention center without prior notice. With the signing of the peace accord, onusal expanded to include large military and police divisions responsible for overseeing the implementation of the peace accord, yet onusal's Human Rights Division continued to play what its own officials described as a "dissuasive" and "preventive" role with respect to abuses.

onusal's unique position within the country and its unparalleled access to the government and security bodies allowed it to comment with authority on numerous aspects of the human rights situation. The fifth report of the Human Rights Division was issued in August 1992, a year after onusal began operations. For the period since the cease-fire, onusal observed:

 In the eastern and central parts of the country, active duty soldiers were responsible for "a disturbing number of cases" of violations of the right to life, most of which "bore the hallmarks of common crimes." In the western and central parts of El Salvador, the Army's territorial service of military escorts was frequently cited in complaints of summary executions or deaths. Arrests by members of the civil defense or the territorial service were "in open violation of the law and of the Peace Agreement."

 Complaints of death threats went up dramatically following the signing of the peace accord, in some cases directed against religious, political, and trade union organizations, and in some cases made by members of the armed forces, security forces, and civil defense against private individuals. The Salvadoran government failed to follow onusal's recommendation that the state provide special protection when threats emanated from organized clandestine groups, such as the Salvadoran Anti-Communist Front or the Secret Army of National Salvation. Moreover, in some murder cases, death threats "were designed todeter witnesses or members of the victim's family" from coming forward with information relevant to prosecution.

 Although onusal could not establish that the practice of torture was systematic, "cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment," including beatings and a disproportionate use of force, was "a systematic practice." Complaints of mistreatment were often lodged against the Municipal Police, a security force under the direct control of local mayors, which was responsible for the beating death of a youth in Soyapango and whose troops "systematically make arrests in a manner which rarely meets the minimum legal guarantees." Reform of the Municipal Police was not touched on in the peace accord.

 Even in those areas in which there had been improvement, such as reductions in cases of disappearance, torture or kidnapping, there was no corresponding consolidation of the rule of law. onusal called for profound reforms of criminal law and procedure and in the judicial system, without which improvements in human rights practices may well be ephemeral.

While many of the complaints received by onusal, particularly of summary executions, turned out to have been common crimes (that is, without an explicit political motivation), there were a number of cases in which political motives appeared more clear-cut. In none of the following cases was there an adequate investigation, let alone punishment of those guilty. This failure suggests state involvement by omission, if not direct commission.

For example, immediately after the signing of the peace accord, a bomb destroyed the vehicle of the Reuters correspondent in San Salvador and damaged a vehicle belonging to The New York Times. Three foreign journalists received death threats from the Salvadoran Anti-Communist Front (fas), the same group that had threatened onusal, United Nations, and other international personnel when onusal began operations in July 1991. On January 6, the clandestine Secret Army of National Salvation issued a death threat against nine pastors and lay persons of the Protestant National Council of Churches (cni); two of those threatened had been previously arrested and interrogated by the National Guard, and the wife of a third cni member was abducted on January 22, blindfolded, and interrogated about cni activities. She was subsequently released.

In a February report, onusal concluded that "there may be a link" between the threats against cni and the prior arrests by the National Guard, and deemed the case "so serious" that the authorities should clear it up "fully and expeditiously." A month later, however, members of the military-dominated SpecialInvestigation Unit (siu) still had not spoken with the National Guard. No suspect has ever been identified.

In the most prominent political murder since the cease-fire, Nazario de Jess Gracias of the Federation of Independent Associations and Unions of El Salvador (feasies) was brutally hacked to death on March 2, at union headquarters where he worked as a night watchman. Gracias had been arrested the previous year by the Army's First Brigade for "conspiracy to subvert" (he was reportedly returning from a labor demonstration), had been turned over to the National Police, and was released after several days. He later received death threats which he denounced to onusal.

Following Gracias's death, his fellow unionists briefly detained a suspicious individual loitering outside the union headquarters who carried a card identifying himself as a member of the Army's Territorial Service. Despite this important lead suggesting state involvement in the murder, the siu told Americas Watch that it was unable to locate that individual. It also failed to follow leads publicly indicated by onusal, which repeatedly called on the government "to take decisive and firm measures" to prevent and investigate murders and death threats. Such recommendations have fallen on deaf ears.

A disturbing pattern of attacks and threats against those engaged in opposition political activity has continued into the time of formal peace, and accelerated in the second half of 1992. In early August, five members of the executive council of the Salvadoran Association of Telecommunications Workers (astel) received death threats following a labor conflict. Adrin Esquino Lisco, who achieved international prominence earlier in the decade for his advocacy on behalf of the victims of a massacre at Las Hojas cooperative, received death threats in Sonsonate in September. A number of workers from grassroots organizations reported receiving death threats, as did members of fmln political communities in the countryside. In some cases, violent deaths of political and trade union activists may have been the result of common crime, but former members of the army and security forces have been implicated in criminal attacks and have continued to go unpunished. In addition, a disturbing number of attacks on fmln leaders have been carried out; although the perpetrators have not been formally identified, the identity of the target raises deep suspicions of a political motive. The government's ongoing failure to investigate violent crimes-unless specifically pressured to do so by onusal-contributes to the climate of polarization and mistrust.

Tensions came to a boiling point in late October, just prior to the deadline for the full demobilization of the fmln and the date for carrying out the purge of the Army as specified by the Ad Hoc Commission. On October 22, one of the most notorious death squads from the early 1980s, the Maximiliano Hernndez Martnez brigade, announced an "all or nothing" struggle to defend El Salvador from communism and "sentenced to death" virtually the entire leadership of the fmln. The communique also threatened onusal and the foreign press, as well as Salvadoran "front organizations" and "political traitors." While a backlash from the extreme right had widely been feared since the signing of the peaceaccord, the communique marked the first instance of an explicit, across-the-board death threat against fmln commanders.

The vast promise of structural reform in the peace accord has not been fulfilled in practice. Both the fmln and the government have failed to live up to commitments. The fmln, for example, is widely believed to have underreported its weapons inventory and to have cached arms. The government, however, has the primary responsibility for institutional reforms that have fallen short; it, and especially the military, have resisted thoroughly implementing many of the reforms until pressured to do so by onusal and the political opposition.

In March, for example, rather than "suppress" the National Guard and Treasury Police as specified by the accord, the government secured hasty passage of legislation that failed to abolish the two forces. While this issue was ultimately resolved (onusal stated bluntly that "the law, as adopted, does not comply with the agreement"), a more explicit violation of the accord lay in the transfer of over 1,000 members of the National Guard and Treasury Police to the National Police. According to onusal, reassigning former members of security bodies to be abolished to law and order functions elsewhere ran "directly counter" to the provisions in the peace agreement calling for the creation of a totally new civilian police force.

The government also devoted few resources to the creation of the new National Public Security Academy, which will train all members of the new National Civil Police. The military refused to provide the existing Public Security Academy facility or the centrally located headquarters of the Atlacatl battalion (due to be disbanded) as the site for the new school; rather, the armed forces insisted on keeping the facilities for themselves, even though the military's size and role in society is to be vastly reduced. Moreover, before military personnel vacated the site that was ultimately agreed on, "they stripped it of anything usable, including beds, door jams, windows, lockers, and light bulbs," according to the U.S. General Accounting Office (gao) in a September report. In addition, according to the gao, "the government of El Salvador has not pledged any funding" for the new police force itself.

Because of these and other delays, the first class of police cadets only started training in late August, some four months later than originally specified in the accords. By October, moreover, it became known that the director of the new public security academy had accepted former members of the National Guard and Treasury Police, as well as members of the army, in the training program for the new officer corps of the pnc. This was an explicit violation of the peace accord.

In addition to these irregularities, serious delays in the resolution of the land issue led the fmln to justify its refusal to finish the disarmament of its forces by the October 31 deadline. The government, in turn, appeared to cite the fmln's failure to demobilize to justify its non-compliance with the recommendations of the Ad Hoc Commission to cleanse the armed forces of abusive commanders. Senior U.N. officials worked round-the-clock in October and November to "readjust" the schedule of compliance, appearing tocome to agreement on the final demobilization of the fmln to be completed by the end of the year and the purge of the armed forces to be completed in early 1993..

The Right to Monitor

In the most serious assault on a human rights monitor in 1992, gunmen in July attacked Jos Eduardo Pineda Valenzuela, a lawyer with the Salvadoran government's new office of the Human Rights Ombudsman (Procuradura para la Defensa de los Derechos Humanos). Pineda Valenzuela, who was left paralyzed from the neck down, had long worked for the Attorney General's office. He had been the lead prosecutor in the Jesuit case and had worked on the case of the U.S. servicemen executed by the fmln in January 1991. Several weeks after the attack, gunmen returned to Pineda Valenzuela's house and threatened his wife if she cooperated with investigators. The shooting of Pineda Valenzuela was a severe blow to the newly created Ombudsman's office, set up under the peace accord.

Although onusal had unprecedented access to government officials and institutions in order to carry out its human rights work, the government on several occasions attempted to interfere with its activities. For months the government attempted to force onusal to fire Argentine legal adviser Rodolfo Matarollo, who had given legal assistance in the Jesuit case. The government denied him a visa and members of the ruling arena party kept him from addressing a human rights seminar paid for by the U.S. Agency for International Development. The United Nations did not renew Matarollo's contract when it expired in August 1992.

In addition, onusal on occasion was refused access to court files by judges hostile to the U.N. presence. On other occasions, onusal officials were denied access to Municipal Police facilities. onusal officials told Americas Watch that government pressures and threats by clandestine groups in 1991, while not insurmountable obstacles, "complicated" the work of the mission.

The Salvadoran Army also continued to express extreme hostility to the work of human rights monitors in El Salvador. In a communique in September, the armed forces called the nongovernmental Human Rights Commission (cdhes) the "chorus and mouthpiece" of leftist organizations and accused it of carrying out a "well-planned propaganda and disinformation campaign." Given previous arrests and killings of cdhes workers, such statements by the military contribute to a climate of hostility that could prompt further attacks.

U.S. Policy

While repeatedly declaring its support for the peace process, the Bush administration appeared unable to let go of a policy of seeking support for the Salvadoran armed forces. However, with some members of Congress opposing any military aid in the wake of the peace accord, the administration was forced to compromise.

On April 1, for example, in approving the second installment of foreign aid for fiscal year 1992, Congress directed most of the administration's request for $85 million in military aid to a fund for the demobilization, retraining and reemployment of former combatants from both sides. Congress restricted the remaining $21.3million in military aid to non-lethal items.

Congress adopted similar cuts in the administration's $40 million request for fiscal year 1993. In late October, Congress approved $11 million in non-lethal military assistance, and devoted the remaining $29 million to the demobilization fund. Congress also specified that, of $1.4 million in military training funds, 75 percent was to be used to help create an effective military judicial system and code of conduct and to conduct training in the observance of internationally recognized human rights.

Of the assistance approved for 1992 and 1993, Congress and the administration pledged $20 million to the new Salvadoran Public Security Academy and new police force. As such, the U.S. was one of two international donors to contribute to the U.N.-supervised endeavor. The Department of Justice's International Criminal Investigative Training Assistance Program (icitap) is administering the effort. While supporting the formation of the new civilian police force is a worthy enterprise, the U.S. administration has remained silent about the Salvadoran military's sacking of the designated site for the training academy, and has not criticized either the Salvadoran government or the Army for its failure to devote the necessary resources to the new police force.

The Bush administration also provided cover for the armed forces by refusing to release important information from its files to the Ad Hoc and Truth Commissions. The administration's limited cooperation with both commissions revealed the shallowness of its commitment to reform of the armed forces, and its ongoing aversion to truth about the human rights situation, especially as it reflects upon the last decade of U.S. policy.

In a singular display of callousness, the administration in late October extradited to El Salvador alleged death squad participant Csar Vielman Joya Martnez. After fleeing El Salvador in 1989, Joya Martnez detailed the activities of what he said was a death squad acting out of the Army's First Brigade, including by naming his superiors. Americas Watch was able to corroborate important elements of Joya Martnez's story, including a murder that had not previously been reported publicly. In agreeing to extradite Joya Martnez, the administration ignored evidence that other members of the military with information about the crimes of their superiors had been killed in prison or in suspicious circumstances. The United States thereby assumes responsibility for the fate of Joya Martnez while he awaits trial in El Salvador.

To its credit, the Bush administration heeded requests by President Cristiani and others not to deport Salvadorans living in the United States. In May, the administration indicated that it would allow Salvadorans to remain for at least a year after June 30, when a temporary amnesty was due to expire.

The Work of Americas Watch

Americas Watch continued to devote considerable resources to El Salvador in 1992, providing information to congressional offices, journalists, attorneys and activists through its staff in Washington, D.C. and San Salvador. In March, Americas Watch published "The Massacre at El Mozote: The Need to Remember," a detailed account of the largest massacre of the war and of the U.S.government's attempt to cover it up. Americas Watch contacted the Salvadoran government on numerous occasions in 1992 requesting that permission be granted to foreign forensic specialists to begin exhumations at the site. The exhumations began in mid-October.

In September, Americas Watch released "Peace and Human Rights: Successes and Shortcomings of the United Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador (onusal)," a review of the work of the onusal Human Rights Division. Both the onusal report and the report on El Mozote received considerable coverage in the U.S. and Salvadoran press, and contributed to a constructive debate on these issues within El Salvador.

Americas Watch provided extensive documentation to the Ad Hoc and Truth Commissions, pulling together information on numerous human rights cases from its files and previously published reports. Americas Watch also publicly called on the U.S. government to declassify information in its files regarding military officers and human rights cases. In January, Americas Watch had a productive exchange with the Salvadoran government, the fmln, and the United Nations regarding the proposed amnesty law.

Americas Watch continued to oppose the extradition of death squad defector Csar Vielman Joya Martnez, calling on the State Department to deny extradition on human rights grounds. Joya Martnez was sent back to El Salvador from a jail in Texas in October.
GUATEMALA

Human Rights Developments

The human rights situation remained bleak in Guatemala in 1992, with selective assassinations, disappearances, and torture by the security forces casting a shadow of fear over the population. Anonymous death threats against trade unionists, human rights monitors, members of the university community, journalists and others reinforced the message that those who challenge the status quo do so at great personal risk. Army-organized civil patrols continue to act as agents of repression in many rural areas, intimidating those who refuse to patrol, join human rights groups, or seek to investigate or prosecute the abuses committed by the patrols. Forced patrolling continues in conflictive areas, despite valiant efforts by human rights groups to free communities from this unconstitutional burden. Impunity remains the rule for those who violate human rights, although the government has initiated criminal prosecutions in many cases and has won convictions of low-level soldiers in a few token cases.

Statistics on the violence compiled by the office of the Human Rights Ombudsman, an official elected by the Congress, and the Archbishop of Guatemala's Human Rights Office suggest a decrease in the number of extrajudicial executions and disappearances in the first half of 1992, compared with the same period one year earlier. While there may indeed be a decline in these human rights abuses, the figures undoubtedly understate the true number of violations, because fear prevents many victims and witnesses from reporting abuses. Moreover, the climate of intimidation that for decadesprevented the formation of domestic human rights groups in Guatemala continues to obstruct the work of these groups, which are unable to investigate the vast majority of violations which occur.

Investigation by Americas Watch into violations of the laws of war by guerrillas uncovered several cases of summary executions of military commissioners in the departments of Chimaltenango, Solol and the Petn in the years 1989 to 1991. Guerrillas may also have been responsible for the January 24, 1992 murder of military commissioner Regino Paniagua and his brother Genaro Paniagua Yol in the village of Rincn Chiquito, in Chimaltenango.

Peace talks pursued intermittently throughout the year deadlocked over human rights issues, although a partial accord was reached on the civil patrols. The agreement calls on the Human Rights Ombudsman to verify on a case-by-case basis whether patrollers are serving voluntarily. New patrols will be formed only after village authorities hold a public meeting, attended by a representative of the Ombudsman, to determine whether villagers freely want to form a patrol.

Meanwhile, the government and representatives of more than 40,000 refugees who have lived in camps in Mexico for the past decade reached an agreement on conditions for the refugees' return. Among the key points agreed upon, the refugees will return to their areas of origin, they will be given land and identification papers, they will be exempt from military service for three years, and they will not be obliged to form civil patrols. The agreement also calls for an as-yet-undefined mechanism to monitor the human rights situation in the regions where the refugees return. Optimism over the agreement has been tempered by the murder, apparently by the army, of Lucas Prez Tadeo, a peasant in the hamlet of Guaxacan, municipality of Nentn, in Huehuetenango. Prez Tadeo disappeared on August 31, and his body was found on September 3. The crime occurred in the area where the first massive repatriation of some 5,000 refugees was scheduled to begin a few months later. Villagers told church investigators that if another army killing occurred in their village, they would all flee to Mexico.

Civilian control over the police-a priority for both curbing and seriously investigating human rights abuses-remains a myth, disguising continuing army dominance. Although the elected government of President Jorge Serrano has paid lip service to the goal of civilian law enforcement, its actions have enhanced military authority.

One facet of this militarization was the inauguration in March of the "Hunap Task Force," a combined military and police patrol aimed at combatting urban crime. Hunap bears a close resemblance to an earlier military-police task force, the Civilian Protection System (siproci), created in October 1988 in response to military pressure to reverse the efforts of the Vinicio Cerezo government to wean the police from army control. While siproci combined patrols of the National Police, Treasury Police and Mobile Military Police, Hunap includes these three units plus soldiers from the Justo Rufino Barrios military barracks. Hunap units operate under army command. The United Nations Independent Expert, Christian Tomuschat, in his January 21, 1992 report, called for the immediate abolition of siproci so military and law enforcement functionswould be strictly separated. Although siproci was never officially disbanded, the authorities have resurrected it with another name: Hunap.

The Hunap Task Force has been involved in a series of violent abuses in 1992, including the unprovoked shooting death of university student Julio Cu Quim and the wounding of six others on April 10. Several Hunap agents have been detained and face prosecution-soldiers in military courts and police in civilian courts-for the murder of Cu Quim. Hunap agents have also been involved in brutal beatings of street children on numerous occasions.

Another facet of this militarization is the new drive to recruit former military personnel into the National Police. According to one former police official, as many as 100 members of the military, mostly from the feared military intelligence branch, had joined the ranks of the police by late August. With military intelligence representatives looking over their shoulders, police are less likely than ever to investigate cases of human rights abuses in which the trail of responsibility leads to the army's door. Another former police official, in sworn testimony given to the Archbishop's Human Rights Office, said that since the naming of a new police director in May, the National Police has effectively been taken over by the army, which has placed military officers in charge of each section of the police. The civilian police director carries out purely administrative functions, according to this source. In a November 1992 interview with Americas Watch, the director of military intelligence, Colonel Otto Prez, confirmed that six army officers had been transferred to the different departments of the police. He asserted that they act only as advisors.

Riot police used excessive force and illegal tactics such as pre-dawn raids in repressing a series of demonstrations, marches and land invasions launched by the urban and rural poor in 1992. The most disturbing incident occurred on July 21 in Guatemala City, when hundreds of riot police violently dispersed about 500 peasants who were peacefully demonstrating in the central plaza. Although the march was legally authorized, the police threw tear gas and beat demonstrators, leaving at least ten wounded. Several police agents have been charged with abuse of authority in connection with this action.

The university community-a cauldron of radical views that has long been the subject of army repression-suffered a wave of attacks in 1992. Powerful explosions damaged the offices of the University Students' Association (aeu) of the public University of San Carlos (usac) in January and October, and student leaders received death threats on several occasions. On February 10, gunmen dressed in civilian clothes shot dead university professor Manuel Estuardo Pea. Pea was known for his leftist views and had received anonymous telephone death threats prior to his death. The judicial investigation into his death had produced no suspects by early December. Three other professors connected with the usac and several students were murdered in 1992 under circumstances that remain unclear.

The continued use by the army of clandestine detention centersfor individuals suspected of ties with leftist guerrillas was reaffirmed in 1992 by two cases investigated by Americas Watch. Details of one of these cases cannot be made public, because of an explicit threat by the army of retaliation against the victim's family. A similar threat was made in the case of Maritza Urrutia, but she has decided to make her story public nonetheless.

Maritza Urrutia was kidnapped by three men driving a white vehicle with smoked glass windows after she dropped her son off at day care on July 23, at about 8:25 a.m., in Guatemala City's Zone 13. The men covered her head with a jacket and drove her to what appeared to be a military base, possibly in Guatemala City's Zone 6. She spent most of her eight-day unacknowledged detention handcuffed and blindfolded. On the rare occasions in which the blindfold was removed, she caught glimpses of olive green knapsacks and military weapons; and although her captors kept a loud radio playing in her cell night and day, she could hear the sounds of drums most days over the radio's blare. At one point, her captors bought her new clothes whose label indicated they were purchased from a store in Zone 6. One of her captors assured her she was in the hands of the army. (Americas Watch has previously received credible reports that a clandestine torture and detention center is maintained next to the installations of the Mobile Military Police in Zone 6.)

Over the course of five days, her captors made her videotape a scripted statement in which she declared that she had not been kidnapped, but had gone into hiding in order to leave the guerrilla movement. The taping sessions were repeated for six or seven hours a day in an effort to make her statement appear spontaneous and natural. She was told that she, her family, and the family of her former common-law husband would face violent reprisals if she later contradicted the falsified version of events she was forced to declare on camera.

The video was dropped off at Guatemalan television news stations, which promptly aired it on July 29. Urrutia was released on July 30 with express instructions to apply for an amnesty for supposed subversive activities, and to hold a press conference in the Attorney General's office repeating what she had been forced to say on the video. She was also instructed to remain inside the country and to meet her captors at a prearranged date, time and place. Instead, Urrutia, with the help of the Archbishop's Human Rights Office, left early on the morning of August 3 for the United States, where she publicly contradicted the official story and filed a complaint at the Inter-American Commission of Human Rights against the Guatemalan government for her temporary disappearance.

This case reflects badly not only on the army, which carried out the illegal detention and later covered it up, but also on civilian officials, who insisted that there had been no kidnapping, even though witnesses had seen Urrutia forced into the white car on July 23. Bernardo Neumann, president of a cabinet-level executive branch human rights commission, unquestioningly accepted and repeated that the kidnapping had not occurred. Worse still, in letters to President Serrano which were widely distributed in Washington by Guatemala's lobbying firm, Neumann and Attorney General Acisclo Valladares suggested that the Archbishop's HumanRights Office had acted improperly in offering Urrutia the church's protection, when it most likely was responsible for saving her life. President Serrano later repeated these accusations, suggesting that an attorney for the office was responsible for covering up a crime. The president's public relations secretary also accused Human Rights Ombudsman Ramiro de Len Carpio of covering up a crime because, although Urrutia had told him of her kidnapping before she fled the country, he abided by her request to keep the information confidential until she felt secure enough to go public. These accusations reflect bad-faith efforts to smear de Len Carpio and the Archbishop's Human Rights Office for having assisted Urrutia.

Impunity for those who violate human rights remains the rule in Guatemala, although the government, much to the credit of Attorney General Valladares, has shown itself more willing to initiate criminal prosecutions in human rights cases than its predecessors. However, Guatemala's extremely weak and ineffective judicial system is no match for the security forces, as the meager results of the government's prosecutorial efforts attest. Only two cases in 1992 yielded convictions of soldiers for murder:

 The military justice system convicted two soldiers and sentenced them to death for the January 17, 1992 massacre of a displaced indigenous family in Ciudad Peronia, a squatter settlement on the outskirts of Guatemala City. To the government's embarrassment, the two soldiers later escaped from the army's general barracks in Guatemala City; one of them has since been captured. The Constitutional Court has ordered the Supreme Court to form a panel of three magistrates and two military officers to hear a final appeal in the case.



 A military tribunal sentenced five soldiers to 30-year terms for the June 1990 murder of U.S. citizen Michael Devine. However, the only officer under indictment, Captain Hugo Contreras, was acquitted of murder. Charges of covering up the crime are still pending.

Other cases suffered notorious setbacks:



 Members of the Pacific Naval Base charged in a military court with the 1991 massacre of ten men and one woman whose bodies were found on the road between Taxisco and Escuintla were acquitted in September 1992, despite President Serrano's testimony for the prosecution. That decision is under appeal.

 Civil patrol leaders Manuel Perebal Ajtzalam III and Manuel Len Lares, accused of doublemurder and causing serious injury to human rights activists near the village of Chunim in the highland El Quich department, were also acquitted of all charges. The decision flies in the face of eyewitness testimony identifying them as among the six killers, as well as a long history of Perebal Ajtzalam III and Len Lares threatening to kill the victims. (Charges against Perebal Ajtzalam III for the October 6, 1991 kidnapping and murder of human rights activist Sebastin Velsquez Meja were dropped without explanation). The Attorney General has appealed the acquittal. The case gained notoriety in 1991 as Perebal Ajtzalam III and Len Lares remained at large, threatening and harassing human rights monitors in Chunim for seven months after warrants were issued for their arrest. They were finally detained on July 30, 1991, as the Inter-American Court of Human Rights prepared to hold a hearing on the case.

One of the few convictions of security force personnel ever to have been upheld on appeal, the conviction of four police agents for the March 1990 murder of 13-year-old Nahamn Carmona Lpez, illustrates the danger faced by witnesses in human rights cases. A policewoman whose testimony implicated her colleagues in the murder was forced to flee the country because of death threats in 1991. In 1992, members of her family were followed, threatened, kidnapped and assaulted in apparent revenge by individuals acting on behalf of the convicted policemen.

The continuing vicissitudes of the case of anthropologist Myrna Mack, murdered by army intelligence in September 1990, illustrate the reasons why judges, prosecutors, witnesses and police investigators fear confronting the army. Noel de Jess Beteta, formerly employed by the Estado Mayor Presidencial, an elite military intelligence unit, is standing trial for the assassination. But the case has been riddled with irregularities and multiple layers of cover-up, with murder and intimidation the only reward for those who seek to establish the truth. Eleven different judges have had and then relinquished jurisdiction over the case; the police report naming Beteta was initially covered up and, once submitted to the judge, its author, police investigator Jos Miguel Mrida Escobar, was murdered; military officers have offered contradictory statements; and reporters and court officials working on the case have been threatened. The army has also pursued an elaborate cover-up of its responsibility for the slaying of police investigator Mrida Escobar, by capturing two apparently innocent men and forcing one of them, under threat of death to himself and his family, to videotape a confession to the slaying. Both set-up suspects were acquitted in 1992, and there is no ongoing investigation to determine the real authors of the crime.

The Right to Monitor

As in the past, those who seek to monitor violations of human rights in Guatemala face daunting persecution, including threats, intimidation and murder.

 The staff of Casa Alianza, which defends the rights of street children, suffered numerous threats as well as drive-by shootings at their refuge for street children in Guatemala City's Zone 1.

 Amlcar Mndez, president of the Council of Ethnic Communities "We Are All Equal" (cerj) suffered repeated death threats, a grenade attack on his house, and a slander campaign by the army. Although in 1991 the Inter-American Court of Human Rights enjoined the government to guarantee the safety of Mndez and thirteen other individuals threatened in connection with the above described Chunim case, President Serrano continued to repeat the slander that Mndez was working with the guerrillas, a baseless statement which effectively invites attacks on him.

 At 3:30 a.m. on October 22, cerj members Alberto Calvo Gonzlez and Juan Ren Gonzlez were arrested by police, blindfolded, and interrogated while bound hand and foot. The two men were turned over to a judge at 6:00 p.m. on October 23, in violation of Guatemalan law, which mandates that detainees be placed at the disposition of a court within six hours of their arrest. Alberto Calvo Gonzlez, who does not speak Spanish proficiently, was not provided an interpreter. Nonetheless, he allegedly implicated cerj leader Amlcar Mndez in providing him with guerrilla pamphlet bombs. Juan Ren Gonzlez denies these accusations. Nonetheless, the judge in the case issued a warrant for the arrest of Amlcar Mndez based on this flimsy evidence. Mndez, who was out of the country when the arrest warrant was issued, returned on November 22 in the company of a delegation of U.S. attorneys organized by the Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Center for Human Rights, with participation by Americas Watch. Following his appearance in court on November 22, the judge ordered Mndez released on provisional liberty.

 On May 17, two unidentified men stabbed and seriously wounded Jos Alberto Nerio Osorio, a representative of the Center for theInvestigation, Study, and Promotion of Human Rights (cieprodh), in Chiquimula.

 Members of conavigua, a national widows' group, and villagers who have pressed for exhumations of clandestine cemeteries in which victims of the army's scorched-earth campaign of the last decade are buried have suffered repeated threats and harassment.

 On October 12, the office of the Mutual Support Group (gam), Guatemala's oldest human rights organization, was seriously damaged by an explosive. The attack marked the second bombing of the group in the past four years. The gam works to establish the whereabouts of the disappeared.

 Following a comment published in the magazine Newsweek in which forensic anthropologist Clyde Snow compared members of the Guatemalan army who carried out massacres in the early 1980s with serial killers, Guatemalan Defense Minister Jos Garca Samayoa threatened to sue international human rights groups for defamation. Garca Samayoa's crude threats, accompanied by his aggressive assertions that the army has never committed abuses, underscore how little the army has changed under civilian government.

 In early November, Defense Minister Garca Samayoa and President Serrano accused human rights monitors attending a conference on in Washington, D.C., whose subject was the practice of torture in Guatemala, of doing the work of the guerrillas.

U.S. Policy

The Bush Administration continued to suspend military aid and commercial arms sales to Guatemala, a policy in place since December 1990 because of human rights violations and the impunity granted the perpetrators. Nonetheless, anti-narcotics aid continued to be channeled to the Treasury Police; U.S. national guard "civic action" exercises continued to be held with the Guatemalan military; U.S. training of Guatemalan soldiers and officers resumed; and the administration has continued to provide Economic Support Funds (esf), which consist of cash aid to the government and are classified as security assistance. In October 1992, the administration notified Congress of its intention to provide $15 million in fiscal year 1992 esf funds to Guatemala. As of November, congressional committees had held up the funds because of human rights violations. The administration has requested $10 million in esf for fiscal year 1993. These symbolic acts of support for themilitary and cash assistance to the government are unwarranted and weaken the message of disapproval sent by the continued suspension of military aid.

Congress adopted a tougher position in its fiscal year 1993 foreign aid appropriation to Guatemala. The legislation prohibited military aid outright (thus preventing the administration from unilaterally resuming such aid) and continued a requirement that the relevant congressional committees be notified 15 days before any aid is provided. In addition, the legislation barred an administration plan to use Black Hawk helicopters for drug interdiction in Guatemala, arguing that it would send the wrong signal given the nation's poor human rights record. Unfortunately, the Congress stopped short of banning commercial arms sales to Guatemala, which theoretically could resume in the future, although the State Department would have to notify congressional committees prior to any arms transfer.

The chapter on Guatemala in the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in 1991, issued in January 1992, blamed the security forces and civil patrols for "numerous and serious" human rights violations. But the tough message sent by the Report was diluted by the U.S. position at the annual meeting of the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva, where Washington held out for continued gentle treatment of Guatemala through approval of advisory services (advice on improving the human rights record of an ostensibly well-intentioned government) rather than the appointment of a special rapporteur (an act of condemnation coupled with ongoing public reporting of abuses).

The administration in 1992 made several important symbolic gestures of support for human rights in Guatemala, including a statement by Defense Secretary Richard Cheney upon arrival in the country in February highlighting the importance of human rights in bilateral relations. That this message came from the U.S. Defense Secretary was significant in the Guatemalan context. U.S. Ambassador to Guatemala Thomas Stroock attended a memorial service on the second anniversary of the murder of Myrna Mack and made a point of visiting and being photographed with Archbishop Prspero Penados after the government had criticized his office's human rights report. In October, the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, Bernard Aronson, wrote to the Guatemalan Ambassador in Washington urging the government to address important evidentiary issues in the Mack trial. And in November, Ambassador Stroock made a strong statement in defense of human rights monitors whom President Serrano and his defense minister had denounced as guerrilla supporters. Also in November, Assistant Secretary Aronson telephoned Serrano and Supreme Court President Juan Jos Rodilo to express U.S. concern over the efforts to prosecute Amlcar Mndez described above. The senior official at the U.S. embassy at the time, charg d'affairs John Keane, accompanied Mndez and the delegation of attorneys from the time of their arrival at the airport on November 22 until Mndez was granted provisional liberty late that night by a judge in Santa Cruz del Quich.

Finally, U.S. Trade Representative Carla Hills accepted a petition for review of labor rights practices in Guatemala filed by church, labor and human rights groups-a move the executive branchhas resisted for many years. Under U.S. law, Guatemala stands to lose trade benefits under the Generalized System of Preferences if a pattern of labor rights violations is found. A decision on the petition is expected in the spring of 1993.

The Work of Americas Watch

Americas Watch conducted several fact-finding trips to Guatemala in 1992. Americas Watch representatives met frequently with government officials and members of non-governmental human rights groups, and traveled extensively to gather first hand testimony of abuses.

Early in the year, Americas Watch sought through meetings, correspondence and a press release to encourage the U.S. delegation to the U.N. Human Rights Commission to lobby for designation of a special rapporteur for Guatemala, a designation reserved for the most serious human rights violators worldwide. In February, we wrote two letters to Defense Secretary Cheney: the first suggesting he avoid a planned trip to Guatemala on the grounds that it might be interpreted by the Guatemalan brass as a sign of U.S. approval, and the second, once it became clear the trip would go forward, urging him to raise specific human rights cases in his meetings in Guatemala.

Also in February, we brought human rights activist Amlcar Mndez Urzar and exiled judge Roberto Lemus to Washington to testify before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights in connection with the above-described Chunim case. In response, the Commission issued provisional measures calling on the government to protect the lives of Mndez and other human rights monitors involved in the case.

On September 11, Americas Watch again wrote to Defense Secretary Cheney to protest the Pentagon's sponsoring of a visit to Washington by the Guatemalan army spokesman, Captain Alberto Yon Rivera, shortly after he had participated in an army campaign to defame Amlcar Mndez and the human rights group he leads. Americas Watch also met with Captain Yon Rivera to protest the army campaign.

On September 23, Americas Watch joined with Physicians for Human Rights in issuing a press release rejecting the threat by Guatemalan Defense Minister Jos Domingo Garca Samayoa to sue for defamation international human rights groups that criticize the Guatemalan army. On November 17, an Americas Watch representative met with the director of military intelligence to protest continued statements by the military linking domestic human rights monitors with guerrillas. And on November 22, Americas Watch Vice Chair Steve Kass joined a delegation accompanying Amlcar Mndez back to Guatemala.

Throughout the year we wrote numerous letters to President Serrano and his newly formed presidential commission for human rights pressing our concerns over cases of extrajudicial execution, disappearances, police brutality, and threats. Often we engaged members of the U.S. Congress in these efforts.

In October, Americas Watch met with a leader of the guerrilla group Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity to discuss violations of the laws of war by rebel forces. Americas Watch presented the insurgent leader with a list of summary executions attributable tothe guerrillas and asked for an investigation into the allegations and discipline for those found responsible.
HAITI

Human Rights Developments

In 1992, the military junta that overthrew freely elected President Jean-Bertrand Aristide on September 30, 1991 continued to rule Haiti through violent repression. Well over 1,000 people are estimated to have been killed by the army since the coup, and all forms of popular organization have been ruthlessly suppressed. Haitians today are living under the most acute terror since the darkest days of the Duvalier dictatorship.

In a country where only nine months before the coup, 67 percent of voters cast their lot with Father Aristide, the majority of the population is presumed hostile to the military authorities. Seeking to avoid the kind of popular unrest that brought down past military regimes, the army-from the generals heading the governing junta, to the section chiefs wreaking havoc in the most remote country hamlets-has attempted to eviscerate all civic, popular and professional organizations opposed to its authoritarian rule. The military junta has banned meetings throughout Haiti's nine departments. All signs of public protest are swiftly and violently repressed. Widespread, short-term detention serves successfully to intimidate and subdue. During detention, beatings are the rule rather than the exception. Almost all arrests are warrantless.

Section chiefs, the notoriously corrupt and brutal rural military overlords, have been reinstated, reversing the steps that President Aristide had taken to abolish their positions. Soldiers and section chiefs prey on their victims, demanding payment to avoid detention or torture. Those in hiding for fear of army oppression are told that they may return to their homes if they pay a fee. At military checkpoints, soldiers can shake down virtually anyone who dares travel the roads. All of this occurs with absolute impunity.

In 1992, the army targeted prominent critics of the de facto regime and well known Aristide supporters. For example:

 Gunmen believed to be members of the Anti-Gang Investigations Service of the Port-au-Prince Police (Anti-Gang), a branch of the army, broke up a political meeting on January 25, and shot and killed Yves Jean-Pierre, the bodyguard of Ren Theodore, leader of the centrist Haitian Communist Party. Theodore was being considered for the post of prime minister in negotiations brokered by the Organization of American States (oas) that led to an accord a month later.

 On May 26, Georges Izmery, a businessman and the brother of Antoine Izmery, one of President Aristide's most vocal supporters andhis wealthiest financial backer, was killed by unknown assailants. The next week, police attacked the funeral procession, beating mourners who were chanting pro-Aristide slogans and arresting as many as ten.

 Jackson Bien-Aim, Mayor of Cerca Carvajal in the Central Plateau, was arrested and held in prison overnight in December 1991 and released after the local bishop intervened. Elected on the ticket of the National Front for Change and Democracy (fncd), President Aristide's movement, Bien-Aim was arrested again in February 1992 and, after a beating, was released the same day.

If the de facto regime has been uninhibited about terrorizing well known Haitian figures, its campaign against the rest of Haiti's civil society, which had grown rapidly following the downfall of the Duvalier regime in 1986, has been systematic and ruthless. On the first day of the coup, ten radio stations were destroyed or shut down. Radio is by far the most important news medium in the country. By the end of 1992, only two of those stations, Radio Lumire and Radio Carabes, had resumed broadcasting. The eight that remain closed are Radio Cacique, Radio Tt Ansanm, Radio Antilles, Radio Hati Inter, Radio Port-au-Prince, Radio Galaxie, Radio Plus and Radio Voix du Nord. Only 8 of 15 Port-au-Prince radio stations are broadcasting news, and they restrict themselves to topics that are not offensive to the regime. Outside the capital, journalists have been intimidated, arrested and beaten by section chiefs. Few correspondents are still working in the countryside; those who are limit themselves to pro-government or noncontroversial reporting. Journalists who have faced retaliation for their professional activities include the following:

 Sony Estus, a reporter for Radio Tropic FM, was arrested by plainclothes police while covering a religious ceremony that turned into a pro-Aristide rally in Port-au-Prince on April 12. He was held for five hours in the Anti-Gang detention center, where he was forced to lie on his stomach while he was beaten with sticks on his back and buttocks. He suffered fractures in his left arm and middle finger and sustained head injuries.

 On May 22, Voice of America correspondent Guy Delva was attacked while he covered an anti-government student demonstration in Port-au-Prince. Four men in civilian clothing accused him of advocating the return of Aristide and one of them beat him with a rifle butt.

Military violence has been aimed at pro-Aristide elected officials, rural development or peasant organizations, neighborhood or community associations, trade unions, and literacy, pro-democracy, students' and women's groups. This violence has thwarted the ability of many groups to meet openly or to meet at all. Leaders and members of these organizations have been hunted down and arrested, tortured or killed by soldiers and section chiefs. For example:

 Members of the Tt Kole (Heads Together) national peasant movement in Beauchamp in the northwest have been viciously and deliberately persecuted. In one gruesome yet not unusual incident, the local section chief in Beauchamp, Jean-Baptiste, filled the mouth of a 70-year-old Tt Kole member with rocks and clapped his hands together on the man's face, knocking out his remaining teeth. The same section chief beat and tortured two other Tt Kole members in his home in the "djak" position, in which the hands are tied together, the knees are pushed up, and a stick is wedged between the arms and legs in a forced fetal position. Tt Kole member Elicier Jean of Beauchamp was badly beaten by several section chiefs and deputies in February, and died a week later of his wounds.

 The Papaye Peasant Movement (mpp), an organization that supports self-help agricultural cooperatives, has virtually ceased all activities. Its headquarters in Papaye in the Central Plateau were looted and destroyed on October 1, 1991, and its members have been targeted since the first days of the coup.

 In May and June 1992, numerous demonstrations by high school and university students in support of deposed President Aristide were violently suppressed by the Haitian army. Prohibited by the military authorities from staging protests in the streets, the students held demonstrations in their classrooms and schoolyards, only to face gunfire, beatings, arrests, and tear gas. In one incident, Professor Camille Chalmers was arrested along with seven or eight students on May 20, when soldiers stormed the Faculty of Human Sciences. He was tortured in the Anti-Gang detention center in Port-au-Prince. Five soldiers repeatedly beat him with the butts of rifles and a metal chair. The soldiers boxed his ears and beat him with fists. The studentsreportedly were not beaten in detention. They were all released two hours later.

 On July 15, as de facto Prime Minister Marc Bazin was being sworn into office, soldiers attacked an anti-regime student demonstration at the medical school, shooting, beating and arresting dozens of students.

 Following a wave of armed attacks on soldiers in the capital in late July, army roadblocks were set up throughout Port-au-Prince. On August 3, Robinson Joseph, a school teacher and former news editor of Radio Lumire, was killed by two bullets to the head by a uniformed police officer at a roadblock, reportedly as he backed his car away to avoid the long line of cars that had formed.

The Catholic Church has come under fierce attack since the coup. Priests and nuns, especially those suspected of being supporters of President Aristide or who are active in peasant organizing, community development or monitoring human rights, have been threatened, arrested and beaten. Protestant churches and groups that have become strongly identified with social activism and development have also been attacked.

A September 1992 human rights report by the Karl Leveque Center lists over 75 religious workers who have been victims of military repression since the coup. Of the 42 priests included in this list, eight were arrested, three were beaten, ten were forced to abandon their parishes due to threats, 14 were pressured or threatened by armed soldiers during mass, and six had their churches searched.

The Right to Monitor

That a number of human rights monitoring groups have been able to continue to function is more a tribute to their courage and persistence than to any tolerance on the part of the junta. At the end of 1991, human rights monitors were among the first victims of the military regime, facing arrests, assaults, threats and intimidation.

Msgr. Willy Romulus, Bishop of Jrmie and President of the Catholic Church's Justice and Peace Commission, had his home searched and ransacked by soldiers on August 17, 1992. On September 20, he was briefly detained at a military roadblock upon returning from a trip abroad, and was verbally assaulted and harassed at military roadblocks over the next several days. On September 24, he was threatened with death by a soldier and four armed, plainclothes men who went looking for him at a parish house in nearby Les Irois where he was spending the night.

Other members of the Justice and Peace Commission were similarly persecuted. On June 6, soldiers arrested Father Gilles Danroc, the Coordinator of the Justice and Peace Commission and a French national. Father Danroc was arrested along with 14 laypersons who were holding a religious meeting in La Chapelle that the soldiers claimed was "prohibited," even though Father Danroc had previously advised the local magistrate of the meeting. Father Danroc was accused of being a "Lavalas communist" ("Lavalas" is the name of President Aristide's political movement).

Although he wished to remain with the other detainees, Danroc was released under pressure the following day, after being led to believe that the others, including a pregnant woman, would be beaten if he insisted on staying. They were then tortured anyway in the office of the major in charge of the St. Marc military jail. They were forced to lean against the wall on their toes, supported only by their fingers, and beaten with clubs on the back and buttocks. They were also beaten on the soles of their feet. They were released on June 7.

U.S. Policy

The U.S. commitment to the return to power of the Aristide government seemed to soften throughout 1992, while efforts to stem the flow of Haitian boat people intensified. To justify the forcible return of many and ultimately all of the boat people, the Bush administration repeatedly minimized the human rights catastrophe in Haiti. Although the administration formally supported the initiatives of the Organization of American States, including by adopting a trade embargo directed against the military regime, it failed to use its considerable influence in Haiti to back oas initiatives, to call for an end to the ongoing violent abuses, or to press for the reinstatement of President Aristide.

The Bush administration's treatment of Haitian boat people is by far the most troubling element of its human rights policy toward Haiti. Pursuant to an agreement reached between the Reagan administration and former Haitian dictator Jean-Claude Duvalier, the U.S. Coast Guard continued to interdict Haitian boat people in the aftermath of the coup. In November 1991, a federal court in Miami issued an injunction blocking the further return of Haitian refugees because of deficient screening procedures that had determined only 3 percent of those interviewed to be potential political refugees. Boat people thus were collected at the U.S. naval base at Guantnamo, Cuba, where screening proceeded in a more deliberative atmosphere. The result, coupled with improved training of adjudicators by the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) and a conscious effort to break the State Department's monopoly on the information reaching them, substantially improved the quality of screening interviews. By early January, INS sources indicated that 70 percent of new arrivals at Guantnamo were found to have a "credible fear of persecution" if returned to Haiti. Repatriations of "screened-out" Haitians began again on February 3, 1992 when the Supreme Court lifted the stay that had been imposed by the federal judge in November 1991. Over the next six weeks, nearly 8,000 boat people were returned to Haiti.

When Coast Guard cutters carrying the repatriates reached the dock in Port-au-Prince, they turned over to the Haitian authorities the ships' manifests containing the name, age and hometown of each returnee. Many if not most of the returnees were fingerprinted and some were photographed by Haitian military officials.

Flight from Haiti continued at high levels during the spring as the Haitian military consolidated its rule. Toward the end of May, the population at Guantnamo reached what the administration said was capacity-12,000 residents. On May 24, President Bush issued Executive Order 12807 which ended all screening of Haitians intercepted on the high seas. Under the new order, all boat people intercepted at sea began to be returned directly to Haiti regardless of claims that they would face persecution, in direct violation of the principle of nonrefoulement-the international legal principle that forbids the return of an individual to the country where he or she faces a well-founded fear of persecution. This stood in contrast even to the 1981 executive order that had launched the Haitian interdiction operation, which had guaranteed, if only in writing, that "no person who is a refugee will be returned without his consent." The new order also made explicit the administration's position that U.S. international legal obligations under the U.N. Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees "do not extend to persons located outside the territory of the United States."

The administration's interpretation of the Protocol's prohibition on forced return of refugees is at odds with the great weight of international legal authority and the opinion of refugee experts-including the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees-and has been challenged in the U.S. courts by refugee advocates. The issue is now before the U.S. Supreme Court, which has accepted the administration's appeal of a July 29, 1992 decision by the Second Circuit Court of Appeals in New York. The majority in the Second Circuit had found that the "plain language" of the Immigration and Nationality Act indicated that its prohibition on forced return of refugees applied to U.S. agents on the high seas as well as those within the United States.

Since President Bush's May 24 executive order, Haitians seeking refuge in the U.S. have had only one option-to apply to the In-Country Refugee Processing program in Port-au-Prince. Until October 1992, would-be refugees had to apply at the U.S. consulate. Since then, the embassy has contracted the International Organization for Migration, a nongovernmental organization, to undertake the refugee processing in offices outside the consulate, in the Banque National de Paris. The program has established such a high threshold for approval and requires such extensive documentary proof from would-be refugees that few Haitians qualify. Since the program's inception in February through November 13, only 253 of the more than 2,560 who have been adjudicated out of some 6,000 applicants had been conditionally accepted; 97 of these are pending the results of medical examinations. Many if not most have already experienced arrest or beatings by the military. Those who cannot show such actual persecution are routinely turned down. For those in hiding who are reluctant to travel to Port-au-Prince, the consular officials theoretically will consider traveling to them on a case-by-case basis.

Although the U.S. accepts refugees through in-country programs in Cuba, Vietnam and the former Soviet Union, it has never made it the exclusive option for persecuted individuals from these countries. Given the stark contrast in the results of the screeningin Port-au-Prince and Guantnamo, the in-country processing does not vitiate the clear violation of the principle of nonrefoulement inherent in the summary repatriation ordered by President Bush.

The administration also has tried to justify summary repatriation by claiming that no repatriate has faced persecution. The basis for this claim is State Department and INS surveys conducted of some 2,500 repatriates before screening ended. These surveys were deeply flawed since, whether by design or negligence, they excluded repatriates with the greatest risk of persecution-the class of Haitians who were being "screened in" at Guantnamo at the time the surveys were conducted but thereafter would be summarily returned to Haiti, and those who, having been returned to Haiti after being "screened out," were too fearful to meet with U.S. investigators. Even those who were willing to be included in the surveys were often interviewed publicly, at times in the presence of soldiers, in circumstances that strongly discouraged them from describing the persecution they face.

The conclusions reached by the State Department and the INS notwithstanding, many Haitian refugees have been arrested, imprisoned or otherwise persecuted after being returned to Haiti. Reports of persecution of refugees fall into several categories. Many "double-backers"-Haitians who set to sea a second time after being returned by the Coast Guard-have reported retaliation by Haitian authorities for having fled. INS officials in Guantnamo found some of these stories so persuasive that they admitted such Haitians to the United States.

The best-documented story of persecution of returnees is the case of 154 people who were arrested by Haitian police on August 14, shortly after being repatriated by the U.S. Coast Guard. An Associated Press report said the "roundup took place minutes after the U.S. cutter Confidence dropped off the Haitians at a Port-au-Prince dock." According to the Haitian police, the repatriates were questioned about the reported hijacking of the boat in which they had been attempting to flee. Police the next day said that all but six had been released. An August 25 report noted that one was still in police custody.

Americas Watch believes that arresting entire boatloads of people for questioning amounts to penalizing people for leaving Haiti. By forcibly returning Haitians without screening for possible refugees, the United States becomes complicit in such practices.

Several bills seeking to address the plight of Haitian refugees were introduced in Congress in 1991 and 1992. These ranged from one granting Temporary Protective Status to all Haitians interdicted by the Coast Guard, thus granting them temporary admission to the United States, to another that would have required U.S. officials to show that returnees would not face persecution before forcibly returning them. None has attracted broad support.

Apparently to avoid contradicting its dubious assertions that summarily returned boat people face no danger in Haiti, the administration has shied away from the strong public criticisms of abuses in Haiti that had characterized its initial response to the coup-until the boat people started fleeing a month later. Still, when army violence has threatened diplomatic efforts to resolve thepolitical crisis in Haiti, the Bush administration has spoken out. Its strongest reaction came at the beginning of 1992 in response to the above-described police attack on a political meeting and the killing of Yves Jean-Pierre, the bodyguard of Ren Theodore, who was being considered for the post of prime minister in oas-brokered negotiations. State Department spokesman Joe Snyder read the following statement at a press briefing on January 27:

Those who have taken power in Haiti have claimed that they support a return to democratic rule. However, Saturday's brutal attack on a peaceful political meeting does nothing but impede the restoration of constitutional rule. The regime should know that restoring democracy is the only way to end Haiti's political and economic isolation. In response to this event we will recall our Ambassador to Washington to discuss its implications for U.S. policy. We call on the Haitian army and the de facto government to bring to justice those who are responsible for this crime.

The ambassador returned to Haiti in February, as the oas-brokered negotiations reached an accord.

On August 19, while a high-level oas delegation was in Haiti, the bullet-riddled bodies of three Aristide supporters were found at a Port-au-Prince hospital morgue. They had been arrested two days earlier for hanging Aristide posters. The U.S. embassy released a statement in response saying that it had received "credible reports of blind killing, harassment, illegal searches, arrests without warrant, unjustified detention, and mistreatment of prisoners....It is the responsibility of Haitian authorities to condemn these assassinations, to act promptly to initiate a thorough investigation, and to bring the guilty to justice."

In the immediate aftermath of the September 1991 coup, the Bush administration reacted swiftly with a number of forceful statements, symbolic gestures, and concrete actions, including the suspension of all government-to-government assistance and trade with Haiti as part of the oas-imposed hemisphere-wide economic embargo. The administration also froze all Haitian government assets in the United States. Only humanitarian assistance, essential foods and medicines were exempted from the embargo.

The embargo has been a blunt instrument. Since the military was in the best position to control contraband entering Haiti despite the embargo, its members were able to profit from shortages of basic commodities while poorer Haitians faced serious deprivations. The embargo's effectiveness was further undermined by the failure to prevent shipments of oil-a critical commodity for the army-from arriving in Haiti. Still, President Aristide and many of his supporters endorsed the embargo-and urged its strengthening-as the best available method for pressuring the military, as well as an important symbol of international support for Aristide's return to office. However, on February 4, the State Department announced that the U.S. would allow case-by-case exemptions to the embargo for assembly factories, many owned by American businessmen, that use cheap Haitian labor to assemblegarments and electronic goods for export to the U.S. The administration justified this action as an effort to revive jobs for the tens of thousands of Haitians who had become unemployed as a result of the embargo and who, the administration feared, would seek to flee to the U.S. Despite its apparent humanitarian intent, the softening of the embargo was troubling because the de facto rulers of Haiti interpreted it as a sign that the U.S. government was less than serious in its support for a return to democracy. The administration offered no alternative sanction to rectify this perception.

The U.S. and the oas have had limited success in enforcing the embargo, which has been described by oas Secretary General Joo Baena Soares as "leaky." As many have pointed out, the Bush administration has been far more efficient at intercepting refugees on rickety sailboats on the high seas than at stopping oil tankers from docking at Port-au-Prince. The Washington Post reported in June that American products, including items such as auto and computer parts, continued to be delivered to Haiti through third countries. According to Government Accounting Office (gao) reports in May and September 1992, between November 1991 and September 1992, thirteen ships carrying oil reached Haiti, most from the European Community, which has ignored the embargo. President Bush never enlisted European support for the embargo by engaging in the high-level, personal diplomacy that he employed so successfully to build the Gulf war coalition the previous year. Since some Latin American countries have been either direct sources or transshipment points for oil and other commodities that have reached Haiti over the last year, the oas must share responsibility for the ineffectiveness of its own embargo.

The State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in 1991, issued in January 1992, included a chapter on Haiti that while factually accurate for the most part, was troubling for its omissions. Its criticism of the Aristide administration was thorough and generally well-founded. However, it understated some of President Aristide's most impressive efforts, such as those designed to eliminate the repressive rural section chiefs and to hold military officials accountable for abuses. On the other hand, the sections on military abuses since the coup lacked the detail that those on the Aristide government contained, and failed to convey the extent of army violence and repression that within the first few days had dwarfed the abuses that had taken place during President Aristide's eight months in office. In some cases, the report misrepresented facts and figures that were collected and made available by courageous Haitian human rights monitors who, at great risk, continued to work. In fact, the report failed even to discuss the fact that human rights monitors had been persecuted after the coup.

The oas Response

The Organization of American States has led international efforts to mediate a negotiated reversal of the coup. While it deserves credit for its persistent involvement in the Haitian crisis, it has been repeatedly frustrated in its dealings with the various de facto authorities in Haiti.

Perhaps the most disappointing diplomatic failure in 1992 was the collapse of the so-called Washington Protocol, brokered by the oas and signed by President Aristide and leaders of the Haitian Parliament in Washington on February 23. The agreement provided for the reinstatement of Aristide at an unspecified future date, and included a number of specific human rights provisions-such as a commitment to pass laws requiring the separation of the police force from the army and the establishment of a "citizens' protection bureau."

The protocol also offered an amnesty to the leaders of the coup for political crimes but excluded "common criminals." President Aristide made it clear the day after he signed the accord that he considered senior military leaders who had been responsible for the wholesale slaughter of innocent Haitians since the coup to be common criminals. He included in this category General Raoul Cdras, the commander in chief of the army. Despite Aristide's valid reading of the accord, the Bush administration distanced itself from his interpretation and blamed him for the agreement's ultimate demise.

Americas Watch believes that the issue of army accountability for its crimes should play a central role in international negotiations to restore President Aristide and democracy in Haiti. The issue should not be whether murderers in the Haitian army are to be brought to justice, but how this can be done. While military leaders obviously are not eager to turn over power to a government that intends immediately to try them, the periodic surge of lynchings that has marred Haiti's recent history provides army commanders with a powerful incentive to find a lawful, orderly way to placate popular demands for justice.

One way out of the impasse is suggested by the peace process now under way in El Salvador, where the parties understood that a system of accountability for the abuses of the past decade was necessary to resolve the conflict. Rather than haggle over who should face trial, they reached a compromise in which questions of justice were delegated to two independent commissions, one to document the truth about human rights violations and the other to cleanse the army of its most abusive elements.

In Haiti, then-President Joseph Nerette and then-Prime Minister Jean-Jacques Honorat were opposed to any agreement that allowed for Aristide's return. Although the army at first seemed willing to accept the accord, General Cdras soon hinted that he was not prepared to go along with it. A parliamentary session convened to vote on the accord dissolved into a fistfight in which some legislators drew guns. Finally, when the Haitian Supreme Court (packed with coup supporters) declared the protocol unconstitutional since it was not signed by Haiti's "constitutional" president, Nerette, the oas accord died.

In early September, the oas mediated talks between de facto Foreign Minister Franois Benoit and Rev. Antoine Adrien, the Roman Catholic priest who heads Aristide's ten-member negotiation commission. The de facto government agreed to allow the oas to send a civilian mission in an effort to curb political violence. Ultimately, the oas was permitted to send only 18 unarmed civilian observers in mid-September. The mission's scale is not as far-reaching as many had hoped; it sought to pursue political negotiations with the junta, and to monitor human rights violations and the distribution of humanitarian assistance. One of the members of the delegation was later expelled from Haiti, reportedly because he was considered by the regime to be too close to the Aristide government in exile. As of November, the mission had made little progress.

The oas assigned the job of establishing a monitoring presence in Haiti to the Unit for the Promotion of Democracy, a small office created less than two years ago. The officials sent to the field have no experience in monitoring human rights violations and most do not speak Haitian creole. The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (iachr), which has conducted this kind of work since 1959, was given no role in the implementation of the latest agreement.

On its own, the iachr, one of two human rights bodies of the oas, nevertheless monitored human rights violations in Haiti in 1992. The iachr sent a mission to Haiti in December 1991 and published its findings in its annual report released in February 1992. The Commission plans to send an exploratory mission to Haiti in December 1992 and an on-site visit in January 1993; those fact-finding trips will serve as the basis for a follow-up report. The Commission has sent numerous communications to the government protesting abuses and is opening a case on behalf of the family of Georges Izmery, the slain businessman whose brother was a key financial backer of President Aristide.

The Work of Americas Watch

Americas Watch continues to cooperate closely with the National Coalition for Haitian Refugees (nchr) in its work on Haiti. In June, we published our fourteenth joint report on Haiti, "Half the Story: the Skewed U.S. Monitoring of Repatriated Haitian Refugees." The report was released one month after the Bush administration announced that it would forcibly turn back all Haitian boat people on the high seas.

Americas Watch sent a researcher to Haiti from early June to the end of August to document nationwide army attacks against the organizations of civil society-peasant unions, grassroots political groups, student associations, the press and the church. The nchr participated in a two-week mission with the Americas Watch representative in August. A joint report is expected in December.

Americas Watch in 1992 filed two amicus curiae briefs before the Second Circuit Court of Appeals in cases concerning Haitian refugees. In one case, a challenge to the incommunicado detention of "screened-in" Haitians, Americas Watch highlighted the international law prohibition on prolonged incommunicado detention and noted many instances in which the U.S. State Department had condemned similar detention in other countries. In the second case, challenging the administration's executive order on summary repatriation, Americas Watch noted the deficiencies in the State Department and INS surveys used in part to justify the repatriations.

MEXICO

Human Rights Developments

In contrast to the political climate of just a few years ago, in which human rights in Mexico provoked little governmental, public or media interest, the topic of human rights pervaded public debate in 1992 and prompted significant nationwide governmental and non-governmental activity. Yet, the human rights landscape in Mexico continued to be marred by cases of torture; election-related violence, including extrajudicial killings; limitations on the right of assembly of workers, peasants and indigenous peoples; attacks on journalists; and impunity for those responsible for all these acts.

According to credible reports received by Americas Watch, serious human rights violations continued to be committed by Mexican police in 1992. For example, on August 2, San Luis Potos State Judicial Police agents shot Magdaleno Barrn with a high-powered rifle. Barrn was attempting to flee after the police threatened to "let him have it" when he asked them why they were detaining his companion, Juan Garca. Bystanders who witnessed the shooting were dispersed by gunfire, and the police fled from the scene. Barrn was not arrested; he died in a hospital the following week.

Another serious case involved the torture of 17-year-old Pablo Molinet, from Salamanca, Guanajuato. Molinet was arrested on March 24 by state and federal police after he found his family's maid dead in their kitchen. He was held incommunicado, tortured, and forced to confess to the crime. Immediately following the arrest, police and prosecutors publicly announced that Molinet murdered the woman as part of a satanic cult ritual. The basis for the accusation was that the youth, who was educated in Mexico City, writes poetry and has quotations from Gabriel Garca Mrquez painted on his bedroom wall. Americas Watch is concerned not only about the use of torture to extract a confession, but also about Molinet's right to a fair trial in light of the prejudicial statements made to the press by the authorities.

Partisan violence continued to haunt Mexico's elections. Following the hotly contested July 12 gubernatorial race in Michoacn, a stronghold of the opposition Democratic Revolutionary Party (prd), four prd members were machine-gunned to death in an ambush near the town of Tiquicheo. Claiming that the killings were politically motivated, the prd filed a complaint with the National Human Rights Commission (cndh), the governmental human rights agency. According to prd reports, between July 27 and October 16 five other party activists were killed in Michoacn in election-related incidents, and prd deputy-elect Wilburth Rosas's house was fired on.

Individuals concerned with the integrity of the electoral process expose themselves to other dangers as well. On September 13, Michoacn-based researcher and election observer Morelos Marx Madrigal Lachino was kidnapped in Mexico City by two armed men wearing caps like those often used by police. The kidnapping occurred as he was heading for the airport to fly to Ecuador to attend a religious conference. Madrigal was held incommunicado, beaten and interrogated for three days about his ties to the prd and the non-partisan Convergence of Civil Organizations forDemocracy, which had coordinated independent election monitoring in Michoacn. He was then dumped, blindfolded, on a Mexico City street.

Another violent election-related incident occurred in the border town of Matamoros following elections in the Tamaulipas state. In those elections, the two major opposition forces, the National Action Party (pan) and the Party of the Democratic Revolution, supported a single gubernatorial candidate in a rare alliance. On November 11, the evening on which election results were to be released, citizens assembled outside the Electoral Committee office clashed with anti-riot police; during the melee, the Electoral Committee office was set on fire with Molotov cocktails and all the recently cast ballots were burned. Both the pan and the prd blamed the government and the ruling pri party for the incident, arguing that those in power stood to benefit from it more than the opposition. The pri and the government, for their part, blamed the pan and the prd. Authorities detained 30 people allegedly involved in the incident, including Juan Gutirrez Vzquez, a local prd activist who claims that he was beaten by police forces. The Federal Attorney General's office requested that the Foreign Relations Ministry seek the extradition of the son of the coalition's gubernatorial candidate and the pan candidate for mayor of Matamoros, both of whom crossed the border to the United States, for their presumed role in the Electoral Committee incident.

Workers in Mexico continue to risk physical violence when they attempt to exercise their rights of freedom of expression and association during labor disputes. In July and August, workers at the Volkswagen plant in Puebla struck in an attempt to block a reorganization of the work force that would set higher productivity standards. A controversial decision by the government's Conciliation and Arbitration Board supported Volkswagen management by throwing out the collective contract. This move triggered the firing of the plant's 14,000 workers and the rehiring of most workers under terms more favorable to Volkswagen. On August 20, police with trained dogs and billy clubs attacked dissident workers who were demonstrating peacefully near the plant. Twelve protesters were injured.

Similar abuse was visited upon 120 members of the Democratic Peasants Union (ucd) who demonstrated peacefully against layoffs and inadequate severance payments in the square in front of the governor's palace in Mrida, Yucatn on June 25. As more than 200 police stood in the square, members of the government-supported National Peasant Confederation burst in and broke up the demonstration. The police then arrested nearly 50 demonstrators, all from the ucd, including ucd leader Severino Salazar Castellanos, who was beaten by uniformed state and local police, held incommunicado for four days at the local penitentiary and, according to his wife, tortured. He reports that Yucatn authorities have offered to release him if he would claim responsibility for the violence, but he has refused, and is now being held without bail on multiple charges. Despite a nine-day hunger strike by his wife and an appeal to the National Human Rights Commission, Salazar remains in detention.

Others involved with popular organizations also expose themselves to violence. On October 15, the body of Jos Luis Rodrguez Morn, a social worker and adviser to the San Juan Copala Handicrafts Cooperative, was found on a median strip near his home in Mexico City. Although the corpse had stab wounds, there was no blood at the site where it was found, suggesting that the body had been brought there after the killing. In the six months prior to his death, Rodrguez Morn had received anonymous telephone calls telling him to "pull out" or be "hurt"-apparently references to his work with the cooperative. Mexico City police detained two suspects, a man and a woman. Reports indicate that the latter was held incommunicado for two days following her arrest. After two days of physical mistreatment and intimidation, she was induced to sign a confession which she subsequently retracted. Both defendants remain jailed.

Indigenous persons encounter violence and unjust treatment when they seek to exercise their rights to freedom of expression and association. For example, on December 26, 1991, three hundred indigenous peasants began a peaceful demonstration at the central square of Palenque, Chiapas, demanding the elimination of corruption in the civil registration process, tax reductions, interpreters in the prosecutor's office, and an end to arbitrary detentions. After two days, 200 agents of the Chiapas Public Security Police and the State Judicial Police forcibly removed the protestors. Some 103 demonstrators were arrested and five were seriously injured as a result of beatings with clubs. Those arrested were held incommunicado without food or water for 30 hours and, they report, threatened with torture if they refused to cooperate. Most were then released. Nine leaders were retained in custody and charged with crimes from Chiapas's new penal code, including sedition and rioting. Eight were released a month later; the ninth was released several months later.

Attacks and intimidation continue to plague journalists in Mexico. On November 13, journalist Ignacio Mendoza Castillo was shot dead as he returned home from a protest gathering of journalists at the Foreign Journalists Club. Mendoza Castillo, publisher of La Voz del Caribe, a newspaper in the southeastern state of Quintana Roo, had denounced a pattern of intimidation directed at him by the governor of that state. The threats and intimidation against Mendoza Castillo were severe enough to prompt him to relocate in Mexico City. Among the assaults was one in which bullets were fired at Mendoza Castillo's sons by unidentified assailants. Mendoza Castillo had denounced these threats to the National Human Rights Commission, and had participated in various activities to bring the plight of journalists in Quintana Roo to national attention. According to Mendoza Castillo, his denunciations to Interior Ministry officials were ignored.

In mid-July 1992, Carlos Menndez Navarrete, director of the independent Diario de Yucatn, was the target of two attacks following his newspaper's critical coverage of the government's handling of the ucd demonstration led by Severino Salazar Castellanos. Early on July 21, unidentified persons pelted Menndez's house with stones, attempted to force open the front door, and damaged two automobiles. The following week, a bomb wasfound on the premises of the Diario de Yucatn. Police have released no information about the progress of their investigation.

In response to petitions from journalist associations, the federal government's human rights office, cndh, undertook to investigate 55 attacks on journalists. By late 1992, recommendations were issued in 15 of the cases but, according to the cndh, none of the recommendations has been implemented in full.

In August, the cndh issued its first recommendation in a case of media censorship. The grievance was filed by two members of the Mexican Human Rights Academy, Sergio Aguayo Quezada and Oscar Ortiz, who were cut off the air by imevision, a state-owned television station, in August 1991 during a question-and-answer segment of a program about non-partisan election monitoring. The cndh found the censorship was without legal basis, and recommended that imevision broadcast the complete interview and investigate and discipline the employees who were responsible for interrupting the transmission. In late August, imevision aired the program in full but, according to Ortiz, it still has not investigated or sanctioned the station officials who were responsible for the censorship.

The problems of police abuse, electoral violence, restrictions on the right of assembly, and attacks on journalists are compounded by the impunity which those responsible for these crimes enjoy. This lack of criminal prosecution for abusive officials continues to dominate the human rights panorama and undermines the efforts of governmental and non-governmental groups to advance the protection of fundamental rights.

The government's failure to act in response to the recommendations of the cndh highlights the problem of impunity. The cndh, created in June 1990, lacks prosecutorial authority and is thus limited to making nonbinding recommendations to state and federal governmental agencies. In June and again in September 1992, the cndh blasted numerous state and federal government agencies for failing to comply fully with 113 out of 289 recommendations, including many calls for investigation and prosecution of those responsible for human rights abuses. Fourteen of these recommendations were in homicide cases-including several multiple murders and the slaying of a Ford Motor Company union activist-and three involved disappearances during the tenure of current President Carlos Salinas de Gortari.

Twenty-five of the unfulfilled recommendations were directed at the Federal Attorney General's office and pertain to agents of the Federal Judicial Police the cndh found were involved in torture, illegal detention, and other serious abuses. Notorious among them is the March 24, 1992 recommendation calling for the prosecution of more than a dozen people, including 11 members of the Federal Attorney General's staff, alleged to have been involved in the January 1990 murders of Hector Ignacio Quijano Santoyo and his brothers, Jaime Mauro and Erick Dante, as they surrendered to Federal Judicial Police at their home near Mexico City.

Other recommendations were unfulfilled by state authorities. For example, the disappearance of Jos Ramn Garca Gmez on December 16, 1988 remains unexplained even though President Salinas personally asked the cndh to investigate. The cndh has issued tworecommendations in the case, the second of which called on Morelos Governor Antonio Riva Palacio to apprehend the former State Judicial Police director, Antonio Nogueda Carvajal, and the former state political investigation chief, and to prosecute two men charged as accomplices in the crime. Nogueda fled before he could be arrested. On February 10, 1992, Daniel Estrella Valenzuela, a member of Garca Gmez's opposition Revolutionary Workers Party, was appointed Special Prosecutor to investigate the case. On March 20, Estrella Valenzuela and other officials took off in a helicopter to try to locate and arrest Nogueda Carvajal in a mountainous region of the Guerrero state. The helicopter crashed, reportedly due to a power loss, killing three and injuring Estrella Valenzuela and another. The Revolutionary Workers Party of which Jose Ramon Garcia was a member officially requested that the cndh investigate the crash, noting that the helicopter's engine was new and that its pilot had received death threats from the Federal Judicial Police.

The official response to the July 1991 slaying of Ciudad Jurez journalist Vctor Manuel Oropeza Contreras was similarly inadequate. The cndh recommended that Chihuahua state authorities preliminarily investigate officials alleged to be responsible, including department chiefs and agents of the state attorney general's office. To date, no action has been taken.

Despite the often disappointing official response to its work, the cndh maintained its high profile during 1992. To date, it has issued hard-hitting recommendations in more than 300 cases. In January, Article 102 of the Mexican Constitution was amended to grant the cndh independence from the Interior Ministry. But at the same time Article 102 shrank the scope of the cndh's mandate. Before passage of the amendment, the cndh voluntarily chose not to investigate cases involving labor rights, irregularities during elections, and cases under the jurisdiction of courts; now it is constitutionally prohibited from doing so.

In addition, each of Mexico's 31 states has until January 1993 to set up a state human rights commission to investigate grievances about abuses by state authorities. Once a state establishes such a commission, the cndh will lose primary jurisdiction to investigate abuses in that state, though it will retain the power to review alleged failures of the state commissions to adequately investigate claims of abuse. As of late October 1992, state commissions were operating in Baja California, Coahuila, Colima, Guerrero, Hidalgo, Morelos, Nayarit, Sonora, Tamaulipas and Veracruz. This diffusion of authority to investigate human rights abuses will make it difficult for watch-dog non-governmental groups to monitor state government responses to human rights abuses.

Other human rights initiatives taken by the Mexican government in 1992 include the appointment of former federal deputy and prominent Democratic Revolution Party member Leonel Godoy as special prosecutor to investigate the unresolved 1988 assassinations of Xavier Ovando and Romn Gil, coordinators of the election monitoring effort for the 1988 presidential bid of opposition candidate Cuauhtmoc Crdenas; the efforts of the Federal Attorney General's office (pgr) to professionalize the Federal Judicial Police and Federal Prosecutors offices; and therelease from jail of 473 indigenous persons in 12 states.

The Right to Monitor

The activities of both non-governmental and governmental human rights organizations throughout Mexico increased significantly in 1992. Almost 200 independent non-governmental human rights monitoring and advocacy groups now flourish in more than a dozen of Mexico's 31 states, an increase from 65 such groups in 1991. Thirty of these groups have joined together in a national human rights network, "All Rights for All," to defend and publicize urgent cases and to exchange information and resources on issues of civil, political, labor, women's and indigenous rights.

Some of these human rights activists faced threats for their work in Mexico. Mara Teresa Jard Alonso, a lawyer and one of Mexico's best known human rights activists, received several written death threats in October. Jard was responsible for exposing human rights abuses as part of the investigation into the July 1991 murder of Dr. Vctor Manuel Oropeza. At the time she was Attorney General Morales Lechuga's human rights staff officer. In 1989, while working for the Mexican Human Rights Academy, she pressed for the prosecution of Miguel Nazar Haro for his involvement in torture, political disappearance and other human rights abuses committed between 1977 and 1981 while he was chief of the Federal Security Directorate, a secret police force under the Interior Ministry. Jard's investigation followed Nazar Haro's appointment as head of a new intelligence division of the Mexico City Judicial Police. He resigned shortly thereafter, amid public outcry and following the disclosure that he was involved in wrongdoing in the United States. Her actions with respect to the Nazar Haro case, though, cost Jard her job at the Mexican Human Rights Academy.

U.S. Policy

Despite strong relations between Mexico and the United States, human rights issues were not the focus of bilateral relations in 1992. The Salinas and Bush administrations worked together to resolve the remaining contentious issues in a North American Free Trade Agreement (nafta), which was initialed by the Mexican, U.S. and Canadian governments in October and is awaiting ratification. The agreement contains no provision on human rights, despite the obvious relevance of labor rights in the context of trade negotiations.

As a result of these close relations, each government hesitated to criticize the other about human rights violations. Thus, although the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1991, issued in January 1992, identified numerous serious violations but also praised the Salinas administration's effort to promote human rights. By adopting the position that President Salinas has Mexico's human rights situation under control, the Bush administration failed to seize upon the improved bilateral relations to press for genuine improvements in human rights conditions. Similarly, Mexico failed to capitalize on the improved relations to raise its concerns about U.S. mistreatment of Mexican nationals who illegally enter the U.S. (Seethe chapter on the United States for a description of the human rights violations committed by the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service against undocumented migrants at the U.S.-Mexico border.)

The one serious glitch in bilateral relations occurred in June when the U.S. Supreme Court issued a ruling in United States v. Alvarez Machain. The Court held that the extradition treaty between the United States and Mexico did not explicitly bar U.S. government agents from kidnapping a Mexican citizen in Mexico for prosecution in the United States, even though Mexico formally protested his abduction. The Court's ruling, which patently misconstrues international law, legitimized the kidnapping and forced transport of Humberto Alvarez Machain to the United States to stand trial for complicity in the 1985 torture and murder of U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (dea) Special Agent Enrique Camarena Salazar.

Mexico vociferously protested the ruling in public but tempered its diplomatic reaction, leaving the impression that its response was intended to quell domestic and Latin American outrage rather than to weaken its ties with the United States. Hours after the ruling it suspended anti-narcotics cooperation with the United States, but provisionally reestablished it the following day. Mexico demanded that the United States renegotiate the extradition treaty, but backed down after President Bush promised that U.S. agents would not carry out future abductions in Mexico. Mexico also required clarification of the role and authority of the 39 dea agents working in Mexico and announced that it would no longer accept U.S. anti-narcotics law enforcement economic assistance.

However, anti-narcotics cooperation was not interrupted. dea agents continue to operate in Mexico and, according to the State Department, the termination of U.S. law enforcement assistance had been discussed for a year prior to the cut-off announcement and was a result of Mexico's ability to finance the program itself. (During fiscal year 1992, Mexico received $20 million in anti-narcotics law enforcement assistance, but is slated to receive only $4.5 million in fiscal year 1993. In addition, through transfers and leases, U.S. aircraft will continue to be made available for Mexico's counter-narcotics activities.)

Americas Watch maintains that the bilateral goals of the United States and Mexico to integrate their economies and combat drug trafficking must be pursued with consistent attention to the protection of human rights on both sides of the border. The United States and Mexico should use their close relationship to press actively for human rights improvements on both sides of the border.

The Work of Americas Watch

Americas Watch filed an amicus curiae brief with the United States Supreme Court in the Alvarez-Machain case in which the Court examined the legitimacy of the kidnapping by U.S. agents of a Mexican national in Mexican territory and his subsequent prosecution in U.S. courts. In the amicus brief, Americas Watch urged that the kidnapping be declared illegal because the U.S. action interfered with Mexico's duty to protect the human rights of its citizens in criminal prosecutions.

In November, representatives of Americas Watch met with seniorfederal government officials and representatives of the cndh, attended a meeting of the nationwide non-governmental human rights network, All Rights for All, and participated in a press conference organized by the Planeta publishing house to promote the release of the first three Americas Watch reports on Mexico in a Spanish-language edition. Work continued on the forthcoming Human Rights Watch/Yale University Press book on human rights in Mexico, and articles on human rights conditions in Mexico and the human rights implications of the Alvarez Machain case are scheduled for publication in upcoming volumes of Current History and the World Policy Journal.
PERU

Human Rights Developments

A dramatic blow against human rights was struck on April 5, 1992, when President Alberto Fujimori violated Peru's constitution by dissolving the Congress, suspending the judiciary, jailing members of the opposition and assuming dictatorial powers. He defended this self-inflicted coup as necessary to pursue government reforms, combat widespread corruption and bolster the war against the Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso) insurgency.

When President Fujimori took office in 1990, he faced one of the most daunting challenges in Latin America. The economy was in ruins, the cocaine trade was expanding and the Maoist Shining Path had made significant gains in its campaign to destroy democracy. Since the Shining Path took up arms in 1980, at least 26,000 Peruvians have fallen victim to political violence by government and insurgent forces, over 210,000 have become internally displaced and several thousand have been forcibly disappeared. Peru is among the countries that year after year lead the world in reported disappearances, according to the United Nations Working Group on Forced and Involuntary Disappearances.

Although the coup was condemned abroad, most

Peruvians, beset by poverty, widespread corruption and violence, supported it as an extraordinary measure to impose order. The new regime moved quickly to curtail civil liberties and silence critics. Immediately after the coup, 21 journalists were detained and kept incommunicado for several days. The elected leaders of the Senate and House of Deputies were temporarily placed under house arrest, and one prominent senator was beaten by police when he tried to attend a protest meeting in Lima. One member of the American Popular Revolutionary Alliance (apra) political party, Andrs de los Ros Bernardini, was forcibly disappeared for 22 days, and upon release reported having been mistreated.

Thirteen members of the Supreme Court, the leadership of the Public Ministry, including the Public Prosecutor, and over 100 judges and prosecutors were later fired. New laws prevented fired officials from appealing their dismissal. Among those sacked were a judge who accepted a writ of habeas corpus on behalf of three jailed police generals and two judges who accepted a writ of amparo on behalf of other judges protesting their dismissal. Other judges fired included some noted for their willingness to take up humanrights cases. Regime supporters were appointed in their place, leading Americas Watch to conclude that firings were made on completely arbitrary or political grounds, rather than the asserted grounds of corruption.

Despite repeated pledges by President Fujimori to strengthen respect for human rights-including a still-unfulfilled promise to create a National Commission of Human Rights-little of practical value has been accomplished. Nor has his administration taken steps to end the impunity enjoyed by military abusers of human rights. A law doubling the punishment for police convicted of crimes, including human rights violations, was welcome, but failed to address the problem of military personnel involved in similar abuses. Meanwhile, five police agents arrested for killing three youths in custody in 1991 remained in pretrial detention while a jurisdictional dispute between civilian and military courts went unresolved. A police official implicated in the murders remains at large despite an outstanding warrant for his arrest.

Two months after abolishing a law penalizing those who forcibly disappear people, President Fujimori signed a decree on July 2 recriminalizing the abuse and establishing a national registry of detainees and disappeared to be maintained by the Public Prosecutor's office. However, no measure to put teeth into the law-like the creation of a force of independent, civilian investigators or the requirement of public access to the registry-was included. The temporary decriminalization of disappearances may well have done irreparable damage: officials who might have been charged for the thousands of disappearances that took place before July 1992 may now be able to invoke the defense of the "most benign penal law" to prevent prosecution and thus ensure continued impunity for those crimes. Emblematic of impunity's reign is the case of General Jos Valdivia Dueas, implicated in the May 1988 massacre in Cayara of at least 28 people, the disappearance of dozens more and the subsequent murder of nine witnesses. General Valdivia was promoted in January 1992 to Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces Joint Command, one of the most powerful posts in the country.

To the best of Americas Watch's knowledge, in 12 years there have been only two cases in which members of the military have been convicted of human rights offenses. One case that merits scrutiny involved the murder of 69 peasants, including six children, in Accomarca on August 14, 1985, by members of four army patrols. Despite evidence and eyewitness testimony linking five officers to the murders, a military tribunal absolved all but one, the most junior, of any crime. In a 1987 decision, the court convicted Sub-Lieutenant Telmo Hurtado Hurtado of "abuse of authority with disobedience" and sentenced him to four years in prison and immediate dismissal from the army. Although Hurtado was sent to the Lima army base where a military prison is located, he was never confined. Indeed, he was never even dismissed from active duty, and was promoted normally.

In a rare move, the General Prosecutor of the Military Supreme Court, General Luis Carnero Debernardi, questioned irregularities in the proceeding and the leniency of the decision and filed an appeal on December 3, 1987. A subsequent army investigation, nevermade public but leaked to the Lima daily La Repblica, found that all five officers and their men engaged in rape, the burning alive of captured peasants, on-the-spot executions, the murder of witnesses and the wanton destruction of houses. Although the case was reopened for investigation in 1988, Hurtado again was the only defendant convicted on the same charges. The others were absolved on the grounds that they were following higher orders. Lieutenant Guillermo Paz Bustamante was absolved of failing to inform his superiors of the deaths of two peasants, on the grounds that the officer "lacked time, was tired and was experiencing a very tense situation." Although the sentence against Hurtado was confirmed and increased to six years in March 1992, the sentence was suspended and the case closed. Hurtado was never dismissed, never served time in prison, and now has the rank of captain.

The second conviction of a military officer in a human rights case was handed down in January 1992, when a military court sentenced retired army major Luis Angel Morillas Cspedes to 15 years in prison for having ordered his subordinates to murder a civilian and hide his body.

Twelve years of counterinsurgency strategy based on granting the military exceptional powers has produced not only the steady growth of insurgency, but also systematic, egregious and continuing human rights abuses coupled with complete impunity for members of the security forces implicated in the abuses. Far from a "soft dictatorship" (dictablanda), as supporters have described President Fujimori's rule, this regime is characterized by continued, flagrant abuse of human rights. The Lima-based National Coordinating Committee for Human Rights (Coordinadora) has documented 139 unresolved disappearances in the first nine months of 1992 (the government's special human rights prosecutor recorded an additional 99 cases of forced disappearance during the same period) and 44 extrajudicial executions in the first eight months, all of them attributed to the security forces.

In the department of San Martn, the Catholic Prelate's Office of Social Action registered 125 cases of human rights violations by the army in the first eight months of 1992, including rape, arbitrary detention, disappearance and extrajudicial executions. Human rights groups have also noted an alarming increase in killings that they believe to be carried out by paramilitary groups with ties to the army and intelligence services. In Huancayo, human rights groups believe a paramilitary squad with ties to the army is implicated in the murder of 19 students and the disappearance of at least 12 others since August. Among the hundreds of cases that remain unprosecuted is the paramilitary-style massacre of 15 people in the Barrios Altos district of Lima on November 3, 1991 by plainclothesmen believed to be linked to army intelligence.

The government continues to emphasize the role of civil defense patrols, or rondas campesinas, in areas where the Shining Path is active. While some are formed by villagers themselves to protect against guerrilla incursions, others are mandated and controlled by the Army. All have official legal backing, and are authorized to receive defensive weapons. Some patrols have brought relative peace to areas long torn by conflict. However, the use of civilians in counterinsurgency makes them military targets withoutgranting them the protection necessary to prevent retaliation. In rural areas, the highest death tolls are those of patrol members and their families, who often have no access to transportation or medical care for the wounded. In addition, patrols have committed serious human rights violations. In one case, 40 patrollers from the community of Colpar, Junn detained ten peasants in nearby Paccha on February 27 and, according to witnesses, beat them before marching them away. The ten remain disappeared.

In the Apurmac Valley, civil defense patrols have successfully defeated guerrillas, but in their place have permitted a booming trade in cocaine. In some areas, wealthier farmers are funding a paramilitary organization called "The Tigers," which threatens to evolve into a Colombia-style private army and which has been accused of abuses. Farther north, the Army has fostered the expansion of the Ashninka Army, led by indigenous leaders to combat guerrillas. Ashninka units have also been implicated in attacks against peasant families, in an attempt to win back traditional hunting lands.

Immediately after the coup was announced, radio stations, newspapers and magazines were forcibly closed. Television news broadcasts were monitored by military officers who had been stationed in studios under the pretext of providing "protection." One example of increased restrictions on the press was the decision of three post-coup appointees to the Supreme Court to uphold a charge of defamation against Enrique Zileri, publisher of the respected newsweekly Caretas, for describing in the magazine a close Fujimori adviser as a "Rasputin." A political candidate for mayor of Lima was similarly charged for calling Fujimori a "cheap dictator." The court imposed a $40,000 fine on Zileri as well as restrictions on his movements.

On May 6, Fujimori ordered police to enter the Shining Path women's cellblock in Lima's "Miguel Castro Castro" prison to transfer inmates to another facility. When inmates resisted, a four-day pitched battle ensued, during which prisoners resisted with home-made weapons and guns captured from police. One policeman was reportedly murdered by prisoners after being captured and two more died in uncertain circumstances. Although facts remain unclear, at least 39 prisoners died in circumstances suggesting that excessive force was used. Some may have been killed after surrendering to police. At the very least, the government's refusal to allow independent observers to enter or mediate during the standoff suggests that it did not want witnesses to its actions inside. Americas Watch has called for a public, independent investigation and access to the autopsies of those killed. The Fujimori government has ignored its obligation to provide a serious explanation of the slayings at the prison, and has taken no action to investigate or punish those responsible.

In the weeks after the inmates were transferred, Americas Watch interviewed prisoners in the Chorrillos penitentiary on two separate occasions. Four of the women who survived the clash reported inhumane conditions at Chorrillos beyond the ordinarily appalling ones present in Peruvian detention facilities. Prisoners were prevented from speaking with their lawyers or receiving family visits or packages of clothes, medicine and food. Three weeks aftertheir arrival at the new facility, they had only the clothes they had worn during the confrontation. They were kept two to three to a cell with no opportunity to go outside except to shower briefly once a week. Food was inadequate, and they were prevented from reading, writing, listening to the radio or speaking with national human rights groups. While recognizing the government's obligation to maintain secure prisons, Americas Watch called for humane conditions consistent with security requirements, including family visits, clean clothing, adequate food, medical attention and regular exercise. The appeal has gone unheeded.

The Shining Path attempted to capitalize on the coup by launching a campaign to bring terror to urban Peru, particularly Lima. One independent human rights group noted that there were more guerrilla actions in July, with 293 attacks, than any other month since Fujimori's inauguration in 1990.

According to the Coordinadora, the Shining Path was

responsible for at least 482 political assassinations in the first ten months of 1992, with the victims including more than 70 elected and state-appointed officials. Guerrillas continued to target members of shantytown "survival" organizations, like soup kitchens, neighbor associations and mothers' clubs, murdering more than 60 people. In August, the Shining Path killed a Pucallpa reporter and Santiago Jao Gmez, the owner of two radio stations in Barranca, who was also a member of the Popular Christian Party.

Through a network of clandestine and semi-clandestine front organizations, the Shining Path typically seeks to infiltrate popular organizations, force collaboration and provoke divisions. If organizations resist, the Shining Path attacks installations, executes key leaders, and threatens others. Similarly, when people do not support the Shining Path, guerrillas exact bloody revenge. One victim in 1992 was Mara Elena Moyano, the 33-year-old vice mayor of Villa El Salvador, a Lima municipality of 300,000. After several months of threats, attacks and murders of women leaders, Moyano led public protests against these terror tactics. On February 15, an assassination squad shot Moyano at a fund-raising barbecue, then blew up her body with dynamite. The

Shining Path proudly claimed credit for this crime in its national and international press outlets, on the grounds that Moyano's open activities ran counter to its revolutionary objectives.

On May 22, guerrillas detonated a 660-pound bomb in a banking district, killing one and wounding 15. This was the first of six car or truck bombs of over 600 pounds set off in the capital. Although guerrillas have used car bombs before, the immensity of these explosions marked a horrifying new chapter in the war. All were aimed at civilian targets: an internationally renowned development institution, a television station, a foreign embassy and a school for children of military officers were among the targets. On July 16, a 1,300-pound bomb aimed at two banks killed 22 and left more than 200 wounded in downtown Miraflores, a middle-class Lima municipality.

Far from aberrations, these attacks demonstrate the Shining Path's open contempt for life. As spokesman Luis Arce Borja explained to the German magazine Der Spiegel after the bombing:

We know that many innocent people are dying. But history is written with blood. We will never attain power if we are tormented by the deaths. The price is high, but without bloodshed and violence there is no revolution. Our objective is to seize power. Only then will the deaths cease.

True to that vow in October, guerrillas killed 47 people, including 33 women and children, in the Ayacucho village of Huayao, apparently in punishment for forming a civil defense patrol. The insurgents reportedly killed 11 more residents in the neighboring village of Rumi Rumi after President Fujimori visited Huayao in the wake of the massacre.

The size of the "Emergency Zone" placed under military control, with restrictions on movement, assembly and the privacy of the home, diminished in 1992, from nearly half to less than one-quarter of the country. But because those provinces where liberties were restored have such small populations, the number of people affected remained roughly the same, about 50 percent of the country's population.

Yet in important respects, the entire country now lives under "emergency rules." Decree 25475, the anti-terrorist legislation promulgated on May 5, leaves Peruvians virtually unprotected against the abuse of power. Employing a vague definition of terrorism, this law authorizes prosecution of anyone who "provokes anxiety" or "affects international relations" by any means, including nonviolent ones. The law is written so broadly that journalists and human rights activists could be charged under it because of critical articles or reports, and face prison terms of not less than 20 years. One human rights monitor, Jos Ramrez Garca, has been in pretrial detention for three months under terrorism charges because of materials on political violence found in his library. The crime of "apology for terrorism"-an accusation that President Fujimori has leveled frequently at human rights groups-is never defined, but carries a sentence of between six and twelve years imprisonment. Such crimes are to be tried before "faceless judges" in circumstances that seriously violate the right to due process.

A law promulgated on August 13 defined "treason" to include some acts listed in Decree Law 25475, and transferred prosecutions for this offense to secret, military courts. Those convicted in summary courts-martial are subject to life imprisonment and severe restrictions on their subsequent ability to confer with lawyers or receive family visits. The competence and impartiality of military courts is highly suspect. Military judges are not legal professionals but officers drawn from the ranks to serve set terms. According to Peru's military code, they are charged with hearing only cases involving soldiers accused of military-specific crimes, such as negligence or disobeying orders, and thus are ill-prepared to handle their new case load. Other decrees prohibit lawyers from assuming the defense of more than one person charged with either terrorism or treason, a restriction that falls hardest on those living outside urban centers, where there are few lawyers.

In addition, according to Decree Law 25744, police need thepermission of only a military court to carry out "preventative detentions" of suspects and hold them incommunicado indefinitely. Since the Treason Law also abolished the right to amparo and habeas corpus for those accused of terrorism and treason, citizens can be held for long periods with no legal recourse or access to counsel. Draconian in and of themselves, these restrictions are also alarming because the period of incommunicado detention is typically when detainees are tortured, raped and forcibly disappeared.

If police turn a suspect over to the courts for investigation, the detainee is prohibited from gaining conditional liberty, even when demonstrably innocent. Rather, he or she remains imprisoned while a specially constituted secret trial is held with "faceless" judges and prosecutors. Decree 25728 allows trials for citizens accused of treason or terrorism to be held in absentia.

The combined effect of these laws is that anyone can be arrested at any time on charges that no one has a responsibility to make public and held indefinitely. To be arrested under these circumstances means to descend into a legal no-man's land, where the most basic rights vanish.

Ironically, these new severe restrictions on basic rights played no role in the single greatest blow against the Shining Path, the September 12 arrest its leader, Abimael Guzmn, and more than 50 of his top followers. The arrests were the result of patient, traditional police work by dincote, the specialized anti-terrorism police, not military sweeps or restrictive laws. However, the new restrictions on due process tainted the aftermath of the arrests. The military tribunals used offered no guarantees of independence or impartiality. The proceedings were excessively speedy, with little opportunity for the defendants to put forward a defense or to contradict the prosecution's evidence. The extremely short time to present an appeal-eight hours, on a decision handed to Guzmn's lawyer on a Friday night-made a mockery of the process.

The right of Guzmn and his associates to a fair trial was further compromised by numerous statements made by President Fujimori in favor of conviction and the death penalty before a court decision was announced. The death penalty does not even exist as a punishment under current law except for cases of treason in a foreign war. In addition, President Fujimori threatened to write into law a provision that would allow the state to try convicted leaders for the crimes of alleged followers even after the leaders were incarcerated.

While Americas Watch has consistently and energetically condemned the blatant violations of common Article 3 of the 1949 Geneva Conventions committed by the guerrillas, we have defended the rights of those accused of belonging to the Shining Path to a fair trial.

On June 1, the day after a delegation from the Organization of American States (oas) led by Uruguayan Foreign Minister Hctor Gros Espiell left Peru, President Fujimori called elections for November 22-more than a month after the October 18 deadline set by the oas. Although the oas had resolved that the road back to democracy should be determined through dialogue between Fujimori and the opposition, Fujimori established the date and procedures for theelections unilaterally. As a result, the apra, Accin Popular, Libertad and the Unified Maritegui Party-Peru's largest parties-boycotted the elections. New parties and those that received less than five per cent of the vote in the 1990 election were required to collect a minimum of 100,000 signatures in less than two months, placing an undue burden on all but the largest parties. In violation of the Peruvian constitution, Fujimori also postponed municipal elections until January 29, 1993, almost a month after current municipal authorities are scheduled to leave their posts.

Elections were held as scheduled on November 22, with President Fujimori's New Majority-Change 90 coalition winning a slim majority of seats in the congress. As decreed by Fujimori, the Democratic Constituent Congress (dcc) will be unicameral and contain 80 representatives elected to terms ending in July 1995. Its task will be to draft a new constitution and develop a new legislative system. However, Fujimori has decreed that the dcc will have no authority to overturn executive actions implemented since April 5. In summary, the return to popular rule that is supposedly represented by the dcc has occurred without open debate, without the consent of existing political parties, without full legislative power conferred to the constituent congress, and without any move toward respect for human rights.

The Right to Monitor

Both sides to the Peruvian armed conflict threatened and attacked human rights monitors in 1992. President Fujimori

continued to slander domestic and international human rights groups and, in a new and troubling development, initiated criminal proceedings against several human rights monitors under the new anti-terrorist legal norms. Indeed, the use of military courts against human rights monitors does not appear far-fetched in the wake of statements by Fujimori after the capture of Guzmn, when he asserted that Guzmn's campaign of "death and destruction [took place] under the silent, protective cloak of organizations that defend human rights." In addition to being wrong-national and international human rights groups, including Americas Watch, have consistently and energetically denounced abuses committed by armed insurgents-these statements irresponsibly invite violent attacks by the army and its paramilitary allies against monitors. Among the most worrisome cases in 1992 was the forced disappearance of Pedro Yauri Bustamante, a Huaura journalist and town council member known for his defense of human rights. Witnesses indicate that Yauri was detained on June 23 by armed men wearing uniforms who identified themselves as members of dincote. The next morning, neither the local police station nor the office of the Technical Police would accept from Yauri's father a formal complaint denouncing his son's detention. A judge later declared a writ of habeas corpus unfounded. Yauri's whereabouts remain unknown.

As noted above, Jos Ramrez Garca, a human rights monitor and writer on political violence from Cusco, has been in pretrial detention since August 17 for photocopying the book Sendero Luminoso: el movimiento ms letal del mundo (Shining Path: The Most Lethal Movement in the World) by Simon Strong. Although the book isfiercely critical of the Shining Path and has not been banned in Peru, the police have charged Ramrez with terrorism based on his photocopying of the book and on his possession of copies of Shining Path literature later found in his home.

Carlos Chipoco, an attorney widely respected for his human rights work, has been charged with apology for terrorism on the basis of a report submitted by the National Intelligence Service (SIN) to a Lima prosecutor which stated that Chipoco had worked for Americas Watch in Washington and was responsible for bringing two cases against Peru to the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, the oas body whose compulsory jurisdiction Peru has recognized.

The police also made public a list of "suspected Shining Path sympathizers abroad," which included two figures who are well-known for their human rights work: Raquel Martn Castillo de Meja, currently in political exile in Sweden, who is pursuing a case before the oas Inter-American Commission on Human Rights for the disappearance of her husband, a human rights lawyer; and Angelica Mendoza de Ascarza, the founder and long-time president of the Ayacucho Association of the Family Members of the Detained and Disappeared (anfasep). Neither woman is known to have connections to guerrillas. Mendoza is said to have "coordinated" Shining Path activities in France, yet she has never lived in that nation. The publication of Castillo de Meja's and Mendoza de Ascarza's names in this manner constitutes a threat to their lives and the lives of other human rights monitors. In September, the government formally charged both women and ordered their arrest.

Another human rights defender, attorney Tito Guido Gallegos Gallegos, was charged on November 3, 1992, with "collaboration with terrorism"-a crime which carries a penalty of 20 years in prison. Gallegos monitors human rights for the Catholic Church's Vicariate of Solidarity in Puno. In October, he presented a habeas corpus writ on behalf of a 13-year-old boy charged with terrorism. Although the judge accepted the petition and ordered the boy to be freed, he later reversed himself on the grounds that the right to habeas corpus no longer exists for those accused of terrorism. He then instructed the public prosecutor to charge Gallegos with collaboration with terrorism, for allegedly improperly using the habeas remedy. Fortunately, the charge was dropped after protests from Americas Watch and other human rights groups. Nonetheless, the case illustrates the tremendous threat to human rights work posed by President Fujimori's new decrees.

Violent attacks on human rights monitors before 1992 remain unpunished. The investigation into the attack against human rights lawyer Augusto Ziga, who lost his left arm after receiving a letter bomb on March 15, 1991, is stalled. At the time of the attack, Dr. Ziga was investigating the alleged police-led disappearance of university student Ernesto Castillo Pez on October 21, 1990. In August 1992, a Lima court temporarily shelved the Castillo Pez case claiming that evidence against the police was still lacking.

For its part, the Shining Path continued to attack human rights as "middle-class illusions," even as it called on international human rights organizations to denounce abuses against its members. On October 7, Shining Path detonated explosives thatdestroyed the office of the Vicariate of Solidarity in Ayaviri, Puno department. The Vicariate of Solidarity carries out peace and human rights activities under the auspices of the Catholic Church.

U.S. Policy

During 1992, the focus of U.S. policy toward Peru shifted from one of preoccupation with anti-narcotics operations to concern over the threat posed by the Shining Path. While the Bush administration reacted swiftly and forcefully to the April 5 presidential coup, its outrage was slowly replaced with anxiety over the Shining Path's growing influence. Some U.S. policymakers became convinced they had to choose between supporting an abusive government and risking Peru falling to the guerrillas. In making this choice, they lost sight of the importance of respect for human rights as a tool for rebuilding the government's legitimacy needed to defeat the Shining Path. The result has been a U.S. administration that has placed its trust, unjustifiably, in President Fujimori's stated intention to restore some semblance of democracy, despite the evidence that the constituent congress will be powerless to disassemble the authoritarian regime he has been constructing since April 5.

The U.S. government initially responded to the April 5 coup by calling for a speedy return to democracy and respect for human rights. In a speech before the oas, Secretary of State James Baker called the coup "tragic," and added, "you cannot destroy democracy in order to save it." While in Lima, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Bernard Aronson canceled an appointment with President Fujimori and instead met with members of the human rights Coordinadora, sending an important message of support for its work.

The Bush administration suspended all new aid and

approximately $25 million in economic aid and $15 million in military aid that had been appropriated but not disbursed from fiscal year 1991 because members of Congress believed that Peru had not yet complied with the human rights conditions mandated by law for the aid to be delivered. The United States also froze commercial military sales to Peru and pulled out all Green Beret trainers working with Peruvian anti-narcotics police. However, anti-narcotics activities, such as Drug Enforcement Administration programs and police training administered by the State Department, continued uninterrupted, as did all humanitarian assistance. With the exception of Japan, which reinstated a $53 million credit on July 31, other countries followed the U.S. lead by suspending assistance.

The rapid and firm international response, which apparently surprised President Fujimori, was probably decisive in prompting him to remove troops from the streets and newsrooms and to free political leaders. In later weeks, however, Washington quietly softened its position, siding with the majority in the oas that advocated a more gentle approach to the Peruvian regime. In June, the United States joined a unanimous World Bank board of directors in approving a $400 million loan for Peru's financial sector. While the U.S. opposed an Inter-American Development Bank loan of $221 million just after the April coup, by September the U.S. activelysupported the loan, citing progress such as Fujimori's announcement of elections. Approval of the loan enables Peru to refinance its debt with the Inter-American Development Bank and thus to become eligible for additional loans that had previously been delayed. Americas Watch opposes U.S. support for these non-humanitarian loans, since their approval has made it appear, falsely, that President Fujimori has made acceptable progress toward the restoration of democracy and respect for human rights.

In January 1992, the State Department issued its Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1991, which contained significant omissions in the chapter on Peru. While the report notes "continued...credible reports of summary executions, 'disappearances,' arbitrary detention, torture and rape by the military and police," it adds that the number of unresolved disappearances had fallen. Yet it fails to note that the number of extrajudicial executions had increased, according to local human rights groups. Moreover, although the number of disappearances did decline in the second half of 1991, the number reported for the year as a whole exceeded that of 1990.

After the November 22, 1992 elections, the State Department was quick to signal its eagerness to restore economic assistance, hailing the elections as "an important first step back toward fully constitutional government," in the words of a senior State Department official who briefed reporters on November 23 on the condition that he not be named.

Efforts to restore significant amounts of assistance may face opposition in the U.S. Congress, regardless of the November 22 elections, since human rights conditions that Congress imposed on anti-narcotics assistance in 1991 have still not been fully complied with. While the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc) has been permitted increased access to military and police detention centers, it was denied access to the Miguel Castro Castro prison for more than five weeks following the violence in May.

When Americas Watch visited the ministry responsible for prosecutions in July, the office's central list of detained and disappeared-a list mandated by the U.S. Congress's human rights conditions set forth in 1991-was not yet fully functional. While the Peruvian army had cooperated, for the most part, with the maintenance of the registry, the police had yet to comply. There is legitimate concern that the ministry, since April 5 administered by a Fujimori appointee, may no longer be able to maintain such a list in an independent manner.

Moreover, there has been almost no movement toward resolving any of nine prominent human rights cases which the Congress had chosen to measure progress in prosecution of human rights violators.

In response to the April 5 coup, Congress prohibited new military assistance for Peru for fiscal years 1992 and 1993. (Military assistance was originally appropriated for Peru in fiscal year 1992, but was rescinded after the coup.) A small portion of the $95 million of Economic Support Funds (esf) approved for Peru in fiscal year 1992 was disbursed, primarily for the Administration of Justice and miscellaneous narcotics education programs, and Congress has placed a cap of $50 million on esf for fiscal year1993.

The Bush administration opposed conditioning funding under the 1992 International Narcotics Control Act (INCA) on human rights. The human rights conditions attached to the 1990 INCA had led to a bitter debate over human rights in Peru. In 1992, the

administration threatened to veto the new INCA if human rights conditions were included. Congress capitulated and withdrew the conditions.

Some members of Congress have looked into reports that the Central Intelligence Agency helped to found a special anti-drug unit allegedly headed by Vladimiro Montesinos within the military intelligence service. Montesinos is a close advisor to President Fujimori who reportedly played a central role in planning and executing the April 5 coup. He is also well known in Peru for his defense of drug traffickers during the 1980s and his participation in the attempted cover-up following the 1988 Cayara massacre. CIA assistance has also reportedly been used to provide vehicles and training in the United States to Peruvian intelligence agents under Montesinos's command. These vehicles may have been used for the April 5 arbitrary detention of journalist Gustavo Gorriti, the November 1991 Barrios Altos massacre, and other human rights violations. Americas Watch believes that the U.S. should terminate any covert or overt assistance to units, such as the National Intelligence Service allegedly controlled by Montesinos, which engage in gross violations of human rights.

oas Policy

Efforts sponsored by the Organization of American States to reinstate democracy have been important, yet also contradictory and limited. The oas responded rapidly to the coup, calling an emergency meeting of foreign ministers and sending representatives to Peru four times between April 20 and May 30. Its intervention probably prevented the situation from worsening further. However, subsequent oas statements have been less emphatic, thus facilitating the half-measures, deceptions and attempts to shrug off international pressure that have characterized the Peruvian regime's response.

During the May oas General Assembly in Nassau, Bahamas, discussion of the coup was marred by a storm of criticism over a special report on Peru by the President of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, Marco Tulio Bruni Celli. Peru's Minister of Justice, Fernando Vega, charged that the report gave the armed insurgents increased international status, presumably by recounting inmates' testimony regarding the slaying of 39 prisoners by police in May. Meanwhile Uruguayan Foreign Minister Hctor Gros Espiell, chosen to head the oas efforts on Peru, was quoted in the press asserting that the Commission report, which Americas Watch found accurate and forceful, was filled with "half-truths." Gros Espiell also criticized the Commission for failing to report on abuses committed by insurgents throughout Latin America, echoing comments by Peruvian officials, even though the oas has never provided the Commission with the resources necessary to address rebel abuses. This dispute diverted attention from the military-backed coup and its effect on human rights. Worse, its apparentpurpose was to suggest that the coup and accompanying abuses were justified by the fight against Shining Path-a troubling precedent.

The oas also failed in its mission to promote a successful dialogue between Fujimori and the democratic opposition. On August 18, the oas Council of Ministers issued a communiqu stating that "all possible means were exhausted to expand the dialogue," a ridiculous assertion given that Fujimori refused any compromise and insisted on mandating the terms himself. Talks between Fujimori and Gros Espiell became a substitute for dialogue between Fujimori and the democratic opposition. The oas's acceptance of this substitution served to further entrench Fujimori's authoritarian approach and to confer an aura of legitimacy on the regime.

The Work of Americas Watch

Through reports, press releases, opinion articles and frequent correspondence with the government, Americas Watch continued to condemn human rights violations and violations of the laws of war by both the government and armed insurgents. Several Americas Watch missions visited Peru before and after the April 5 coup to gather information and meet with government officials. One investigation was conducted in conjunction with the Human Rights Watch Women's Rights Project, to prepare a report on women and political violence. Americas Watch also organized and participated in a delegation of human rights activists from several Latin American countries that traveled to Peru in May to raise human rights concerns in the wake of the coup. As a result of those missions, Americas Watch published two brief reports in August: Peru: Civil Society and Democracy Under Fire and El Per de Fujimori: Golpe a la Democracia y a los Derechos Humanos. Also during the May visit, members of the Americas Watch delegation spoke with four women who survived the clash at the Miguel Castro Castro prison. With Peruvian journalist Gustavo Gorriti, Americas Watch visited key congressional offices to urge close vigilance of human rights in Peru, especially as the country prepared for new elections. Information provided by Americas Watch was considered by congressional offices that were developing U.S. drug policy in the Andean region.

In cooperation with Peruvian human rights organizations and the Center for Justice and International Law (cejil), Americas Watch is acting as counsel for the victims in two important cases currently being litigated before the oas Inter-American Court of Human Rights. One involves the 1986 prison riots and subsequent massacre at the island prison of El Frontn, and the other concerns the Cayara massacre of 1988 and the subsequent persecution and murder of investigators and witnesses.

ASIA WATCH OVERVIEW

Two features of the human rights situation in Asia in 1992 stood out: the extent to which Asian countries were contributing to human rights problems outside their own borders and the extent to which they decided to respond formally to external pressure on human rights.

Most of the human rights problems noted in 1991 remained the same, including the treatment of dissidents in China and the harshness of the Chinese prison and labor camp system; political imprisonment and atrocities against national minorities in Burma; military and paramilitary abuses in Kashmir; and repression by the Indonesian government in East Timor. The fall of President Najibullah in Afghanistan threw that country into a state of chaos and factional fighting that threatened to turn it into an Asian Somalia. The refusal of the Khmer Rouge to cooperate with a United Nations peace agreement and reports of its successful political infiltration of Cambodian villages raised the specter of a return to influence of one of Asia's deadliest organizations. If there was a bright spot, it was Taiwan's continued progress toward a more open society, marked among other things by the repeal of the Sedition Law. South Korea, by contrast, kept its National Security Law on the books, despite a recommendation in July 1992 by the United Nations Human Rights Committee that the vaguely worded law be phased out.

It was striking how many of Asia's human rights problems involved more than one Asian government. Burma's ruling State Law and Order Restoration Council (slorc) was armed by China and kept afloat by trade with China and Thailand. When slorc's abuses pushed Muslim refugees across the border to Bangladesh, problems of the treatment of refugees arose on the Bangladeshi side. Efforts to put pressure on the Khmer Rouge depended on Thai willingness to seal off its borders to the gem and logging trade. Thai police routinely abused Burmese refugees, particularly women. Pakistan's supply of arms to Kashmir contributed to the tension there (although abuses by Indian security forces could neither be explained nor justified by such involvement.) Saudi Arabian and Pakistani sources were believed to be supporting Afghan mujahidin leader Gulbuddin Hekmatyar's efforts to wrest power from other mujahidin factions, despite Hekmatyar's abusive practices. Hong Kong's forced repatriation of Vietnamese refugees and India's repatriation of Tamils to Sri Lanka were both characterized by inadequate screening and monitoring procedures. The Chinese government was attempting to prevent democratization in Hong Kong before the British colony is returned to China in 1997. Worker rights in Indonesia were reported to be particularly abused in plants owned or managed by South Koreans; similar allegations were made about the treatment of workers in factories in China that were financed with Hong Kong or Taiwanese capital. Japan, as the region's largest donor and investor, had enormous financial interests in countries with the worst human rights records in Asia, but it chose not to exert its economic leverage. Abuse against hiv and aids sufferers became an increasing problem, linked to drug production and trafficking in womenacross Burma's borders with Thailand, China and India. Human rights abuses against villagers living in forest areas was another problem as Thai logging companies backed by the military sought new areas of operation in Cambodia, Burma and Laos, as well as in ostensibly protected forest areas of Thailand.

The complicity of Asian governments in human rights abuses beyond their own borders gave a new twist to the other striking development during the year: the interest shown in establishing formal human rights bodies in Asia. There were numerous examples:

 The governments making up the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (asean)-Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, the Philippines and Brunei-began to discuss setting up a governmental human rights forum for the region.

 Indonesia set up a parliamentary committee on human rights.

 India, supported by the state governments, moved to set up a human rights commission in Delhi which was expected to begin work in early 1993.

 China issued two new White Papers on human rights, one on the criminal justice system and one on Tibet.

 Cambodia, through the Supreme National Council, acceded to six major international human rights agreements and Thailand moved toward accession to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.

 Japan reaffirmed its commitment to use respect for human rights as one criterion in allocating Official Development Assistance, its overseas aid program.

These moves, while positive, would have been more welcome had they been coupled with evidence of a desire to prevent human rights abuses at home or within the region. With the exception of Thailand, where government efforts to address human rights concerns were overwhelmingly the result of domestic pressure following the May violence to place curbs on the army, and Cambodia, where the United Nations Transitional Administration in Cambodia (untac) was setting the human rights agenda, government moves appeared to be more an effort to fend off international criticism than a genuine attempt to ameliorate human rights abuses. They were at once a reaction to efforts by Western donors to condition aid on democratization and respect for human rights; a determination to define an "Asian" concept of human rights; and a way of responding to outside criticism of specific practices and policies. But there were clear differences of approach in South Asia, Southeast Asia and China.

In South Asia, Sri Lanka and India responded to international pressure by taking steps in 1991 to set up their own human rights commissions and task forces which would at once address the concerns most often raised by donor countries and keep human rights investigations a domestic affair. "Once we havethe human rights commission," an Indian official said, "there will be no need for Asia Watch or Amnesty International." Local nongovernmental organizations (ngos) were torn. In Sri Lanka, many activists felt that the new agencies forced the government to pay more attention to human rights, even if they were slow, unwieldy and too limited in scope. In India, human rights organizations expressed concern that a human rights commission would be a way for the government to focus less on its own conduct than on abuses by militants in Kashmir, Punjab and elsewhere. However, even the skeptics acknowledged that a commission would give legitimacy to discussions on human rights.

In Southeast Asia, there was much more of an effort to band together to face what was perceived as an onslaught of Western criticism on human rights-and one likely to get worse with a Clinton administration in Washington. The moves were led by Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore, with tacit support from Vietnam and, to some extent, China. At the Non-Aligned Movement's summit meeting in Jakarta in September, Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamed of Malaysia called the conditioning of aid on respect for human rights a form of cultural imperialism, imposing Western political values on non-Western countries. At a meeting between asean and European Community foreign ministers in Manila in October, Indonesian Foreign Minister Ali Alatas reiterated a theme he has stated many times before: developing nations must secure the economic rights of their people before turning to individual rights which are purportedly a luxury of developed countries.

To further the notion that developing countries, and particularly Asian countries, need to foster a concept of human rights that is more in tune with their culture and level of economic development, asean governments in 1992 began to discuss the idea of forming their own regional human rights commission. Spokespersons for Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore acknowledged the universality of human rights principles but argued that it should be up to governments to determine how these principles should be implemented.

China reacted to human rights pressure by accepting the principle of respect for human rights but denying its own violations. Just as its October 1991 White Paper on Human Rights stressed the social and economic benefits that Chinese people enjoyed, two new White Papers issued in 1992 described the enlightened treatment of China's prisoners and the human rights enjoyed by the people of Tibet.

The underlying message of Asian governments was that while discussion of human rights issues was legitimate, control over the interpretation and implementation of international human rights standards should rest with the government in question. At the end of 1992, there were efforts to develop a common governmental position across South and Southeast Asia that could be presented at the United Nations World Conference on Human Rights scheduled to be held in Vienna in June 1993.

Asian ngos and individual human rights activists from Asian countries also tended to believe that human rights priorities had been skewed by the West but they sought to block moves to weakenthe universality of international standards. Moreover, in a statement signed by 60 Asian ngos in preparation for the World Conference, they noted, "While the denial and deprivation of economic and social rights is a matter of grave concern, Asian ngos are equally distressed by the gross violations of the civil and political rights of people in the region."

The stands taken by South Asia, Southeast Asia, and China all acknowledged the legitimacy of human rights as a topic of international discussion. The question was whether that acknowledgement would lead to action by governments, either to address violations of human rights and humanitarian law in their own countries or to join forces with other countries in the region to put pressure on offending neighbors. Paradoxically, the more Asian governments become involved in human rights violations elsewhere in Asia, the more they become a necessary part of the solution. Even if the European Community, the U.S., Australia and Japan agreed to put pressure on the Khmer Rouge, their actions would be ineffective without Thai cooperation. A full trade embargo against Burma is likely to have little effect unless China takes part. To put real pressure on China to improve its human rights performance, Japan must weigh in. Establishing the legitimacy of the topic was a first step, but it is not enough.

The Right to Monitor

Human rights monitors had a difficult year in Asia, and they fared no better in democratic countries than in authoritarian ones. Governments throughout the region used a variety of techniques of intimidation, ranging from murder to cutting off an organization's source of funding. No known domestic human rights organizations exist in Brunei, Burma, East Timor, North Korea, Singapore or Vietnam. In China, underground organizations were active but were not allowed to function openly. Human rights monitors tended to face the most danger in areas marked by internal conflict or ongoing civil strife within countries that generally allowed a high degree of freedom of expression and association. Human rights activists were arrested or continued to be detained in 1992 for documenting or publicizing violations of internationally recognized rights in Cambodia, China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines and Tibet.

Many governments in the region appeared to be indirectly targeting human rights organizations by imposing general controls on nongovernmental organizations: making registration procedures more onerous or restricting the amount of foreign funding allowed. In fact, as Asian governments increasingly decried conditioning aid on respect for human rights, those governments tended to see domestic human rights organizations that received foreign funds as agents of foreign interests.

U.S. Policy

The Bush administration did not place a high priority on human rights problems in the region, and Asian governments were awaiting the transition to a Clinton administration with some anxiety. If the Bush administration had by and large encouraged trade and investment at the expense of human rights-by sayingthat what is good for American business is good for human rights-Asian governments feared that Clinton would be more willing to use trade sanctions in support of human rights.

In country after country, whether China, Indonesia, India or Sri Lanka, the Bush administration put business first and assumed that as long as economic reforms in favor of foreign investment were underway, political change was inevitable, and concerted pressure on human rights was neither desirable nor necessary. The administration vetoed conditions on Most Favored Nation trade status for China; it tried to avert a cutoff of military aid to Indonesia after the East Timor massacre; and it actively opposed a bill in Congress that would have required U.S. businesses investing in China to observe a Code of Conduct that would promote human rights. Among the region's worst offenders, only Burma came in for sustained criticism-and U.S. economic and strategic interests there were minimal.

In general, the administration's reluctance to press very hard on human rights issues on a bilateral basis was also evident in its performance in multilateral settings. It contributed to the defeat of a resolution at the U.N. Human Rights Commission meeting in Geneva that would have condemned China for human rights abuses in Tibet. It continued to oppose some loans to China in the World Bank, but whereas after the 1989 crackdown it had lobbied other governments to do the same, by 1992 it was making no effort to prevent World Bank lending to China from reaching record-high levels. The administration's record was better in the annual meetings of donors to particular countries. In March, prior to the meeting in Paris of donors to Sri Lanka, the U.S. urged Japan to join in pressing the Sri Lankan government on human rights, and in July, at the meeting of the donor consortium on Indonesia, the U.S. made a public statement noting human rights abuses in East Timor.

The administration reacted swiftly and appropriately to the killings in Bangkok in May by suspending joint military exercises with the Thai military, but it was too quick to resume cooperation after the September 13 election restored a civilian government to power. Major questions about the Thai military's role in the killings and in subsequent disposal of bodies remained unanswered, and continued suspension of military cooperation would have been a powerful source of pressure.

U.S. policy toward refugee-related human rights problems in Asia was mixed. The administration properly opposed forced repatriation of Vietnamese refugees from Hong Kong, although its opposition was derided in the region because of its own summary repatriation of Haitian refugees. It gave assistance to Burmese refugees in Bangladesh and exerted pressure on the Bangladeshi government to ensure that any repatriation to Burma was safe and voluntary. On the other hand, its policy toward Burmese refugees in Thailand was decidedly ambiguous, as the administration appeared to support less-than-adequate screening and monitoring in the proposed "safe area" for Burmese students in Thailand.
AFGHANISTAN

Human Rights Developments

Nineteen ninety-two was a watershed for Afghanistan. The U.N.-sponsored peace talks that appeared to be making progress at the beginning of the year came to an abrupt end on April 15 when President Najibullah was prevented from leaving the country. In the months that followed, thousands of refugees streamed back into the country even as Kabul was rocked by the worst fighting there in 14 years of war. Steady rocketing and shelling in August by the forces of the radical mujahidin leader Gulbuddin Hekmatyar killed at least 2,000, most of them civilians. Hundreds of thousands fled the city and remained in makeshift camps along roads leading to Pakistan. By year's end, international interest in the conflict had all but vanished and Afghanistan appeared to be on the brink of a humanitarian catastrophe.

On March 18, 1992, President Najibullah announced that he had agreed to cede power as part of a negotiated arrangement with the U.N. Secretary General's Special Representative in Afghanistan, Benon Sevan. The resignation was intended to pave the way for a U.N.-brokered agreement on a transitional government. But on April 15, Najibullah was blocked from leaving the country by members of his own party who were allied with mujahidin rebels controlling Kabul's airport. Since then, Najibullah has remained in hiding in Kabul.

Two prominent members of the government were killed during the takeover. Minister of State Security Ghulam Faruq Yaqubi was assassinated shortly after Najibullah was deposed, although his death was reported as a suicide. Abdul Karim Shahdan, the chair of the National Security Court, was abducted and murdered by unknown assailants a few days later. A member of a government security force answering to the Ministry of the Interior was beaten and shot dead in front of a Reuters cameraman after being discovered hiding in a ministry office. Although the new ruling council eventually declared a general amnesty, there were other instances of summary execution and reprisal killings by various forces after the coup. In the northern city of Mazar-i Sharif, a number of government soldiers were reportedly shot dead by a militia-mujahidin coalition that took over the city.

Over the next two weeks, street battles broke out between the forces of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar and those allied with Ahmed Shah Massoud, the powerful commander of the Jamiat-e Islami organization from northeastern Afghanistan who is an ethnic Tajik. On April 28, the Interim Council of the Islamic State of Afghanistan, under the presidency of Sigbatullah Mojaddedi, assumed authority in Kabul, as agreed to by all the major Sunni mujahidin leaders at a meeting in the Pakistani border city of Peshawar after the coup. However, the council's authority did not extend beyond Kabul. Elsewhere, local governing mujahidin councils, where they existed, or individual commanders, assumed control.

The council immediately announced its intention to enforce Islamic law throughout the country. The notorious Pul-e Charkhi prison was opened, and all detainees were released. A mass grave long rumored to exist outside the prison was discovered, but no significant exhumations or forensic investigations wereconducted.

Hekmatyar rejected the authority of the Interim Council, which controlled Kabul through mainly Tajik and Uzbek security forces. In early May, his forces bombarded Kabul with rockets, killing at least 73, most of them civilians. Serious fighting also broke out between the Saudi-backed Pashtun Sunni Ittehad-e Islami party and the Iran-backed Shi'a Hezb-e Wahdat party in Kabul. Both groups engaged in deliberate abductions of civilians of the Hazara and Pashtun ethnic communities. Hundreds were killed, and as many as 1,000 detained and tortured before a cease-fire eventually took hold in June. Continuing tension between ethnic groups erupted in other violent confrontations throughout the remainder of the year.

On June 28, Burhanuddin Rabbani, the head of the Jamiat-e Islami party, became president of the interim council, peacefully taking over from Mojaddedi. Within a week, Hekmatyar, who had allied his forces with the mainly Pashtun Khalq faction of the former communist party, attempted to seize power and launched an all-out assault on the city. He evoked Pashtun nationalism in claiming that his motive was to drive out the Uzbek forces of General Abdur Rashid Dostam, who had formerly supported Najibullah and had allied with other mujahidin leaders to launch the April coup. In the month of August alone, a bombardment of artillery shells, rockets and fragmentation bombs killed over 2,000 people in Kabul, most of them civilians. Hospitals were unable to perform surgery during the assault, which contributed to the number of deaths, especially of children. A two year's supply of fuel was also destroyed. By the end of the month, 500,000 had fled the city, erecting tent camps along the roads outside Kabul. Other refugees, including Hindu and Sikh minorities, fled the country.

After weeks of bloodshed, a cease-fire took hold on August 29, and most of the few foreign diplomats and relief staff were evacuated from Kabul. At the end of the year, there was no expatriate U.N. presence in the city although U.N. personnel remained in Herat and Mazar-i Sharif. The International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc) handed over control of its hospital in Kabul to the government, citing fear for staff security. Prospects for a lasting cease-fire remained dim.

Refugees continued to return to rural areas of Afghanistan in huge numbers from Pakistan, despite the threat of fighting and the danger from land mines. According to the icrc, the frequency of mine injuries tripled after April.

In November, Hekmatyar's forces, together with guerrillas from some of the other parties, barricaded a power station in Sarobi, 30 miles east of Kabul, cutting electricity to the capital and shutting down the water supply, which is dependent on power. His forces and other mujahidin were also reported to have prevented food convoys from reaching the city.

On November 23, Minister of Food Sulaiman Yaarin reported that the city's food and fuel depots were empty. There were also reports of food shortages in central and eastern Afghanistan and in Herat.

The Right to Monitor

No known domestic human rights organizations were in place in Afghanistan at the end of 1992. The country was in such a state of chaos that even had such organizations been allowed to function by law, their ability to do so would have been limited by the severity of the fighting. By year's end, Asia Watch had received reports of arrests in Kabul of persons suspected of opposing the ruling council or elements of it, including Zia Nassery, a U.S. citizen of Afghan origin who was detained in October.

U.S. Policy

Despite the substantial role the U.S. played in supporting the mujahidin throughout the war, the U.S. administration paid little attention to the crisis in Afghanistan after the April coup. Even Hekmatyar's brutal attack on Kabul in August, carried out with U.S.- and Saudi-financed weaponry, merited only a belated condemnation more than a month after it occurred.

On January 1, 1992, the agreement signed in September 1991 between the U.S. and the then-Soviet Union banning supply of lethal aid to their respective clients in Afghanistan went into force. The agreement also called for the withdrawal of major weapons systems provided by the two superpowers, but U.S. efforts to secure the return of Stinger missiles that had been supplied to the mujahidin proved fruitless. For their part, the Russians also failed to retrieve Scud missiles supplied to the Najibullah government, some of which were seized by Hekmatyar. In this period, Hekmatyar-who had stockpiled large quantities of arms during the war-also reportedly continued to receive support from former officers of Pakistan's Directorate of Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) and other sources in Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and elsewhere in the Middle East.

For fiscal year 1992, the U.S. requested $60 million for cross-border assistance and $6 million in food aid to be delivered to Afghanistan through the World Food Program. The administration also requested $20 million in aid for Afghan refugees in Pakistan and reconstruction of the Afghan countryside. On April 8, the U.S. announced that it would provide 10,000 metric tons of wheat for needy residents of the capital.

In April, as the mujahidin were advancing on Kabul, the U.S. welcomed their success after what State Department spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler called "a long and bitter struggle for self-determination which won admiration and support from around the world." At the same time, the U.S. stressed its support for a strong U.N. role in resolving the conflict and urged all parties "to use the utmost restraint...[and] not resort to violence." In June, the State Department welcomed the "peaceful transfer of power from Mojaddedi to Rabbani," and again called on "the Afghan factions to continue a peaceful political process which will lead to a government acceptable to the Afghan people." The statement also called on the Afghan parties to "honor the cease-fire" but neglected to acknowledge that the most serious threat to the "peaceful process" came from the forces of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, who long received much of the weaponry financed by the U.S. andits allies.

Hekmatyar's attack on Kabul in August received scant comment from U.S. officials at the time. It was not until October 2 that the State Department issued a strong statement naming Hekmatyar and condemning his "recent savage bombardment." It added that "these actions, taken in pursuit of personal ambitions, were responsible for the deaths of hundreds of innocent people in Kabul. We condemned these ruthless actions and will continue to oppose any one who uses violence to subvert the political process."

The Work of Asia Watch

On May 28, Asia Watch appealed to the interim council to take urgent steps to safeguard the rights of all Afghans and ensure that the armed forces abide by standards of human rights and humanitarian law. On June 5, Asia Watch and Middle East Watch jointly issued a press release condemning continuing attacks on civilians and urging Saudi Arabia, Iran and Pakistan to use their leverage with various Afghan factions to end the bloodshed. Asia Watch also met with U.N. Special Representative Benon Sevan and senior U.S. officials to discuss concerns about the humanitarian crisis in the country.

BURMA (Myanmar)

Human Rights Developments

Burma (Myanmar) in 1992 remained one of the human rights disasters in Asia. Nobel Peace Prize winner Aung San Suu Kyi continued under house arrest, and an unknown number of political dissidents remained in prison. Reports of military abuses against members of ethnic minority groups were frequent. Certain positive measures were taken by Burma's military junta, the State Law and Order Restoration Council (slorc), such as the release of several hundred alleged political prisoners and slorc's accession to the Geneva Conventions of 1949. But the changes were largely superficial, and human rights violations persisted unchecked.

The year began with one of the most intensive dry-season offensives ever mounted by Burmese troops against the minorities living along the borders of Thailand, China and Bangladesh. By June, over 300,000 refugees from Arakan State, most of them members of the Rohingya Muslim minority, had fled into Bangladesh, with horrifying accounts of rape, forced labor and religious persecution. The Burmese government claimed that the Bengali-speaking refugees were illegal immigrants and never belonged in Burma in the first place.

In early April, Jan Eliasson, the U.N. Secretary General's new humanitarian relief coordinator, went to Bangladesh and Burma to discuss the crisis, visit the border area, and secure the safe and voluntary return of the refugees. Shortly afterward, Burma and Bangladesh reached an agreement that set the terms for the repatriation but contained no provisions for international monitoring on the Burmese side of the border. The repatriationwas to begin May 15, but the first refugees did not return until September 22, when 47 refugees were sent back without the knowledge of the Bangladesh office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (unhcr). A second group of 63 returned on October 12, this time after having been interviewed by unhcr officials. Although the latter were able to verify that the return of the 63 was indeed voluntary, there were no international monitors on the Burmese side to ensure that those repatriated would not be persecuted.

As of November, the Bangladeshi government had submitted to the Burmese government a list of 125,635 names of refugees it wished to repatriate; the Burmese government agreed to accept 13,060 names on the list, but neither the unhcr nor the Bangladeshi government was aware of the criteria used to select those deemed "eligible for repatriation." There is no indication that those named on the list had agreed to return. In response to domestic pressure on the Bangladeshi government to resolve the refugee issue, the repatriation was speeded up in November and nearly 1,000 people were sent back on November 25, some of them against their will, according to unhcr and relief workers.

slorc announced on April 28 the suspension of its fighting with the Karen insurgents. Although fighting did stop through the rainy season, by September Burmese troops had resumed military operations against the Karen, an ethnic minority living in a province adjoining northwest Thailand. The war sent hundreds of refugees into Thailand with accounts of forced labor, forcible relocations of entire villages, and summary executions. At the same time, Burmese troops reportedly built up their forces around the Mon territory in southeastern Burma, and accelerated operations against the Karenni, yet another ethnic group living along the northern Thai border. At the end of the year, minority leaders and relief workers were preparing for the possibility of a heavy influx of refugees, many from the estimated 100,000 internally displaced in Burma.

slorc made a concerted effort to improve its pariah image by making several superficial political changes. None substantially altered the repressive nature of the government. In April, General Than Shwe replaced General Saw Maung as prime minister, chair of slorc and Armed Forces commander-in-chief. Prior to his appointment, General Than Shwe was deputy commander of the Defense Service and army chief and known to be unswervingly loyal to Burmese strongman Ne Win who remained in control of the government even after his formal resignation in July 1988.

Also in April, slorc issued Declaration No. 11/92, announcing that political detainees who posed no threat to state security would be promptly released. The statement was the first acknowledgment by slorc that it held political prisoners. By late 1992, over 300 prisoners had been released, including at least 33 who had been elected to parliament in May 1990, but it was not clear that all 300 were political prisoners.

Declaration 11/92 also stated that "slorc will hold talks with the leaders of elected representatives from legal standing political parties and independent representatives within two months and that a national convention will be called within sixmonths in order to lay down basic principles to draw up a firm constitution." Over 100 of those elected to parliament in May 1990 had already been disqualified for a variety of spurious reasons. Of the 366 members of parliament who had not been disqualified, 29 were selected to participate in the first so-called "talks" held in June and July to discuss who would be invited to the national convention. Declaration 11/92 seemed to be an attempt to answer charges by the international community that slorc was making no progress toward handing power over to the parliament elected in May 1990, but slorc clearly had no intention of overseeing a transition to civilian rule. Indeed, on October 3, slorc announced that any new constitution would ensure "participation of the armed forces in the leading role of national politics."

Aung San Suu Kyi, now in her fourth year of house arrest, was allowed family visits for the first time in June and July 1992. However, in an interview with the BBC in Rangoon, Major General Khin Nyunt made clear that there was no role for her in Burmese politics and that the government had not changed its attitude toward her.

On August 24, Burma acceded to the Geneva Conventions of 1949. However, by the end of the year, the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc) still was not permitted to visit prisons or provide medical or other humanitarian services to those in areas affected by the conflict between the Burmese military and various ethnic insurgencies.

Universities and colleges were reopened in August, after slorc had forced all university teachers back to school earlier in the year for courses on how to enforce discipline. The course included a loyalty test, and those who failed were fired. Over the year, according to the government-run newspaper, Working People's Daily, 160 lecturers from Rangoon University and 50 doctors from the Ministry of Health were fired on loyalty grounds.

The Right To Monitor

The United Nations Human Rights Commission passed a resolution on March 3, condemning Burma for human rights violations and appointing a Special Rapporteur to give a public report to the next meeting of the United Nations General Assembly and Human Rights Commission. However, the rapporteur, Professor Yozo Yokota, was not granted permission by slorc to visit Burma until December 1992.

No domestic human rights organizations are allowed to exist, nor is independent monitoring permitted within the country.

U.S. Policy

The Bush administration in 1992 issued strong public condemnations of Burma's human rights practices, labeling the government one of the worst violators in the world. It also took some steps to increase international political pressure on slorc-particularly among Burma's Southeast Asian partners-as well as to respond to the refugee crisis on the Bangladeshi border. However, the administration failed to impose any new economicsanctions against Burma or to push slorc's Chinese sponsors to stop supplying arms.

The State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in 1991, issued in January 1992, noted that slorc had taken "further steps in 1991 to prolong its rule until a constitution and civilian leadership acceptable to the military can be produced. Such preconditions could well take years to fulfill." Later in 1992, the administration expressed skepticism toward slorc's "dialogue" with certain political groups. While acknowledging slorc's limited reforms, including the release of some political prisoners, the U.S. government continued to call for the release of all political figures, including Aung San Suu Kyi, and the establishment of a democratically elected, civilian government. The State Department also publicly condemned the harsh sentences given to eight students sentenced by military tribunals in September.

The Administration once again refused to certify Burma for anti-narcotics assistance. The State Department's 1992 International Narcotics Control Strategy Report said that Burma was the largest source of opium and heroin worldwide, and that the production of illicit drugs has doubled since slorc took power.

At the United Nations Human Rights Commission, the U.S. government actively supported the resolution on Burma. The administration also indicated its commitment to press for passage of a resolution at the U.N. General Assembly in December.

Congress urged the Bush administration to take additional measures to isolate Burma. A Senate resolution adopted on May 19 took note of Chinese arms sales to Burma, a European Community (ec) arms embargo, and the ec's decision to withdraw military attaches from Rangoon, in urging the President to seek an international arms embargo. It also asked him to instruct the Secretary of State to "call privately and publicly for an end to China's military sales and economic support to Burma until such time as all political prisoners are unconditionally released." A similar resolution was passed by the House on June 2, urging the President to "seek a mandatory arms embargo on Burma." The House action was sponsored by Representative Stephen Solarz, who said such an embargo could help end the military assault driving refugees across Burma's borders, and that concern about Chinese arms "appears to be shared by most governments in the region." While the administration had imposed a ban on U.S. arms to Burma following the 1988 crackdown, it did not pursue international action because of its reluctance to confront China.

A House Foreign Affairs Committee bipartisan staff delegation traveled to the region in April and issued a report making recommendations for U.S. policy, including the option of comprehensive economic sanctions on trade and investment. But the Administration explicitly ruled out any restrictions on U.S. investment in Burma when its new Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, William Clark, was questioned by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. "The Administration currently has no further economic sanctions under active consideration," Clark said. "We should not take unilateral,purely symbolic actions which harm U.S. business interests and which the Burmese regime can ignore without difficulty." In fact, there were additional U.S. investments in Burma in 1992, including two oil contracts signed in June. The State Department failed to see the utility of U.S. sanctions as part of a broader effort to encourage Burma's largest trading partners, especially Japan and Southeast Asian nations, to take similar steps. The Australian government, acting on its own initiative, discussed with the U.S. the possibility of implementing trade and economic sanctions, but as of November 1992 no concrete actions had been taken.

In concert with other Western governments and Australia, the U.S. made a strong appeal for renewed pressure on Burma at the post-ministerial conference of foreign ministers of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (asean) held in Manila in July. Secretary of State James Baker said, "Collectively, our message to the Burmese military must be loud and clear: release all political prisoners immediately...." Fifteen prominent members of Congress wrote to Baker before the meeting urging him to raise Burma at the asean conference. But the members of asean renewed their commitment to "constructive engagement" and rejected appeals to put pressure on Rangoon, although Malaysia did block Burma's attempt to attend the meeting as an observer, citing Burma's poor human rights record.

The U.S. responded to the Rohingya refugee crisis by expressing support for the efforts of the unhcr and the return of refugees under safe conditions. The U.S. also provided $3 million through the U.S. Emergency Refugee and Migration Assistance Fund for relief efforts in Bangladesh, plus another $191,419 for health and sanitation projects. Members of Congress from both the House the Senate wrote to Bangladeshi and Burmese authorities to urge a suspension of repatriation until unhcr is fully involved in the process, and firm guarantees are in place to ensure the protection of those who return.

The Bush administration's attempt to send a new U.S. envoy to Burma was stalled in March and remained in limbo at the end of the year. Acting on the nomination of Parker Borg, a career diplomat, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee unanimously recommended that the Senate not consider his nomination unless the administration publicly endorsed the assumption of power by the civilian government elected in May 1990, withdrew the U.S. military attach in Rangoon, supported a U.N. arms embargo and opposed further U.N. Development Program funding for Burma. The administration objected to the precedent of the committee stipulating conditions on an ambassadorial appointment, and also maintained that it was essential to keep a military attach in Rangoon to monitor Burmese military activities; it did not express opposition to the other terms of the committee's recommendations.

The Work of Asia Watch

Asia Watch worked in several ways in 1992 to raise the public profile of human rights concerns in Burma and to advocate U.S. policy options. Asia Watch sent several missions to Thailand toinvestigate abuses against Burmese citizens and published four reports on its findings: Human Rights in Burma (Myanmar) in 1991; Abuses Against Burmese Refugees in Thailand; Burma: Rape, Forced Labor and Religious Persecution in Northern Arakan; and Changes in Burma? The reports were widely distributed among the press, diplomatic community and parliamentarians, in the U.S., Europe, Asia and Australia.

In both New York and Washington, Asia Watch coordinated frequent roundtable discussions on Burma for representatives of dozens of organizations, both governmental and nongovernmental. When a new ambassador to Burma was under consideration in February, Asia Watch presented testimony on U.S. policy to the Senate Subcommittee on East Asian and Pacific Affairs. Throughout the year, Asia Watch staff offices responded to Congressional inquiries and provided input for resolutions adopted in the House and Senate. They stayed in close touch with the State Department and wrote to Secretary of State James Baker, urging him to raise the question of Burmese human rights abuses at a conference with asean foreign ministers in July.

Japanese policy toward Burma was a key issue in discussions with government officials and others in Tokyo during an Asia Watch mission in March.
CAMBODIA

Human Rights Developments

The October 1991 peace settlement, which promised to end Cambodia's civil war and culminate in "free and fair elections," was on the verge of unravelling a year later due to the Khmer Rouge's refusal to disarm and open its bases to U.N. supervision. As a result, the three other armies-the Khmer Rouge, funcinpec (the Sihanoukist organization) and the Khmer People's National Liberation Front (kpnlf)-demobilized in only token respects, and U.N. deployment in the Khmer Rouge zones was limited to military observers whose movement was restricted. The arrival of U.N. peacekeepers did bring an end to a series of political killings and attacks in the capital, but political violence continued in the provinces along with periodic military clashes in Kompong Thom and Preah Vihear provinces.

The U.N. Transitional Authority in Cambodia (untac) got off to a late start, with the arrival of Special Representative Yasushi Akashi in March 1992, some five months after the accords were signed. Prior to his arrival, Phnom Penh was rocked by a series of violent demonstrations and political attacks, including the near-lynching of Khmer Rouge representative Khieu Samphan in November 1991; student demonstrations against corruption in December 1991, involving some violence, which ended with military forces firing into the crowd; the murder of Tea Bun Long, a government official outspoken against corruption, and the shooting attack on Ung Phan, a former political prisoner who intended to form a new political party in January 1992; and in March, the mysterious death of Yang Horn, another former political prisoner who suffered a blow to his head shortly afterbeing summoned with Ung Phan to an encounter with his former jailers who warned both not to engage in political activity.

The late start and the inflexible schedule culminating in May 1993 elections has forced untac into a race against time to lay the groundwork for the transition to an elected government. Critical steps for protecting human rights, such as de-mining arable land, developing legal guarantees, constructing a civilian justice system, and educating administrators and police to respect human rights, were getting started with only nine months to go before the elections. Khmer Rouge intransigence has blocked the plan to disband the various armies and disarm soldiers, vastly complicating the U.N.'s task. With all sides preparing for a possible revival of the civil war and bands of armed soldiers still at large, goals such as securing free movement in the country, reintegration of refugees and factional zones, and political neutrality are more difficult to achieve.

Despite these obstacles, significant progress toward improving human rights has taken place. The Phnom Penh government, or the State of Cambodia (soc), has been the most cooperative in opening its territory to U.N. supervision, with the ironic consequence that it has been the subject of the greatest number of complaints filed with the U.N.'s human rights administrators. After initial resistance, as described below, the central authorities have been generally forthcoming in cooperating with U.N. investigations into human rights complaints.

In late 1991, the Phnom Penh government began releasing hundreds of political prisoners, even though it resisted supervision by the International Committee of the Red Cross until January 1992. untac has now established access to both civilian and military prisons, and a Prison Control Commission has been established on untac's recommendation to oversee prison conditions and review the basis for detention of all prisoners in government custody. The government has also agreed to end abusive practices such as prolonged shackling and dark cells, and the World Food Programme is preparing to provide emergency subsistence rations to all prisoners in Phnom Penh jails. However, the discovery of several clandestine soc detention centers in and around Battambang in mid-1992 raised concerns about the soc's commitment to these reforms.

untac had no regular access to prisons maintained by the other Cambodian factions. There were widespread reports of summary executions of prisoners in the custody of the various military factions, including the kpnlf and funcinpec. The Khmer Rouge claimed to maintain no prisons, and instead to turn its prisoners over to Thai authorities, but lack of access to Khmer Rouge areas made that claim impossible to verify.

untac did not succeed in completely resolving the issue of identity cards, which are necessary for movement and employment in the soc, and which normally are issued in conjunction with the creation of political dossiers. Returning refugees could not obtain identity cards without bribes, and were forced to rely for photographic identification on old ration books that clearly reveal the faction-controlled camp from which they come. untacsettled for a plan whereby provincial authorities issue temporary cards without photographs while the government processes permanent cards (without political interviews). The issue of political dossiers keyed to identity cards for long-term residents in the soc has yet to be addressed.

untac supervision of the Phnom Penh government's legal system and the police force began in mid-1992. In the funcinpec and kpnlf zones, where untac civil administrators arrived in August, there were virtually no civilian institutions of any kind, making untac's task of establishing neutral administration of justice that much more difficult.

The repatriation to Cambodia of over 300,000 refugees from the Thai border was another task slated to be accomplished before elections. At year's end, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (unhcr) had transported over 200,000 refugees back to Cambodia safely, itself a significant accomplishment. In the process, however, the repatriation plan had been reformulated several times, weakening safeguards that were to ensure free choice of destination on the part of refugees. The diminished protection was significant because the political factions controlling the Thai border camps were seeking to maintain their control by coercing some refugees to resettle in their small "zones" near the border.

Incitement to racial violence against the ethnic Vietnamese minority in Cambodia was another problem facing the U.N. Several massacres of ethnic Vietnamese civilians occurred after untac's arrival, including a brutal attack on men, women and children at Tuk Meas, in Kampot province, in July. The attacks were attributed to the Khmer Rouge, which denied responsibility even as its radio applauded the killings. The Khmer Rouge continued to demand the expulsion of purported Vietnamese soldiers disguised as civilians, despite the U.N.'s assertion that no Vietnamese military units had been identified.

untac's response to the threat of racial violence was to criminalize incitement, defamation, insult, and false news in a new penal code for the country. This approach established serious limits on freedom of expression beyond those permitted by international law. Commonly used epithets can now subject the speaker to prison time, as can deliberately distorted reporting or mischaracterization of untac. These measures set an ominous precedent for regulation of speech under the next Cambodian government.

Efforts to remove land mines from Cambodia have been slow to start and limited in scope, although de-mining was once a precondition for the repatriation process to move forward. Several strategic routes have been cleared, including large parts of Route 5, which runs from Phnom Penh to the Thai border, but major efforts still await the establishment of the Cambodian Mine Action Center, a joint effort by untac and the Supreme National Council, the sovereign authority which includes representatives from all four Cambodian factions.

In May the Supreme National Council acceded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.The U.N. did not at any time recommend accession to the Optional Protocol of the Civil and Political Rights Covenant, which allows individuals to submit grievances to the Human Rights Committee, but told Asia Watch that it would make such a recommendation in the future. In September, the snc acceded to other major human rights conventions: the Convention on the Rights of the Child; the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment; the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women; and the Convention and Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees and its subsequent Protocol.

The Right to Monitor

In the past, none of the Cambodian parties tolerated serious criticism of its human rights record by Cambodians under its control, and none had any mechanism to investigate or redress rights abuses.

The peace settlement and the presence of U.N. monitors dramatically changed this situation, particularly in the State of Cambodia, where cooperation and access are most advanced. untac's human rights office established an investigative unit along with the untac civil police, and as of August had received almost 200 complaints. It remains to be seen whether the kpnlf and funcinpec will cooperate in investigations in the areas that they control, and the Khmer Rouge has not granted access to its areas.

The first independent human rights organization in the State of Cambodia formed in January 1992. Composed of former political prisoners and intellectuals, The Association for Human Rights in Cambodia (adhoc) describes its mandate as "to eliminate all human rights violations in Cambodia and to try by every means available to avoid a return of the massacres and tortures and all inhuman practices that were widespread in the past."

The attack on Ung Phan, an early adhoc sympathizer, forced the group to take a low profile at first, but following the establishment of a significant U.N. presence in Phnom Penh, the group began publishing a newsletter and organized a series of seminars on human rights with the cooperation of the untac human rights component. Nevertheless, members of the group still receive threats. On May 1, an adhoc member in Prey Veng province was arrested, and the application papers and photographs of over 30 prospective adhoc members were confiscated from him by the police. The incident was resolved after untac intervention, but members in Prey Veng were warned by the authorities that if they continued to report to the U.N., they might "win for a little while, but meet with an accident later."

Other human rights groups also came into being, including the Cambodian League for the Defense of Human Rights, and Human Rights Vigilance in Cambodia. On the Thai-Cambodian border, several human rights groups began to function in the major kpnlf camp, Site 2, most of which had links to the faction. Human rights classes were held under U.N. auspices in several of the camps. In Site 8, the most open of the Khmer Rouge camps, refugees told Asia Watch that while there was great interest in human rights education, it was too dangerous to establish anindependent human rights group.

U.S. Policy

The 33 nations attending the Tokyo Conference on Rehabilitation and Reconstruction, which convened in June, pledged $880 million toward Cambodia's development, but not without expressing "serious concern" over the Khmer Rouge's refusal to cooperate with the peace plan. On July 21, the U.S. joined in a unanimous U.N. Security Council resolution forbidding the Khmer Rouge to benefit from any of this promised development aid should it continue to withhold its cooperation with the U.N. This sanction is not expected to have much effect, given the considerable wealth that the Khmer Rouge has accumulated, and continues to amass, from logging and gem-mining concessions in the enclaves it controls. The U.S. has so far been reluctant to pressure Thailand to seal its borders to the lucrative trade between the Khmer Rouge and Thai military and business leaders. In November, the co-chairmen of the Paris Conference on Cambodia (the foreign ministers of France and Indonesia) sponsored talks in Beijing with the Khmer Rouge in a final effort to gain their cooperation. The Khmer Rouge did not yield, and on November 30, the U.S. joined the Security Council in barring the delivery of oil to and the export of gems and timber from areas under Khmer Rouge control. However, enforcement of the sanctions depends entirely on Thailand, which opposes the presence of untac on its side of the border to monitor sanctions.

Following the signing of the Paris Accords, the United States dropped its embargo of Cambodia, and by the end of the year, major development institutions such as the World Bank and the U.N. Development Program preparing to commit funds. The World Bank sent a team to Cambodia in March and April 1992, which recommended a financial rehabilitation program of at least $350 million for 1992-94, not including technical assistance and humanitarian aid. The team's report, published in June, noted that in light of the current situation in Cambodia, "preventing a further deterioration of basic public services and gradually improving their operations within the next two to three years would itself constitute a major achievement."

The United States, which financed the non-communist resistance armies (kpnlf and funcinpec) since 1979, continued to allocate money to these parties through the U.S. Agency for International Development (usaid). According to a March 1991 usaid "strategy document," one of the Bush administration's long-term objectives was to "prepare the non-communists to govern Cambodia." The U.S. provided administrative subsidies to the kpnlf and funcinpec and paid for their administrative costs in participating in the Supreme National Council, including the rent for their Phnom Penh headquarters. Proposed fiscal year 1992 allocations included $3 million to support "democratic groups and projects" and $5 million in direct aid to the kpnlf and funcinpec. Traditionally, the U.S. has considered these parties more inclined toward democratic development than the others, their lack of democratic institutions notwithstanding.

usaid allocation requests over the last two years show ashift toward balancing the funds allocated to resistance areas with those provided throughout the rest of Cambodia. In fiscal year 1991, $10 million was allocated to nongovernmental agencies for general humanitarian projects in Cambodia, $5 million for programs supporting women and children, and $10 million for the resistance. The fiscal year 1992 budget included $5 million in continued support for women and children and $11 million for rural road reconstruction throughout Cambodia. The administration continued to refuse to provide direct aid to the Phnom Penh government, even while recognizing that some form of administrative subsidy was essential to keep basic services running.

The foreign aid bill adopted in October for fiscal year 1993 included $20 million for humanitarian and development assistance through international relief groups, U.N. agencies, and private and U.S. voluntary organizations to meet priority needs as recommended by usaid, together with an additional $5 million to provide humanitarian assistance to children and war victims in Cambodia. The legislation required the administration, within 120 days of the bill's passage, to conduct an on-site assessment of the needs for economic development as well as the eradication of land mines. The law also mandated a cutoff of aid to any Cambodian organization cooperating the Khmer Rouge military operations, and required a report from the President by May 1, 1993 on all violations of the U.N. peace agreement by the Khmer Rouge and the U.S. response.

The Work of Asia Watch

In September 1992, Asia Watch published Political Control, Human Rights, and the U.N. Mission in Cambodia, a 73-page report based on a mission to Cambodia and the Thai-Cambodian border camps in April and May 1992. The report discusses the means by which each Cambodian faction has maintained political control over Cambodians, and the obstacles the U.N. faces as it tries to loosen that control, establish respect for fundamental human rights, and create a politically neutral atmosphere for elections.

While in Cambodia, members of the Asia Watch delegation met with diplomats, U.N. officials, representatives of the four Cambodian parties, human rights activists, ordinary Cambodians, and refugees. The delegation also brought to the attention of the U.N. a Phnom Penh municipal order permitting house-to-house searches by the police for "election registration," which was being used to harass members of opposition parties. Asia Watch also opposed a restrictive press law passed by the State of Cambodia's National Assembly which subjected publishers, printers and distributors to close government supervision. Both regulations were suspended by untac.
CHINA

Human Rights Developments

The Chinese government throughout 1992 maintained its hard-linestance toward political dissent. Any hope that Deng Xiaoping's renewed campaign for economic reform would bring about positive political change was ended on October 12 at the opening session of the 14th National Party Congress. Jiang Zemin, general secretary of the Chinese Communist Party (ccp), warned Party members, "We must not tolerate liberalism or any defiance of organization and discipline."

Official insistence that the book was closed on the 1989 pro-democracy movement did not prevent new arrests, arbitrary detention, pre-judged political trials, torture, and other human rights abuses in 1992. On July 21, in the most important political trial in China since the Gang of Four was tried 12 years earlier, the Beijing Intermediate People's Court sentenced Bao Tong, a leading reformer and former aide to deposed Party Secretary Zhao Ziyang, to seven years in prison. On August 5, Bao's assistant, Gao Shan, was sentenced to four years in prison, and on August 25, Wu Jiaxiang, an influential economic theorist, received a three-year prison term.

At least 55 people were arrested in 1992 for peaceful political activities. Some were associated with pro-democracy organizations, such as the Socialist Democratic Party of China (sdpc), which was founded in 1991, is based in Lanzhou, Gansu Province, and promotes democratic reform and the release of all political prisoners; the China Progressive Alliance, committed to non-violent opposition to a one-party system; and the Free Labor Union of China (fluc).

Others arrested during the year included Liao Jia'an and Wang Shengli, both graduate students at People's University in Beijing. In early June, they were held in "shelter for investigation," a form of administrative detention, in connection with the distribution of Trends of History, a book of essays in support of the reformist faction of the Communist Party. Legally published in April by People's University Press, the book was then criticized by hard-line officials and withdrawn from circulation. In addition to staging a reading of the book, Liao and Wang had founded a student organization, the "Study Club" at People's University. Although the organization was formed in accordance with university regulations, it came under scrutiny because of reformist political commentary in its journal, Dajia (Everyone), since banned, which the two men edited.

On June 3, Wang Wanxing was seized by police in Tiananmen Square for unfurling a banner condemning the 1989 massacre, and was later sent to a psychiatric hospital.

Shen Tong, a student activist during the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests who had fled to the United States, returned to China to establish a branch of his U.S.-based pro-democracy organization and was arrested in Beijing on September 1, hours before a scheduled press conference. He was released and deported back to the United States on October 24. Several dissidents in China were arrested for meeting with Shen: at least two in Beijing, one of whom was later released, two in Hunan, and two in Tianjin.

Beijing continued to exert tight control over alleged "splittist activities," of nationalist or unofficial religiousgroups.

In Tibet, suppression of pro-independence activities escalated at the end of February when groups of policemen conducted surprise raids at the homes of Lhasa residents. Record numbers of demonstrations were reported, not only in Lhasa but also in rural areas. The chair of the People's Government in Xinjiang, acknowledging "activities and sabotage" against communist rule, called for harsh punishment of national separatists.

Despite the well publicized "humanitarian" releases of a few elderly bishops, arrests of Roman Catholic priests continued. In April, Bishop Joseph Fan Xueyan, the most influential bishop in the underground church, died under mysterious circumstances. Chinese authorities ignored international requests for an official investigation. Members of the Protestant "house church" movement also were harassed and detained. On June 15, in the Hu Guan District of Chang Zhi, Shanxi Province, 12 church leaders and laymen were arrested after a raid on a gathering of more than 100 Christians. According to eyewitnesses, Public Security Bureau personnel sealed the doors of the house and assaulted those inside with electric batons. Those arrested were interrogated and beaten. Seven of the 12 were released after several weeks; the others remained under house arrest.

Many prisoners were detained under appalling conditions and routinely tortured or denied medical care. Li Guiren and Ren Wanding, two dissident intellectuals sentenced in 1991, and Xu Wenli, a Democracy Wall activist in prison since 1981, were in urgent need of medical treatment at the end of 1992. Ren had retinal and cataract problems; Li was too weak to walk; and Xu had lost control of his bladder.

Political prisoners in Lingyuan No. 2 Labor Reform Detachment in Liaoning Province, known to the outside world as Lingyuan Motor Vehicle General Assembly Plant, were severely abused. Inmates smuggled out accounts of forced labor, seven days a week, twelve to fourteen hours a day, as well as graphic details of torture. Lingyuan is one of several prisons that continue to manufacture goods for export. Concern over prison exports that violate U.S. law led to the signing by the United States and China on April 7 of a Memorandum of Understanding on investigation of such exports.

The Chinese government continued the practice of "forced in-camp employment," the phrase used to describe making prisoners stay on after their sentences expire to meet production needs. A former prisoner from Hunan reported that a fellow inmate had his urban residency permit cancelled after his prison term ended so that he was forced to continue working in the prison factory. His daily working hours and production quota were virtually the same as while he was in formal custody.

Persecution after prison continued in 1992. Released dissidents were dismissed from their work units or assigned work inconsistent with their training and experience. Some, such as Li Minqi, a former Beijing University student who spoke at a campus rally commemorating the first anniversary of the 1989 crackdown and served two years in prison, were denied permission tocontinue their education after their release. Others lost their housing or were forced to leave their urban residences. Many were restricted to their home villages. In addition, close surveillance continued of 1989 dissidents, even those who have never been charged, as did discrimination against the families of those still imprisoned.

On August 11, as part of a continuing campaign to improve its human rights image, the Information Office of the State Council issued a White Paper on Criminal Reform in China, which claimed that the government had succeeded in transforming criminals into law-abiding citizens by productive labor and "humane handling of prisoners in accordance with the law." At the same time, however, the government acknowledged a substantial increase in violations of individual rights by law enforcement agencies.

Some key dissidents were allowed to leave China in 1992, such as Han Dongfang, leader of the 1989 independent labor movement, and Liu Qing, a pro-democracy activist who had been released in December 1989 after serving a ten-year prison sentence, only to be arrested again for continuing to demand respect for human rights. Others, such as Hou Xiaotian, wife of imprisoned intellectual Wang Juntao, were prohibited from leaving.

Controls on freedom of expression remained, despite official calls for a loosening of restrictions on intellectual and artistic expression. The domestic ban was lifted on two films that had received critical acclaim abroad, Ju Dou and Raise the Red Lantern, but another film, The Blue Kite, was banned for its politically sensitive content.

In January, a State Education directive ordered universities to check all dissertations written in the past five years for "political problems." In May, Wang Jun, a reporter for the overseas edition of Renmin Ribao (People's Daily) was arrested on charges of giving information to the foreign media. Prior to the opening of the Party Congress in Beijing in October, police launched a crackdown on illegal publications, arresting one man, closing more than 40 unlicensed book stalls, and seizing 11,000 published items, only 74 of which were labeled obscene. According to the official Beijing Evening News, the move was intended "to create a good social environment for reform and opening up."

Foreign journalists continued to be restricted and harassed. Chinese authorities required that any coverage of events in a public place first be approved by government officials. On April 30, James Miles, a journalist with the British Broadcasting Corporation, had his press credentials temporarily revoked when he covered a protest in Tiananmen Square by European politicians. In May, officials from the State Security Ministry took personal papers and a notebook from the office safe of Lena Sun, Beijing correspondent for The Washington Post. That same month, the Chinese army issued standing orders to its soldiers to stop foreigners from reporting on incidents of "rebellion" by, as necessary, confiscating notes, recordings or videotapes or taking the individuals into custody. On June 3, two foreign newsmen in Tiananmen Square were beaten by plainclothesmen for photographinga lone demonstrator. One, an ABC journalist, required hospitalization for a suspected spinal injury. In August, journalists trying to cover the rush of would-be stockholders to get share application forms in Shenzhen, the center of China's special economic zone, were harassed, with at least one detained and others turned back at the Hong Kong border.

The government reinforced its ban on independent trade unions as labor unrest intensified. The Free Labor Union of China (fluc), organized in December 1991 for the purpose of promoting the economic and political rights of workers, began distributing leaflets in early 1992 to some 2,500 factories, urging workers to form their own unions. In May and June 1992, fluc members were secretly arrested, and the organization was effectively smashed.

Dissident labor leader Han Dongfang applied for permission to hold a one-man demonstration on March 23 to press for an amendment to a new Trade Union Law that would guarantee the right of workers to organize freely. The application was turned down. When the Trade Union Law was finally passed by the National People's Congress in April, state-sponsored amendments ensured that the All China Federation of Trade Unions, a Party organization, remained the sole legal union.

The Right to Monitor

While no domestic human rights organization was permitted to operate in China, underground groups in several different provinces, including Hunan, risked severe consequences to get information on prisoners to the outside world. Veteran human rights advocates such as Ren Wanding, Wei Jingsheng and Yulo Dawa Tsering remained in prison. No international human rights organization was permitted to conduct fact-finding missions in China.

U.S. Policy

Bush administration officials pursued a two-track policy toward China in 1992. They argued that "engagement, rather than confrontation" was the most effective way to encourage change in China, hoping that economic reform would eventually lead to political reform. But when it came to protecting U.S. business interests in China, President Bush was willing to take a hard-line approach to extract concessions from Beijing. While refusing to impose sanctions or increase pressure on Beijing to promote human rights, he risked a multibillion dollar trade war by threatening tough sanctions to promote U.S. commercial interests.

By the end of 1992, the policy had failed, and the human rights "dialogue," touted by the President when he renewed China's Most Favored Nation (mfn) trade status in June, was moribund. But the tough stance on commercial concerns bore fruit: on October 9, Beijing signed an unprecedented, far-reaching agreement on market access to avert some $3.9 billion in sanctions on Chinese exports to the United States.

The President signaled his determination to bring Beijing's hard-line leaders back into the international fold when he met privately with Premier Li Peng during a U.N. Security Council session in New York on January 31, despite vocal, bipartisanopposition from Congress. Twenty-two senators wrote to President Bush in a vain effort to convince him that such a meeting was "inconsistent with U.S. policy...while the harsh post-Tiananmen crackdown ordered by Mr. Li continues." The meeting was a propaganda coup for Li Peng: the official Chinese news agency boasted after his return to Beijing that Li had set the West straight about human rights.

The President maintained his firm opposition to human rights conditions on mfn status for China and twice fought off efforts by a broad, bipartisan majority in Congress to attach such conditions. The Chinese government rewarded him by continuing its repressive policies, with only token prisoner releases and the publication of two "white papers," on criminal reform and Tibet.

On March 2, President Bush vetoed legislation requiring specific improvements in human rights, trade and nuclear proliferation before the President could extend mfn status to China for another year (a decision made each June, under existing law.) The legislation had broad support in the House (357 for, 61 against) but failed on March 18 to garner sufficient backing in the Senate (60 for, 38 against) to override the veto.

A second mfn struggle later in the year dramatized even more sharply the differences between the two branches of government over China policy. A new bill outlining conditions for renewing in 1993, modeled on a proposal by Human Rights Watch, took the administration's own approach to trade issues and applied them to human rights. In December 1991, U.S. Trade Representative Carla Hills had threatened to impose double tariffs on a selected group of key Chinese exports if China failed to respect U.S. patents and copyrights. Once the names of the targeted products appeared in the Federal Register, Beijing said that U.S. demands would be met. In an op-ed in The New York Times, Human Rights Watch proposed that tariff increases be imposed selectively unless human rights improvements took place, and that government-owned industries be singled out for particular penalty.

Bills based on this proposal were introduced in the House and Senate, but even this more selective, moderate approach to sanctions drew strong opposition from the administration. Its spokespersons argued that this targeted approach was "simply unworkable" on technical grounds, because of the supposed difficulty of identifying state-run enterprises, and that China's leaders were "unlikely to meet" the conditions, thus making their imposition tantamount to revocation.

Yet throughout the summer, as talks on market access stalled, the administration stepped up the pressure on China by threatening billions of dollars worth of sanctions if agreement was not reached by mid-October, and carefully targeted them in much the same way as provided for by the mfn human rights bill. In August, Trade Representative Hills, in accordance with U.S. trade law, published a list of Chinese exports selected for huge retaliatory tariffs.

At the same time, the administration refused to acknowledge that three years of unconditional mfn status had yielded minimal results, and that mfn status, by permitting billions of dollars worth of trade with the U.S., was in effect subsidizing Beijing'spolicy of coupling economic reform with harsh political repression. The Congress's alternative approach, if embraced by the President, would have exerted effective pressure for both economic and political reform by making state-run enterprises less competitive and exacting a price for continued human rights abuses.

The new mfn bill won support in both houses of Congress but was vetoed by the President on September 28, who argued that "our human rights dialogue gives us an avenue to express our views directly to China's leaders" and that "comprehensive engagement" was the foundation of his policy. The House voted to override the veto, but the Senate vote fell short (59 for, 40 against.)

Meanwhile, on June 2, President Bush had extended mfn status to China for another year, citing "positive, if limited, developments" in the administration's human rights dialogue with China. The accompanying report to Congress, as well as an earlier report submitted in May (in compliance with the Foreign Relations Authorization Act for fiscal years 1992 and 1993), made it clear how limited those developments were. The administration claimed that it had "secured an accounting" of 800 political prisoners whose names were on a list presented to the Chinese in June 1991. In fact, Beijing had handed over contradictory, inconsistent and virtually useless information. Follow-up requests by the State Department for further information elicited little response, and efforts to persuade China to allow the International Committee of the Red Cross access to prisons got nowhere.

Despite a series of meetings between Chinese officials and Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs Richard Schifter in January 1992, and between Arnold Kanter and the Chinese Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs in March, the Chinese continued to deny leading dissidents visas to leave China. It later granted five requests out of 20 on the State Department's list.

By October, in the wake of the President's sale of F-16 jet fighters to Taiwan the previous month, a move considered by China to be a betrayal of U.S. commitments to China, the human rights "dialogue" was on ice.

In his report to Congress, the President took credit for speaking out on behalf of Tibetan victims of human rights abuses, both in bilateral exchanges and before the U.N. Human Rights Commission. In fact, the U.S. role at the Commission's session in March was extremely controversial. The U.S. delegation, by opposing a draft put forward by the European Community and other nations, effectively assured the defeat of a resolution condemning human rights violations in Tibet. The U.S. took this position on the grounds that the measure should deal with violations in all of China. A compromise draft presented on the eve of the vote, dealing with violations in "China/Tibet," drew support from the U.S. but was rejected on a procedural motion, since many delegations objected that it gave implicit recognition to China's claims over Tibet.

During the mfn debate in 1991, the President had promised to step up the administration's efforts to stop export of prison labor products to the United States from China. After nearly ninemonths of negotiation, a "memorandum of understanding" between the United States and China was signed on August 7, 1992. Its most important provision provided for inspection of sites suspected of producing prison goods, but it was vague about the conditions for inspection, stating merely said that such visits should be "promptly arranged." By the end of October, the agreement remained untested; the State Department had given the Chinese a list of 18 sites from which prison goods had been exported to the United States, but none had yet been visited by the single U.S. Customs Service official assigned to the embassy in Beijing to implement the agreement for the whole of China. Authorities in Beijing were ostensibly conducting their own investigation of the 18 sites, a preliminary step provided for in the agreement. (U.S. officials told Asia Watch that the huge Lingyuan prison complex, believed involved in exports to the United States, was not on the list.)

The administration also fought off an attempt by Congress to legislate a "code of conduct" for U.S. companies operating in China and Tibet, modeled roughly after the Sullivan Principles for South Africa. The proposed code took at face value the claims of U.S. businesses that supported unconditional renewal of mfn status by insisting that U.S. economic ties could be a positive force for human rights in China. It called on U.S. companies to ensure they were not knowingly using prison labor or prison-made products; to protect freedom of assembly, expression and association of their employees; to discourage compulsory political indoctrination in the workplace; and when the opportunity arises, to attempt to raise with the Chinese government cases of political prisoners. Despite the administration's opposition and the watering down of some of the original language, the code was included in the Export Administration Act (conference report) passed by the Senate on October 8; however, it died in the House of Representatives when Congress adjourned.

The President did sign into law, on October 9, an immigration bill allowing some 70,000 Chinese students to remain permanently in the United States if conditions do not allow their safe return to China by the middle of 1993. The President must make such a determination by June 30, 1993, and if he finds unsafe conditions, Chinese citizens would have one year to apply for permanent resident status. The Chinese government, anxious to entice overseas nationals to return to China, criticized the law as "untenable."

In May 1991, legislation was introduced in the Senate to establish a Radio Free China, patterned after Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty, to broadcast to China daily news of events in China. However, when questions were raised about the scope, feasibility and implementation of the proposal, Congress established a bi-partisan commission to come up with recommendations. In July 1992, the commission concluded that an independent service broadcasting into China, as well as into North Korea, Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos, Tibet and Burma, should be established. A minority of the commission, with the concurrence of the State Department, argued for strengthening Voice ofAmerica instead.

U.S. policy towards China at the World Bank remained unchanged in 1992. As it has since the 1989 crackdown, the administration technically limited its support to loans that served "basic human needs." However, multilateral lending to China soared to record levels in 1992. Indeed, China received more money from the World Bank than any other country during the fiscal year ending June 30, 1992-over $2.5 billion, compared to an annual rate of $590 million immediately after the June 1989 crackdown. This show of support for the Chinese government was accompanied by a return of major U.S. commercial banks, such as BankAmerica and Citicorp. The administration abstained on one World Bank loan ($180 million for the Yanshi thermal power project in January), and opposed another ($82.7 million for a regional cement project in March) on the grounds that they went beyond serving basic human needs. However, these votes were token gestures. Treasury Department officials confirmed to Asia Watch that the administration was making no effort to slow down World Bank consideration of loans to China, to restrict the level of lending or, as the U.S. had done prior to 1990, to convince others at the Bank to oppose loans that did not meet basic human needs. This policy allowed the administration to give the appearance of responding to congressional pressure for a brake on loans, while in fact allowing lending levels to increase.

The record-breaking loans to China were criticized by former U.S. Ambassador to China Winston Lord as "a testimony to China's success in having the world overlook what it's doing to its people." In a Los Angeles Times article, Richard Schifter, former Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs in the Bush Administration, argued that though Bank loans are intended to alleviate poverty in China, "the repressive central government of China is the beneficiary and gets the credit" for the loans.

The Work of Asia Watch

Asia Watch's largest single project during 1992 was the effort to document the post-1989 crackdown in Hunan province. For nine months, the Hong Kong office of Asia Watch worked with Tang Boqiao, a leader of the 1989 student movement, to unearth details of more than 200 previously unknown imprisoned pro-democracy activists in the province. The collaboration also produced information of unparalleled detail about the labor camp and prison system, and about the macabre range of punishments and torture used by Chinese security forces. A report, entitled Anthems of Defeat and published in late May, revealed that the 1989 crackdown was far more widespread in the vast hinterland beyond Beijing than had previously been suspected.

The Hong Kong office went on to document similar crackdowns on dissent in other little-known areas of China. An April 1992 report, Continuing Crackdown in Inner Mongolia, presented new cases of imprisoned ethnic Mongolian activists, as well as confidential government reports urging the local authorities to tighten controls on Mongol cultural and political life. It also offered the most complete profile to date of the Inner Mongolianpenal system.

Another report, released in September 1992, documented the abuse suffered by pro-democracy activists imprisoned in Liaoning province. It also presented the most powerful evidence to date of the Chinese government's systematic exporting of prison-made goods: a sales catalogue in English and Chinese, advertising an astonishing range of goods produced by some 30 prison and labor camp enterprises throughout Liaoning province for overseas sale-including to the United States. Highlights from the catalogue, which appeared in the report, established for the first time a direct link between particular imprisoned pro-democracy activists and specific prison-made exports. These and other cases from the Hunan report provided the U.S. Customs Service with abundant data for its ongoing investigation into the Chinese prison export industry.

Throughout 1992, the Hong Kong office continued to serve as a direct link between Asia Watch and the small but growing mainland Chinese dissident community, gathering vital, first-hand information on the continuing suppression of dissent.

In late 1992, the Hong Kong office began to unearth substantial evidence demonstrating that many political prisoners in China have been and still are falsely diagnosed as "mentally ill" and forcibly confined by judicial authorities to institutes for the criminally insane.

The Asia Watch office in Washington concentrated on trying to influence U.S. policy toward China, in addition to providing policymakers, the media, and the diplomatic community with documentation of human rights abuses in China and Tibet.

Asia Watch maintained regular contact with the State Department and was often consulted for information on prisoner cases, as in January, when the State Department asked for an assessment of Beijing's response to a list of prisoners that had been presented to the Chinese government in 1991.

The Washington office provided information and briefings to other government agencies, including the U.S. Customs Service, the office of the U.S. Trade Representative, and the Treasury Department.

Much of Asia Watch's activity was aimed at servicing a broad constituency in Congress concerned about China and Tibet. Asia Watch testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in August at the first congressional hearing ever held solely on Tibet. Staff also presented written or verbal testimony at hearings on mfn status for China before the House Ways and Means Committee (Subcommittee on Trade) in June and the Senate Finance Committee in July. On June 4, Asia Watch testified in New York at a hearing organized by the Commission on Broadcasting to the People's Republic of China.

Asia Watch provided material for congressional letters and other initiatives protesting President Bush's meeting with Li Peng, and seeking to influence U.S. actions on China and Tibet at the U.N. Human Rights Commission. Asia Watch reports on China were frequently cited in congressional debates and floor statements, or were excerpted in the Congressional Record. Congressional offices also consulted Asia Watch on variouslegislative efforts related to China, including mfn bills and the proposed "code of conduct" for U.S. companies operating in China and Tibet. Members of the business community and trade union groups solicited advice on ways of preventing or monitoring prison exports from China.

Asia Watch staff in New York monitored the status, whereabouts and well-being of Chinese political prisoners, producing updates and analyses of individual cases such as that of Bao Tong.
INDIA

Human Rights Developments

Human rights issues assumed an increasingly important place in public debate in India in 1992, as government officials found themselves pressed to respond to international and domestic criticism of India's human rights record. On September 15, Prime Minister Narasimha Rao formally announced to Parliament that the government would establish a national Human Rights Commission to investigate reports of abuses. At the same time, domestic human rights groups, journalists and other peaceful critics of government policy continued to come under attack by police and government officials throughout the year. Government security forces also engaged in widespread human rights abuses in their efforts to stem violent insurgencies in Kashmir, Punjab and Assam. Militant groups in these states also committed serious abuses and violations of international humanitarian law.

In the disputed state of Kashmir, human rights conditions continued to deteriorate. The government launched "Operation Tiger" in August-a campaign of surprise raids designed to capture and kill suspected militants and terrorize civilian sympathizers. In October, a joint mission by Asia Watch and Physicians for Human Rights (phr) visited the Kashmir valley and documented the summary executions of dozens of civilians and suspected militants who had been taken into custody and shot dead after interrogation. In one case, four students who were arrested during a search operation on October 14 in the Dal Gate area of Srinagar were shot dead that night and their bodies handed over to their families the next day. The security forces also broke up peaceful protests against these killings by beating, teargassing and shooting demonstrators.

The Indian army and the federal paramilitary Border Security Force (bsf) and Central Reserve Police Force (crpf) also murdered and raped civilians in retaliation for attacks by militant forces. On October 15, a man and woman were burned alive in Badasgam when bsf troops locked them in a shop and torched it and ten other buildings after mistaking a sonic boom for a militant attack. An army investigator later confirmed that the troops' action was "unprovoked." On October 1, militants ambushed a patrol near the village of Battekut, killing one. In reprisal, the security forces rampaged through the village, killing ten villagers, raping four women, and burning houses and grain stores. Eight women and an eleven-year-old girl were raped duringa search operation by an army unit near Shopian on October 10. On July 2, paramilitary forces opened fire in a crowded market area of Srinagar after mistaking the bursting of a bus tire for sniper fire. Seven civilians were killed. Officials later claimed they had been killed in "cross fire."

Throughout the conflict, the Indian army and other security forces in Kashmir continued to exhibit blatant disregard for international norms of medical neutrality. Hospitals were subjected to frequent raids, sometimes weekly, when security personnel forced doctors at gunpoint to identify wounded militants, who were then arrested, at times after disconnecting them from their intravenous feeding tubes and even removing one patient under deep anesthesia from an operating theater. Health professionals were routinely detained, assaulted and harassed for having discharged their duties. The security forces also deliberately prevented injured persons from being transported for emergency care, in several cases shooting ambulance drivers who attempted to remove the wounded.

Detainees were routinely subjected to severe and prolonged beatings, electric shock and other forms of torture. The Asia Watch-phr team documented a number of cases of renal failure caused by extensive use of the "roller" torture treatment, in which the muscle tissue is crushed, releasing toxins that cause serious, and sometimes fatal, damage to the kidneys.

Journalists were also attacked. On March 5, 82 journalists were beaten by police when they attempted to deliver a petition to state officials protesting government restrictions on reporting. On September 25, Yusuf Jameel, a stringer for the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) and Reuters, and several other journalists were beaten by police in Srinagar when they attempted to obtain the names of five women who were being arrested during a demonstration against alleged deaths in custody. Jameel was clubbed in the head with a police baton, and a paramilitary officer threatened to shoot him. Although the government promised an inquiry into the incident, no investigation has taken place.

Militant groups in Kashmir killed suspected police informers and kidnapped, assaulted and murdered other civilians. They also threw grenades and detonated bombs in public places, killing and wounding civilians.

In Punjab, the long-postponed elections to the Parliament and state assembly were held on February 19, but intimidation by Sikh militants and protests by other Sikh parties resulted in a turnout of only about 22 percent statewide, and no turnout at all in some rural areas. The Congress (I) party formed a government, but real authority for all matters related to the conflict remained with Director General of Police K. P. S. Gill. Immediately after the election, Gill launched an all-out campaign against the militants, expanding a bounty system of cash rewards for police officials who killed top militants. By August, many of the militant leaders had been killed and the government claimed that "normalcy" was returning to the state. During this campaign, however, extrajudicial killings and disappearances of civilians and suspected militants escalated. Detainees in police custodywere subjected to severe beatings, crushing of the leg muscles with a heavy wooden roller, stretching the legs, suspension, and electric shock. The Asia Watch-phr team documented numerous cases of torture, disappearances and police killings that had occurred since the elections.

Militant abuses also continued. Before and after the polls, Sikh militants attacked Hindu laborers, shooting dead 65 between February 17 and March 18. In apparent retaliation for police killings of militant leaders, militants attacked the families of policemen, shooting dead at least 42 men, women and children in July and August. On October 30, militants shot dead 27 migrant laborers in the villages of Daburji and Silon Kalan near Ludhiana.

The right of free expression was under attack in India in several states. In Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh, peaceful protesters who opposed a World Bank-funded dam on the Narmada River were illegally detained, beaten and subjected to other forms of physical abuse as part of a campaign by the state governments to prevent organized protests and restrict the dissemination of information about the dam's environmental and social consequences. Protests intensified in a number of villages near the dam site in early 1992 when officials attempted to evict villagers in anticipation of monsoon flooding.

Growing criticism about the project inside India and from international organizations prompted World Bank authorities to take the unprecedented step of sending an independent team, the Morse Commission, to examine concerns raised about the project. The team's report, issued on June 18, concluded that the project was deeply flawed and that, given the strong opposition to the project by local residents, completing it would "be impossible except as a result of unacceptable means."

On July 13, during a visit by World Bank officials, local authorities attempting to evict villagers from a tribal area called Talgoda, in Maharashtra, opened fire on demonstrators, killing one woman and injuring seven others. Peaceful demonstrations by villagers opposed to the dam were broken up by police on several occasions in August and September. Nevertheless, in an internal memorandum dated September 11, Bank President Louis Preston recommended that support for the dam be continued. The memorandum did not mention human rights concerns. On October 23 the Bank's Executive Directors voted 59 percent to 41 percent to continue support for the project, contingent on the Indian government meeting specific conditions, including a grievance procedure that would include human rights abuses. The U.S., Japan, Germany, Australia, Canada, and the Nordic countries voting against continuing the project. Its status will be reassessed in April 1993.

In April 1992, the government of Tamil Nadu launched a crackdown against the press. Local authorities confiscated and destroyed journals and newspapers critical of Chief Minister Jayaram Jayalalitha's administration and brought law suits against reporters. Other reporters and editors received anonymous threats and were the victims of acts of vandalism and arson. Ganeshan, a printer at the weekly Nakeeran, was detained on April10 on sedition charges after the weekly published an editorial critical of the government's attacks on the press. After he was released on April 20 he told colleagues that he had been tortured. He died of a brain hemorrhage on April 27. Human rights groups have called for an investigation into his death but no inquiry has taken place. Beginning on September 18-19 over 4,600 people were arrested, mostly under preventive detention laws, in connection with a conference and rally in Madras in which political activists called for Tamil Nadu's secession from India. Sixteen political leaders were charged with sedition. On January 20, India began repatriating some 30,000 Tamil refugees who had fled from Sri Lanka to Tamil Nadu (see chapter on Sri Lanka).

On July 1, at least 16 people were killed when police opened fire on a crowd of striking mine workers in Bhilai, Madhya Pradesh, India. The workers were striking to demand the arrest of industrialists believed responsible for the assassination on September 29, 1991, of Shankar Guha Niyogi, a human rights activist with the People's Union for Civil Liberties (pucl), and leader of the mine workers union. On July 2, 1992, Rajendra Sail, the organizing secretary for the local branch office of the pucl, was detained, apparently to prevent him from investigating the shooting. He was later released on bail. Another 89 persons who participated in the strike were also arrested. It is not known whether they have been released.

The Right to Monitor

In addition to Rajendra Sail, mentioned above, human rights activists came under attack in several states. Andhra Pradesh, in southern India, continued to be one of the most dangerous places to do human rights monitoring and investigative journalism. As 1991 drew to a close, Ghulam Rasool, a 31-year-old reporter for the Telugu newspaper Udayam in the state capital, Hyderabad, was shot dead in what police claimed was an "armed encounter." In fact, Rasool and a friend, Vijay Prasada Rao, had been arrested by police on December 27, 1991 and their bodies discovered the next day. Police alleged that the two men were members of a radical militant group known as the Naxalites, and had been shot in an exchange of fire with police. The bodies were cremated secretly. Asia Watch sources believe Rasool was killed because of his investigation into illegal land grabbing in Hyderabad, reportedly by members of the ruling Congress (I) party and a deputy superintendent of police named Rajaiah, among others. Following widespread protests, Rajaiah was transferred and a judicial inquiry into the killing ordered. No other action has yet been taken against the police.

On February 3, Dr. K. Balagopal, the general secretary of the Andhra Pradesh Civil Liberties Committee (apclc), was detained by local police in Bhadrachalam, Khammam district, and held overnight under a preventive detention law. He was released the next morning after local human rights monitors protested the arrest. Later that day, after he arrived in the town of Kothagudem, he was assaulted by thugs reportedly hired by the police who beat him severely until local human rights activists intervened. Balagopal was then brought to the local clinic inKothagudem, where the staff provided first aid but refused to treat his serious injuries out of fear of the police. On February 5, Balagopal was brought to Hyderabad and was treated for facial fractures, cuts around his left eye, and other injuries. No one has been charged yet with the assault.

Ram Singh Billing, a journalist and member of the Punjab Human Rights Organisation, was detained by police in Sangrur, Punjab, on January 3. The authorities later denied he was ever in custody. He is believed to have died as a result of torture.

On April 3, Justice Ajit Singh Bains of the Punjab Human Rights organization was arrested under the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities Act after he made a speech which state authorities claimed was "seditious." Bains, who is 70, alleged that before his arrest he had received threats from the police warning him to cease his work with the Punjab Human Rights Organisation. He was released on bail on August 18. The charges are still pending.

U.S. Policy

Human rights concerns continued to be the subject of private interventions by U.S. officials and were reported to be a priority for the new U.S. Ambassador in New Delhi, Thomas R. Pickering, and his staff. In his written statement for the Senate confirmation hearings, Ambassador Pickering stated that human rights were among the difficult issues between the U.S. and India that he would take up.

At a January 31 State Department briefing, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs Richard Schifter confirmed that U.S. concerns about deteriorating human rights conditions had been communicated to the Indian government and were considered a "very serious problem" for India, the world and "above all...for the people who live there." At hearings before the House Subcommittee on Human Rights and International Organizations on March 4, Secretary Schifter reiterated that violations by security forces in Kashmir were a problem of "continuing concern" and that the U.S. government had expressed this to the Indian authorities. In a written statement supplied for the record, the administration added, "[W]e are concerned by the persistent and credible reports of human rights abuses by Indian security forces ...and have urged the Indian Government to refrain from the excessive use of force."

However, the strength of these statements was diminished when Schifter responded to a question about whether the Indian government had demonstrated a willingness to curb abuses by security forces in Punjab and Kashmir and punish those responsible. He commented that "the Central Government would wish that it did not happen but power is quite decentralized and at the local levels things happen that the Government probably finds embarrassing and wishes it could stop." The statement is ludicrous because in fact, authority for the security forces in Kashmir rests with the central government and even in Punjab, where there is now an elected state government, central government authorities are directly involved in determining policy. In both states, central government officials have longcondoned abuses by security personnel and, as the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in 1991 accurately notes, "little is done to punish those responsible for extrajudicial killing."

In the report accompanying the 1992 foreign aid bill, the Senate Appropriations Committee expressed concern about "persistent reports of widespread human rights violations by Indian Government forces and separatist militants in Kashmir and elsewhere." The Committee called on the Indian government to "establish an independent commission to investigate reports of human rights violations and to prosecute individuals who are responsible...[and] ensure that the rights of detainees are fully protected and that the International Committee of the Red Cross has prompt access to all detainees."

In fiscal year 1992, the U.S. government estimates that it gave India $37.4 million in development assistance, $96.9 million in PL480 food aid, $25 million in housing guarantees and $340,000 for the International Military and Training Program.

On July 13, Senators Patrick Leahy, David Obey and Robert Kasten wrote to World Bank President Louis Preston to express their concern about human rights abuses in connection with the Narmada dam. On October 23, the U.S. Executive Director to the World Bank, E. Patrick Coady, voted for suspension of the Narmada dam project.

In September, in a rare but significantly effective public rebuke, U.S. officials protested to India over the sale of chemicals used to make poison gas and other weapons to Syria. A shipment of the chemicals being transported on a German vessel was halted after American officials alerted German authorities, who ordered the shipment returned to India. The Indian government has since stated that it is investigating the company responsible. According to a report in The Washington Post, administration officials stated that the Indian government had enacted "rudimentary" controls in response to the complaint but was not enforcing them.

The Work of Asia Watch

In January, an Asia Watch researcher traveled to India to meet with government officials and investigate human rights abuses in Andhra Pradesh, the Narmada River valley, and Tamil Nadu. In a press release issued on January 18, Asia Watch called for a halt to the repatriation to Sri Lanka of Tamil refugees in Tamil Nadu until protection for returning refugees could be ensured. In February, Asia Watch organized appeals on behalf of human rights activist K. Balagopal, who was detained and badly beaten in Andhra Pradesh.

Following meetings with senior Indian government officials, Asia Watch provided recommendations on the formation of a national Human Rights Commission.

On June 17, Asia Watch released "Before the Deluge: Human Rights at India's Narmada Dam." The newsletter was circulated widely among Executive Directors at the World Bank and released to coincide with the Morse Commission's highly critical review of the dam project. Because of Japan's influence at the World Bank,the press release was translated into Japanese and circulated among Japanese Diet members. Asia Watch also conducted extensive meetings with World Bank staff, congressional aides and Treasury officials to raise concerns about human rights abuses that have occurred in connection with the project.

In September, Asia Watch published Police Killings and Rural Violence in Andhra Pradesh, which documented attacks on journalists and human rights activists, "encounter killings" and other abuses against peasant activists, and attacks on low caste and tribal villagers by powerful landlords.

In December, Asia Watch will publish "No End in Sight: Human Rights Abuses in Assam," based on the finding of an investigation carried out by a consultant to Asia Watch in April and May.

In October, a delegation from Asia Watch and Physicians for Human Rights traveled to India to investigate abuses by government forces and militants in Punjab and Kashmir. The first of several reports on the mission's findings was published in December.
JAPAN

Human Rights Developments

Asia Watch continued to monitor the Japanese government's treatment of asylum-seekers and closely followed its implementation of human rights guidelines for its foreign aid program.

While Japan continued to deny political asylum and any other form of blanket protection to Chinese dissidents fearing persecution if returned to China, it remained flexible in dealingwith visa requests from Chinese students. Immigration officials granted a number of these students special "designated activities" visas, first provided for in 1991, which allow legal residency in Japan. By the end of October, 34 Chinese students had received the visas and the cases of at least ten others were pending with the Immigration Bureau.

The case of Lin Guizhen, a pro-democracy activist from Fujian province, who was denied political asylum and forcibly repatriated to China on August 14, 1991, received international attention again in 1992. In January, a New York Times journalist visited her family in China and revealed that she had been imprisoned for six months after her return. At the time of Lin's deportation, Japan insisted that it had received assurances from Beijing that no legal action would be taken against her. Japan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs later appeared to justify China's action by saying that Lin was serving a term of "re-education" and that this was "not a penal measure." China's ambassador in Tokyo admitted that Lin had been arrested and detained, but denied that this was due to her pro-democracy activities as opposed to her supposed violation of China's emigration laws when she fled the country in September 1989. He said that she had received a one-year prison sentence, was released from detention on January 16, and was serving the remainder of her sentence at home.

On April 14, the Tokyo District Court rejected a suit seeking refugee status for Lin, which had been pending at the time she was deported. The court ruled that her repatriation to China made any judgment on her claim "worthless," but stopped short of deciding whether Lin had a well-founded fear of persecution. However, a separate ruling by the Fukuoka District Court, on March 26, found that she had participated in pro-democracy protests in June 1989 and fled China fearing repression. (One lawsuit sought cancellation of her deportation order, the other pressed her claim for refugee status.) In April, Lin's lawyers made public a letter from Lin describing her continuous supervision by Chinese security officials, and her fear of being reimprisoned. Appeals to the High Court were pending as of November 1992.

A lawsuit filed by another Chinese dissident, Zhao Nan, in June 1991 was still before the courts in November 1992. Zhao had received a "designated activities" visa, but was seeking political asylum. The prominent pro-democracy activist had formerly been imprisoned in China.

Political refugees from Burma also sought protection in Japan. It is estimated that at least 5,000 Burmese live in Japan illegally. In a rare move, three Burmese dissidents were given asylum in April. In a separate development, the Japan Federation of Bar Associations agreed to represent 14 other Burmese asylum-seekers, the first such attempt by a group of Burmese to gain legal recognition. According to their lawyers, all of the applicants' visas had expired but they feared persecution in Burma because of pro-democracy activities related to the 1988 uprising.

During 1992, the Japanese government reaffirmed itscommitment to promote human rights and democratization through its extensive foreign aid program. This commitment has potentially profound consequences for Japan's relations in Asia and elsewhere. According to figures published in mid-1992, Japan was the largest aid donor in the world in 1991, increasing assistance to $11 billion, nearly 20 percent over the 1990 figure.

The Official Development Assistance (oda) guidelines were first adopted in April 1991. They were spelled out in further detail in the Foreign Ministry's Annual Report on oda published in March 1992. The report stated, "Full attention will be paid to [efforts by recipient countries]...to introduce democracy and market-oriented economy, and to secure human rights and freedoms." This guideline would be implemented in two ways: by providing increased aid to assist countries seeking to democratize, and by suspending aid to countries that have

committed serious human rights violations. The report stressed that dialogue with the government would precede a cutoff in assistance, and that if improvements were not made, aid would be reviewed, giving "full consideration...to the cultural, historical and social circumstances of the country concerned." (Three other principles also included in the April 1991 guidelines dealt with military expenditures, arms sales and imports.)

On June 30, in response to complaints that the program had no clear direction, the cabinet reiterated Japan's oda philosophy and criteria. The cabinet embraced the principle of considering whether potential aid recipients guaranteed basic human rights and freedoms, and said that Japan would continue to give most of its aid to Asian neighbors.

A "white paper" on oda, published by the Foreign Ministry on October 5, described how these principles and criteria were actually being applied, and acknowledged that this was a "trial and error" process. Japan had provided assistance to elected governments in Mongolia, Zambia and Central America. At the same time, it had suspended aid to Haiti after the military coup in September 1991; suspended new aid to Burma following the 1988 crackdown, although aid previously committed continued; pledged no assistance to Kenya and Malawi at World Bank-convened donor meetings "because of their disappointing political performances"; and suspended aid to Zaire due to the country's "deteriorating situation."

Japan also took credit in some cases for exerting positive influence on "undesirable" government behavior and preventing a worsening of human rights conditions, citing its response to the massacre of civilians in East Timor in November 1991, the killing of pro-democracy activists in Thailand in May 1992, and Peru's suspension of its constitution in April 1992. In none of these cases, however, was Japanese aid cut off or suspended.

In an unprecedented move, Japan sent two diplomats from its embassy in Jakarta to East Timor to look into the Dili massacre. A government spokesman in Tokyo later hinted that Japan, as Indonesia's largest donor ($867 million in oda funds in 1990), might review its aid program depending on the results of theNational Commission of Inquiry ordered by Indonesian President Suharto. However, Japan ultimately praised the commission's report, despite its serious flaws, and no review took place, although a Japanese embassy official did attend the courts-martial of Indonesian soldiers accused of shooting East Timorese demonstrators.

Japan responded to the bloody crackdown in Bangkok in May with low-key expressions of regret and diplomatic appeals, but without cutting the large oda program for Thailand. (Japan supplies over 70 percent of Thailand's foreign aid, totaling $406 million in fiscal year 1991.) "Cutting off aid may de-stabilize the country and hurt the people it was meant to help," said a Foreign Ministry spokesman.

Japan made no new oda commitments to Burma in 1992 but continued its policy of disbursing funds committed prior to the 1988 crackdown for "humanitarian aid" projects. However, reliable information obtained by Asia Watch raised questions about the nature of some of these projects: they may benefit Burmese civilians, but they also provide crucial infrastructure support to Burma's military government. For example, one such project involves improvements in the national railway system.

Policymakers in Tokyo told Asia Watch that a basic reason for maintaining some aid to Burma was to keep channels open for dialogue with its rulers. Following a meeting in Manila of foreign ministers of the Association of South East Asian Nations (asean), Japan did not join the U.S. and other nations in publicly urging asean members to increase pressure on Burma but made only general references to the new oda criteria.

Japan was active on Burma in other diplomatic arenas. It supported a strong resolution condemning Burma at the U.N. Human Rights Commission in Geneva in March. Tokyo also welcomed the partial lifting of martial law in Burma in September, emphasizing that it expected further progress toward transferring power to a civilian government as soon as possible. Foreign Minister Michio Watanabe reported that he appealed for the release of Aung San Suu Kyi in meetings with the Burmese foreign minister in Tokyo.

Japanese policy toward China continued to contradict official oda policy, as $1.1 billion in aid was disbursed in 1992, unaffected by Chinese human rights violations. A visit to Tokyo by Chinese Communist Party leader Jiang Zemin to mark the twentieth anniversary of normalization of relations was aimed at encouraging closer economic ties between the two countries. Following his visit, Japan and China signed an agreement for approximately $5 billion in new energy loans.

The increase in aid was not accompanied by attempts to link oda to human rights improvements. Foreign Ministry and trade officials in Tokyo told Asia Watch that such a linkage was highly unlikely, and that Japan would continue to push economic reform and liberalization in China in the hope that political reform and an end to human rights abuses would eventually result. They also stressed that given Japan's military history in China, human rights appeals would be inappropriate.

Increasingly in 1992, as the new oda policy became more widely known, government officials were anxious to explainJapan's approach to promoting human rights, which relied primarily on quiet diplomacy. They felt this approach was widely misunderstood in the West and interpreted as indifference to human rights. Officials in Tokyo told Asia Watch they believed Japan's method could produce results when dealing with other Asian countries, especially when Japan's "soft approach" is complemented by "hard approaches" taken by the U.S. and others.

The Right to Monitor

Human rights groups in Japan are free to function without government restriction or harassment.

U.S. Policy

In 1992, the U.S. refrained from any public criticism of Japan's treatment of Chinese dissidents. The State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in 1991, issued in January 1992, noted Japan's refusal to grant asylum or refugee status to Chinese dissidents, and its decision to grant the "designated activities" visa in some cases and to extend student visas in others. It also referred to evidence that Chinese students seeking to extend visas faced many obstacles and impedimenta erected by immigration officials.

While the State Department report referred to Lin Guizhen's repatriation, it did not criticize Japan for deporting her but simply said the government had "considered her case through regular procedures, including consultation with the office of the U.N. High Commissioner of Refugees." No mention was made of Lin's pending court suits or the reasons why she feared persecution in China.

The Work of Asia Watch

In March, Asia Watch sent a delegation to Tokyo to carry on its dialogue with Japanese government officials, members of the Diet, trade organizations, nongovernmental groups and others. Throughout the year, Asia Watch kept in regular touch with Japanese government officials about human rights concerns in Asia and worked with Japanese nongovernmental organizations to raise specific issues on Indonesia and Burma with the Japanese government.
PHILIPPINES

Human Rights Developments

The most important political development in the Philippines in 1992 was the peaceful transition of power from Corazon Aquino to Fidel Ramos on June 30, after a presidential election in which Ramos won a plurality (23.8 percent) of the popular vote. Ramos had a poor human rights record as head of the notoriously abusive Philippines Constabulary under Ferdinand Marcos. He was also criticized for failing to enforce his own human rights directives while serving first as Chief of the Staff of the Armed Forces and then as Secretary of National Defense in the Aquino administration. His election was thus greeted with some concernby Philippine human rights monitors.

Nevertheless, President Ramos made some significant moves within a month of taking office. He proposed the repeal of the Anti-Subversion Act (Republic Act No. 1700) under which the Communist Party of the Philippines (cpp) had been outlawed; an extension of an Aquino-era amnesty for former rebels of the New People's Army (npa), the armed wing of the cpp; the formation of a National Unification Commission to open peace talks with the rebels; and a review of all cases of suspected rebels currently in detention. Repeal of the Anti-Subversion Act was approved by the Philippines Congress and went into effect on September 22, leading to the release of several well known prisoners such as Rodolfo Salas, former head of the cpp. Salas was freed one day before his six-year term expired. However, human rights organizations estimated that several hundred suspected rebels continued to be detained on criminal charges, particularly illegal possession of firearms. They alleged that in many cases, the charges were either spurious or politically motivated.

There was concern that President Ramos was not taking adequate steps to curb abuses by the paramilitary force, Citizens Armed Forces-Geographical Unit (cafgu). He said he would reduce the size of cafgu, depending on the number of rebels who take advantage of the amnesty program, but in September, he proposed that a new urban paramilitary force be created, the Auxiliary Police Force. It was not clear if strict controls over recruitment, training and supervision of the new force would be imposed from the outset to prevent abuses.

A well-established pattern of human rights violations continued in 1992, although with fewer reported violations than in previous years. Over a dozen disappearances of persons associated with community organizations suspected of rebel connections were reported; one example was that of Ricardo Lirasa, a member of the Basic Christian Communities in Negros Occidental who was arrested by cafgu members in May and subsequently disappeared. Extrajudicial executions of suspected rebels by cafgu members and soldiers were reported from Negros Occidental, Agusan del Sur, Zamboanga del Sur, and other provinces.

The Right to Monitor

There are no legal restrictions on human rights organizations in the Philippines. Antonio A. Ayo, Jr. and Santiago Ceneta, two lawyers from the Camarines Norte branch of the human rights organization, the Free Legal Assistance Group (flag), were charged with subversion in 1991 for allegedly aiding the npa. flag maintained that the charges were in fact a form of harassment against lawyers who defended suspected npa members. Both lawyers went on trial in 1992 but the charges against them were dropped when the Anti-Subversion Act was repealed.

U.S. Policy

The Philippines Senate voted to have the U.S. withdraw its military bases, and the United States completed its withdrawal from the Subic Bay naval base on November 24. During hisconfirmation hearing in July, U.S. Ambassador Richard Solomon stated that the U.S. would continue to assist the Philippine military with information, training and maintenance under the 1951 U.S.-Philippine Mutual Defense treaty. In June, the administration said that it had ceased supplying military equipment and training to the Philippines National Police (pnp), formed 18 months earlier after the dissolution of the Philippines Constabulary, which had been part of the military. The State Department had determined, Solomon said, that such aid would have violated Section 660 of the U.S. Foreign Assistance Act, which prohibits training or financial support for civilian police forces. The pnp continues to receive aid under other U.S. programs.

U.S. aid to the Philippines took a dramatic downward turn in 1992, from $567.9 million in fiscal year 1991 to $218.7 million in fiscal year 1992. For fiscal year 1993, Congress provided $40 million for the Multilateral Assistance Initiative; the foreign aid bill required that at least $25 million of those funds be channeled through private voluntary organizations and cooperatives. Additional funding not earmarked by Congress included $25 million in Economic Support Funds, $30 million for development assistance, $45 million requested for security assistance, and $2.4 million for International Military Education and Training.

In its report on the foreign aid bill, the House Appropriations Committee urged the administration to use its influence with Manila "to seek justice in many of the outstanding cases involving reports of human rights atrocities by Philippine security forces or individuals within their control." Ambassador Solomon, in his confirmation hearings, acknowledged that "extrajudicial violence" in the government's counterinsurgency campaign was a problem but was unable to suggest possible steps that might be taken to promote human rights more effectively.

A jury in a U.S. district court found the late Ferdinand Marcos's estate liable for torture; the court will next determine the amount of compensation owed to his victims.

The Work of Asia Watch

In January and February, Asia Watch conducted a five-week investigation of human rights abuses by the cafgu paramilitary force, and in April issued a report of its findings. Defending the Earth, a joint report of Human Rights Watch and the Natural Resources Defense Council, included a chapter documenting politically motivated abuses against environmental activists and reporters in the Philippines, and another Human Rights Watch report, Indivisible Human Rights: The Relationship of Political and Civil Rights to Survival, Subsistence and Poverty, included a chapter on the forced eviction of the indigenous T'boli people from their ancestral land in Mindanao by landlords linked to the armed forces.

Asia Watch met twice with Philippine embassy officials in Washington, including the ambassador, to discuss the abuse of Filipina domestic workers in Kuwait as well as human rights concerns in the Philippines.
SRI LANKA

Human Rights Developments

The civil war in Sri Lanka continued in the Northeast between the Tamil militant group, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (ltte), and Sri Lankan government troops, with violations of the laws of war by both sides. However, death squad killings and disappearances associated with government counterinsurgency campaigns in the South decreased, leading some government officials to claim that the country was "back to normal." But southern Sri Lanka experienced a marked increase in political intimidation and violence in 1992, with journalists, human rights lawyers and political opposition members the targets. Tens of thousands of disappearance cases from the mid-1980s through 1992 remained unresolved, and new government human rights agencies were still far from effective.

According to a government report, 2,095 people, including 457 civilians, were killed in the war between January and September 1992. Tens of thousands of families were displaced by fighting in northern Sri Lanka in 1992, in addition to the million and a half already displaced since the current phase of the war began in June 1990. The military's attempts to seal off the Jaffna peninsula led to repeated shortages of food and essential supplies for the civilian population.

In January 1992, the Indian government began repatriating the first 30,000 of some 230,000 Sri Lankan Tamils who had fled to India since 1983. Reports of involuntary repatriation continued throughout 1992 and refugee agencies expressed concern that many returnees were ill-informed about security risks in Sri Lanka.

Most returning refugees were destined for temporary camps in the eastern district of Trincomalee, or for the northern districts of Mannar and Vavuniya-all sites of recent violence between the ltte and security forces. In September, the ltte began targeting strategic locations in Trincomalee District as a vital link between North and East and launched major attacks against soldiers in the area. Security forces also arrested large numbers of young Tamils in Trincomalee in September. With security conditions in the Northeast making it impossible for many of the repatriated refugees to return home, the temporary facilities were severely overcrowded. According to reports from refugee agencies in late September, only half of the refugees repatriated since January had been able to return home.

In August, the government of Sri Lanka began prohibiting returnees with homes in ltte-controlled areas from leaving welfare centers in government territory. Previously, some 5,000 refugees who were allowed to return to ltte-controlled areas were required to sign forms relieving the government of responsibility for their safety.

In February, the Sri Lankan army began a series of offensives in the North, each employing thousands of troops, as well as armor and air support. Reports of civilian deaths and injuries associated with indiscriminate firing and shellingcontinued, although at lower levels than at the height of the air war in 1990. On May 20, 1992, for example, artillery shells hit the Vattappalai Temple in Mullaittivu District where some 3,000 Hindu Tamil worshippers had gathered for the annual Pongal festival. Twenty-three worshippers were killed and at least 30 were injured.

Combatants also continued to engage in deliberate, large-scale massacres of civilians. Throughout 1992 the ltte responded to the army's assaults not only with ambushes and counter-assaults against army personnel, but also with bombings of marketplaces, ferries and bus stops, and massacres of Muslim and Sinhalese civilians. Most of these attacks occurred in northern and eastern Sri Lanka, where different ethnic groups live in close proximity. Similar massacres were carried out by Muslim and Sinhalese civil defense units called "home guards"-villagers who are armed and given perfunctory training by the Sri Lankan military, often after ltte killings of Muslims.

The heaviest toll in Sri Lanka's bloody cycle of attacks and counterattacks occurred on October 15 in pre-dawn assaults on three villages in Polonnaruwa District, in north-central Sri Lanka. Over 180 people, most of them Muslim civilians, were shot and hacked to death by attackers whom witnesses identified as ltte cadre.

Sri Lankan soldiers have also engaged in massacres of civilians, and while the government made more of an effort to hold its forces accountable for abuses, it had little to show in the way of prosecutions. On January 30, 1992, a presidential commission investigating the massacre of at least 67 civilians in eastern Sri Lanka in June 1991 found that the killings in the village of Kokkadicholai had been the result of "deliberate retaliatory action" by army personnel for the deaths of two soldiers killed in a land mine explosion.

The case was turned over to the military for investigation, and in early August 1992 the government reported that soldiers involved in the Kokkadicholai massacre faced possible court-martial. On October 28, the commander, Lieutenant H.I.S. Kudaligama, was found guilty of "allowing his soldiers to use their weapons" in the massacre and allowing them to dispose of the bodies. The 19 soldiers implicated were acquitted, reportedly for lack of evidence.

Informed sources told Asia Watch that the military command was reluctant to pursue the prosecution of soldiers in this case because Sri Lankan troops were already so demoralized by the deaths in August of General Denzil Kobbekaduwa, head of military operations in the north, and eight other senior officers whose vehicle detonated an ltte land mine in northern Sri Lanka.

In the South, there was an alarming rise in violent attacks against public figures and journalists. Some of the attackers were identified as police officers or ruling party members acting with police complicity. The Civil Rights Movement (crm), one of the foremost Sri Lankan human rights organizations, counted at least ten such incidents between January and August 1992. In a statement released on August 28, crm denounced what it called "officially sanctioned or condoned lawlessness." It called on thegovernment to end impunity for security forces by investigating and prosecuting the attacks and by actively promoting peaceful freedom of expression as a "crucial safety valve." Similar attacks were also attributed to opposition supporters and even hired thugs.

A number of legal actions designed to limit freedom of expression were taken against journalists in 1992. Most recently, editors of The Island, an independent English-language newspaper, were told by Criminal Investigations Department (cid) investigators that criminal charges for defamation of the President might be filed against the paper for printing an article on August 20 entitled "Gang threatened death if I drew cartoons of President." The article quoted a letter from Jiffry Younous, a well known cartoonist of the opposition paper Aththa, to the Inspector General of Police with details of an attack he suffered on August 18 when armed thugs assaulted him and warned him to stop drawing political cartoons.

In April, Aththa itself faced charges for printing accusations made by a former Deputy Inspector General of Police, Premadasa Udugampola, about government complicity in death-squad activity. Aththa's editor and publisher were indicted under Article 26 of the Emergency Regulations for "causing hostility, ill-will and contempt of the government." Both were acquitted on November 10, but Senior State Counsel A.R.C. Perera indicated that the Attorney-General would appeal the decision. Three other papers, Ravaaya, Yukthiya and Rajaliya, were accused of similar offenses.

It was possible to evaluate the work of several government human rights agencies during the year. In 1990, Sri Lanka had responded to international condemnation of its human rights practices by setting up various bodies to investigate past abuses. These included the Human Rights Task Force (hrtf), designed to safeguard the rights of detainees, and the Presidential Commission of Inquiry into the Involuntary Removal of Persons, charged with investigating disappearances.

The results are mixed. While the government's recognition of the need to address past abuses and prevent future ones was a significant step forward, the progress of the commissions was extremely slow, and their mandates were in some cases so narrow as to limit their usefulness. For example, the commission looking into disappearances can investigate only those that occurred after January 11, 1991, even though an estimated 40,000 people disappeared between 1983 and 1990 after arrest by government forces or abduction by government-linked death squads. By the end of June 1992, according to a progress report Asia Watch received in September, the Commission had received only 453 complaints that fell within its mandate, and of these, only 49 people had been traced.

The Human Rights Task Force has been somewhat more successful. In April it began conducting surprise visits to police stations and army camps-where many of the most serious violations take place-and registered over 780 detainees in these facilities. It also opened several regional offices, although the staff of these offices do not appear to enjoy adequatecooperation from police and army personnel. The hrtf's annual report made useful recommendations for improving the lot of detainees. In particular, it concluded that emergency regulations allowing for indefinite preventive detention were "counterproductive" and called for a re-examination of the regulations. The report openly admitted to shortcomings, remarking that although through August 10 the Task Force had received reports of 3589 missing persons, it had managed to locate only 93. "The gap between `missing' and `found' is disconcertingly large," it added. It also acknowledged instances of torture and ill-treatment in police lock-ups, and complained that the army was not informing the hrtf of all detentions. This rare candor on the part of a governmental body in Sri Lanka is most welcome.

Sri Lanka's efforts to address past abuses are noteworthy. While pressure from donor countries played a major role, these efforts were unusual in that they were undertaken by a government that itself was responsible for gross abuses, rather than by a new, reformist government coming to power after a repressive predecessor was ousted.

The Right to Monitor

Although human rights activists in Colombo enjoyed more freedom to monitor in 1992 than in the recent past, threats and violence against individuals and groups continued. In July 1992, unidentified armed men, searching for Kalyananda Thiranagama and Mohan Seneviratne, lawyers with the Lawyers for Human Rights and Development (lhrd), threatened staff members at the lhrd offices in Colombo. The lawyers had taken up many legal cases against the police and other state authorities for violations of fundamental rights. The printer who prints the lhrd newsletter, People's Rights, also received threats in July warning him to stop printing lhrd's material. The government responded by providing police protection for the lawyers, but the harassment continued when the police guard went off duty. The government reportedly has made no effort to investigate.

U.S. Policy

Despite ongoing severe abuses in Sri Lanka, U.S. officials acknowledged privately in 1992 that the country once again was not a high priority for the Bush administration, except in the area of commercial relations. At her Senate confirmation hearing in May, Teresita Schaffer, the newly appointed U.S. ambassador to Sri Lanka, indicated that she planned "to take advantage of every opportunity to expand U.S. exports and investment." But she also declared, "We stand for vigorous protection of human rights, and will press all concerned to adhere to international standards in this area." She gave no indication that the zeal to strengthen commercial relations would be tempered by persistent Sri Lankan government abuses.

The Bush administration delivered about $67 million in development assistance and food aid to Sri Lanka in fiscal year 1992. For fiscal year 1993, the administration requested $16.5 million in development assistance, and $55.9 million in food aid.

The administration also spent $229,000 for International Military Education and Training (imet) for fiscal year 1992. The administration has requested $250,000 for imet for fiscal year 1993. The imet program is described as "professional military, management and technical training." According to U.S. officials, an imet human rights program "is still being refined" and details are not yet available.

On March 23, a senior Bush administration official denied reports in The Washington Post that the U.S. had proposed $10 million in credits for the purchase of military equipment to Sri Lanka. U.S. officials have consistently maintained that there was no military aid of any kind to Sri Lanka other than imet and that human rights concerns are taken into account when any request for military transfers, credits or sales is considered. According to State Department sources, there have been no transactions of this type in the last three years.

At the March 23 briefing, the Bush administration welcomed the Sri Lankan government's acceptance of 30 of 32 recommendations made by Amnesty International to improve human rights conditions, adding that the U.S. government would like to see them all implemented. While acknowledging human rights improvements, the administration expressed concern over continuing disappearances and allegations of misconduct by government forces that far exceeded the number of investigations. The U.S. urged the Sri Lankan government to institute tighter discipline and better procedures for handling detainees.

In a February meeting, a consortium of major bilateral and multilateral donors known as the Sri Lanka Aid Group, of which the U.S. is a member, pledged a total of $825 million in financial support for economic development and medium-term structural adjustment reforms. Participants in the meeting, including the U.S., acknowledged the Sri Lankan government's efforts to address human rights issues, but urged the government to "bring a larger number of human rights cases to closure." The participants did not explicitly link future aid to progress in fulfilling this recommendation.

The U.S. supported World Bank loans totalling $132.4 million to Sri Lanka for fiscal year 1992 (ending June 30, 1992), a reduction from the $163 million disbursed in fiscal year 1991. Asia Watch believes that the U.S. should use the pendency of these loans to encourage the Sri Lankan government to prosecute its forces for past violations and to end ongoing abuses.

The Work of Asia Watch

Asia Watch continued to monitor the implementation of the Sri Lankan government's human rights initiatives and the repatriation of Tamil refugees.

On January 18, 1992, Asia Watch released a statement calling on the Indian government to halt its proposed repatriation of Sri Lankan refugees housed in camps in Tamil Nadu until their safety in Sri Lanka could be guaranteed. Citing continued security risks in Sri Lanka and possible coercion on the part of camp officials, Asia Watch called the plan dangerous and irresponsible. On January 23, letters to Indian Prime Minister Narasimha Rao andSri Lankan President Ranasinghe Premadasa reiterated Asia Watch's concern for the welfare of returning refugees and urged India to allow international bodies such as the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (unhcr) access to the camps.

On February 3, Asia Watch released the preliminary findings of its December investigative mission to Sri Lanka. Timed to coincide with the Sri Lankan aid consortium meeting in Paris, the report urged donors to insist on accountability for past patterns of human rights violations.

On February 13, Asia Watch staff met with Sri Lankan Government Special Representative Milinda Moragoda, and Minister Bernard Goonetilleke of the Sri Lankan Embassy, to discuss the findings of the Asia Watch mission, the recommendations of the U.N. Working Group on Disappearances, and Asia Watch's own recommendations to minimize civilian casualties in situations of armed conflict.

In April, Asia Watch released an appeal to both the Sri Lankan government and the ltte leadership. Aimed at the protection of noncombatants during an anticipated army offensive, the appeal outlined minimum standards of humanitarian law applicable to all parties in the Sri Lankan civil war.

On May 31, Asia Watch released Human Rights Accountability in Sri Lanka, which provided a more detailed analysis of human rights reforms undertaken by the Sri Lankan government since the meeting of Sri Lanka's donor countries in October 1990. The report also made recommendations to the Sri Lankan government on how to improve the effectiveness of these reforms. On July 10, at the request of government officials, Asia Watch released an open memorandum to the Sri Lankan government summarizing the recommendations of this report.

On October 15, responding to one of the largest massacres of Sri Lanka's civil war, Asia Watch condemned the ltte's attack on over 160 Muslim civilians as "a blatant violation of humanitarian law." Asia Watch also urged the Sri Lankan security forces and Muslim groups not to respond in kind.

On November 10, Asia Watch released a letter to Mme. Sadako Ogata, United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, expressing

continued concern over reports of human rights violations associated with the repatriation of Sri Lankan refugees from India. Asia Watch urged, given the volatile security situation in Sri Lanka and reports of coercion by camp authorities, that the repatriation process be halted until the unhcr has full access to refugee camps in India and adequate screening and monitoring procedures are in place.
THAILAND

Human Rights Developments

Thailand, not usually considered a major human rights abuser in Asia, became the focus of international attention in May when Thai troops fired into crowds of demonstrators in Bangkok who were demanding the resignation of Prime Minister Suchinda Kraprayoon. Between May 17 and 20, at least 52 were killed andseveral hundred injured while more than 200 remain unaccounted for.

The roots of the demonstrations lay in a military coup on February 23, 1991, when a group of generals, including General Suchinda, overthrew a democratically elected government. They formed a National Peace-Keeping Council (npkc) and promised to hold elections in six months. Suchinda himself promised he would not accept the post of prime minister.

The npkc took two actions to restrict labor rights, banning state enterprise unions and requiring Ministry of Interior approval for any labor union "advisers." The npkc also silenced prominent critics, among them Professor Sulak Sivaraksa, who was charged with lese majeste for a speech he gave criticizing the military and the monarchy at Thammasat University on August 22, 1991. A warrant was issued for Prof. Sulak's arrest, and he fled into exile.

By November 1991, the military was rewriting sections of the constitution to give itself a permanent power base. Mass demonstrations took place in Bangkok during November and December 1991 to protest the changes, which allowed the npkc to appoint an upper house of the Parliament, and an unelected prime minister to be designated by the Parliament.

On March 22, 1992, general elections were held with a coalition of five military-backed parties winning 195 seats in the House of Representatives-a clear majority-as compared to 165 seats for the pro-democracy parties. On March 25, Narong Wongwan was nominated as prime minister, but his nomination was withdrawn when the U.S. government announced that Narong had been refused a visa because of alleged involvement in narcotics trafficking. On April 7, Supreme Commander and army chief General Suchinda was appointed prime minister, despite his earlier promise not to accept the post.

On April 8, a former member of Parliament, Chalad Worachat, began a hunger strike demanding Suchinda's resignation. Throughout April, tens of thousands of demonstrators took to the streets to echo that demand, and by early May, the demonstrations were even larger. Former Governor of Bangkok Chamlong Srimuang declared that he, too, would go on a hunger strike if Suchinda did not resign. On May 10, the opposition agreed to call off the demonstrations for one week to allow for negotiations.

With no significant progress in the negotiations, demonstrators gathered on May 17 at the Sanam Luang park in Bangkok demanding constitutional changes that would lead to the immediate resignation of Suchinda. By 10:00 p.m., police had turned water cannons on the demonstrators, who responded by throwing rocks and turning over two fire trucks. Police then began beating demonstrators with their nightsticks. By midnight, Suchinda had declared a state of emergency, and military troops, equipped with M-16 rifles, had opened fire. Over the next three days the Thai military and Border Patrol Police fired their guns indiscriminately to clear the streets, killing at least 52, injuring hundreds and arresting over 3,000.

After the intervention of the King and increasing international pressure, Suchinda stepped down on May 24. His lastact was to ensure that an executive decree was issued, providing an amnesty for "all offenders", leading to the release of those arrested during the demonstration but also to impunity for the military officers who used excessive force against demonstrators and, in some cases, deliberately executed them. The much-respected Anand Panyarachun, who had reluctantly accepted appointment as prime minister after the February 1991 coup, was persuaded to return to the post until elections could be held. He proceeded to take a number of steps in support of human rights, including approving in principle Thailand's accession to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; revoking the decree by which the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces had automatic command of the Internal Peace-Keeping Force; transferring key commanders involved in the May events to inactive posts; and setting up an ad-hoc committee to study ways of protecting freedom of the press, including by private ownership of the broadcast media. He also set in motion a number of investigations into the May killings.

On September 11, the independence of the Thai judiciary was called into question when Prime Minister Anand passed a controversial executive decree changing the composition of the Judicial Commission, which is primarily responsible for judicial appointments. Anand sought to reduce the power of Supreme Court Senior Judge Pramarn Chansue over the Commission by dramatically decreasing the number of elected members. The House of Representatives quickly overturned the decree and established an ad hoc committee to reform the judiciary. In the meantime, there are charges that the Judicial Commission, now dominated by Pramarn supporters, has shown a marked favoritism in its judicial appointments, particularly the regional chief justices and the promotion of Pramarn to Chief Justice of the Supreme Court over three more senior judges.

National parliamentary elections were held on September 13, and a fragile civilian coalition was formed under Chuan Leekpai, a member of the Democratic Party. The new parliament revoked the May amnesty decree, but by late November, it was still unclear whether military officers involved in the May violence could legally be prosecuted. The government revived state enterprise unions that had been dissolved after the 1991 coup, but it remained unclear whether they would be granted the right to strike.

The longstanding problem of treatment of Burmese refugees in Thailand persisted in 1992. The number of refugees from Burma's ethnic minorities living in camps along the border climbed to over 70,000. Thousands of Burmans, the country's majority ethnic group, from lowland areas in Burma also fled to Thailand to escape military abuses. (See chapter on Burma.)

Because the Thai government refused to grant refugee status to the Burmese, those who did not end up in the border camps faced deportation or arrest and detention in Immigration Detention Centers (idc) where conditions were generally appalling. The idc in Bangkok, for example, with a capacity of 200, had from 1,200 to over 2,000 "illegal immigrants" detained at a given time, the majority of whom were Burmese. The inmateswere given extremely limited medical care and no access to translators or legal support.

On February 17, the Thai Ministry of Interior announced that all "Burmese students" in Bangkok would have to register and be interviewed to determine their eligibility for transfer to a "safe area" in Ratchaburi province. Those deemed ineligible would face deportation or arrest. In early September, the Interior Ministry acknowledged that 516 Burmese students were "genuine refugees," of the 1,425 who had registered. The 516 were to be transported to the "safe area" on September 21. However, Burmese groups and international human rights organizations raised serious concerns about the screening procedures used to determine refugee status. They also were troubled by the limited role of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (unhcr) in monitoring the safety of students in the camp and protecting them against involuntary repatriation and abuse by the Thai military. As a result, the Thai government twice postponed action on the plan, and as of late November only a handful of students had agreed to go to the "safe area" voluntarily.

Thailand's willingness to shelter and trade with the Khmer Rouge (Democratic Kampuchea) has come under particular criticism, particularly as the Khmer Rouge have consistently violated the Paris peace accords and refused to cooperate with U.N. authorities. Until late 1992, the Thai government was refusing to use its leverage with the Khmer Rouge to bring about cooperation, citing the need to maintain evenhandedness with all four factions (see chapter on Cambodia). Thailand also refused to consider U.N.-sponsored sanctions against the Khmer Rouge that would involve sealing off the Thai border to cut their economic lifeline and blocked U.N. convoys and U.N. peace-keeping units from entering Khmer Rouge areas from Thailand. In early November, however, the Thai foreign minister suggested that his government would cooperate if the U.N. decided on sanctions.

Right to Monitor

Human rights groups and other non-governmental organizations are able to work openly in Thailand but know that there can be serious consequences if they go "too far." In June, following the May killings, Dr. Pradit Charoenthaithawee, rector of Mahidol University and chair of a subcommittee of a government commission of inquiry looking into the fate of those missing, was forced to resign from the commission after he received threats against himself and his family for suggesting that the army knew where bodies were buried. People accused of helping or accommodating "illegal Burmese" in Thailand can face imprisonment of up to five years and a 50,000 Baht fine. The threat of criminal sanction serves as a warning to individuals and ngos addressing human rights abuses of Burmese in Thailand.

U.S. Policy

In the immediate aftermath of the May killings, the Bush administration pulled out combat troops from joint U.S.-Thai military exercises, publicly condemned the violence and loss of life, and met with Thai leaders to urge restraint and a peacefulpolitical solution. But the U.S. government continued some military sales and took no action to hold up World Bank loans to Thailand. Following the September 13 elections, the administration moved to resume economic and military aid, participation in joint combat maneuvers and high-level military visits, despite key outstanding questions about the role of the Thai military in the May shootings.

Following the military coup in February 1991, in accordance with a provision of the fiscal year 1991 foreign aid bill banning most aid to any country where an elected government is overthrown in a military coup, the administration had suspended U.S. economic and military assistance to Thailand until the installation of a freely elected government. However, this cutoff did not affect anti-narcotics assistance ($4 million in fiscal years 1991 and 1992, with the same amount budgeted for 1993), and aid given through private voluntary organizations for certain projects. Nor did it prevent Thailand from using its own funds to purchase American military equipment, such as F-16 fighter planes, radar equipment and small arms, reportedly worth over $900 million since the coup.

The transfer of U.S. arms to Thailand, either through a government-to-government program (Foreign Military Sales, projected at $400 million for fiscal year 1993) or via commercial sales, remained essentially unchanged following the violence in May 1992, although a ban was imposed on small arms and other lethal items that could be used for crowd control. All other transfers were reviewed on a "case-by-case basis," according to the June 23 written testimony of Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, submitted to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.

On May 19, after three days of violence in Bangkok, the U.S. government withdrew 10,000 combat troops from the joint military exercise with the Thais known as Cobra Gold. However, members of Congress criticized the Administration for allowing non-combat troops to participate. "We think it makes common sense in a time of problems in Bangkok not to have picture of U.S. forces storming the beaches in Thailand," a Pentagon spokesman explained on May 19. A second set of maneuvers scheduled for July was cancelled.

Congress was outspoken in condemning the shootings and demanding an end to the violence and continuing arrests. On May 19, the Senate passed a resolution urging a lifting of the state of emergency and release of all those detained for peaceful activity. The resolution also urged a halt to joint military operations with Thailand and a continued ban on U.S. economic and military assistance until "a duly elected government is installed and human rights are respected." A bipartisan group of members of the House Select Committee on Hunger appealed to the King and Prime Minister Suchinda on May 21 to move swiftly to rescind emergency powers and resume negotiations with the opposition.

At the time of the Bangkok killings, the World Bank was reviewing projects worth $400 million-$178 had already been approved, additional funds were due to be considered in June-with several other loans under preparation. Asia Watch publicly urgedthe U.S. government to lobby the Bank actively for a suspension of these loans, but received no response.

On October 2, following the September elections, the Senate passed a resolution, commending Thailand's interim government for holding elections and investigating the May killings, and urging the new government to complete official inquiries. The Senate expressed support for a resumption of economic assistance, but it made no recommendation on military assistance.

In response to an Asia Watch request that the administration consider holding up some forms of military cooperation or aid until all investigations were completed, James Lilley, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, wrote stating the Pentagon's intention to re-establish "normal relations with the newly constituted military establishment." As of November, discussions were underway between the administration and Congress regarding resumption of military aid.

The administration expressed support for the Thai government's plan to send 516 Burmese students identified by Thailand's Interior Ministry as "genuine refugees" to a "safe area" along the Thai-Burmese border, despite serious concerns about how well those students would be protected from abuse. The State Department said it believed that the site meets "international standards for the protection and welfare of asylum-seekers," noting that a nongovernmental organization affiliated with the unhcr (though not the unhcr itself) will have a permanent presence at the site. As of January 1993, the U.S. government will require that all Burmese students seeking to resettle in the United States must apply from the "safe area."

The Work of Asia Watch

Asia Watch closely monitored events in Thailand in May, issuing statements on May 19 and 21 as the crackdown proceeded, and undertaking a more in-depth investigation in late June, together with Boston-based Physicians for Human Rights (phr). An Asia Watch-phr report was released on October 1 entitled Bloody May: Excessive Use of Lethal Force in Bangkok. The two organizations called in the report for a stepped-up effort to find those missing after the May violence and a revocation of the amnesty decree.

Asia Watch also published a report on March 20, Abuses Against Burmese Refugees in Thailand, calling for better screening procedures to determine who in fact is a refugee with a well-founded fear of persecution. Asia Watch also issued a press release on September 21 to express concern over the imminent transfer of Burmese students to the so-called "safe area."

Asia Watch staff were active during the year in responding to congressional inquiries and providing input for resolutions on Thailand and Burma adopted in the House and Senate.
VIETNAM

Human Rights Developments

Vietnam pursued further economic and legal reforms in 1992 at thesame time as it continued to punish its critics and opponents. Positive developments included constitutional reforms that gave incrementally greater prominence to individual rights, the release of almost all known officials of the Saigon regime who had been held continuously without trial since 1975 for "reeducation," and diminishing control over daily life by the Communist Party. On the negative side, the government continued to arrest, detain and sentence individuals for non-violent dissent, to hold prisoners in conditions that threatened their health and safety, to censor writers, and to repressively control religious institutions.

Perceived political dissent continued to be harshly suppressed. The official press reported in May that Doan Viet Hoat, a professor of English literature, and other intellectuals arrested in late 1990 were to be tried for circulating a newsletter named "Freedom Forum" which published articles on political and social reform. Doan Thanh Liem, a constitutional law scholar arrested for his association with the American businessman Mike Morrow in 1990, was sentenced in a secret trial on May 14 to 12 years' imprisonment for "anti-socialist propaganda." The evidence against him consisted of proposals for constitutional reform that he had circulated to high officials, an article on Catholicism in East Germany that an American friend had sent him, and his private notes that he had jotted on socialism and education. Nguyen Tri, identified as a "reactionary poet," was given an eight-year prison sentence for helping Liem type some documents. The intellectual Le Van Tien began a hunger strike on February 18 to protest his detention on groundless accusations of espionage. The authorities released him some two weeks later after his health had deteriorated sharply but did not permit him to emigrate to the United States as he had planned before his arrest in June 1990.

Numerous other persons were arrested and imprisoned for what appears from official reports to have been non-violent opposition to the government expressed through exercise of their rights to freedom of expression and association. Among them were Nguyen Ngoc Dat, sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment along with four others for drawing up documents on humanism and Buddhism and making contacts with overseas Vietnamese, with the purported intent "to overthrow the government." A number of former South Vietnamese military officers who had formed the "Lien Viet" group were arrested for leading a campaign to write critical leaflets and messages on banknotes, such as "Communism? No! Democracy? Yes!"

The treatment of prisoners remained cause for grave concern. Dr. Nguyen Dan Que, an endocrinologist arrested in 1990 for signing a petition that called for human rights and political reforms, was transferred in early June from Phang Dan Luu jail to a cell in Chi Hoa prison with violent common criminals. Two of his front teeth were then knocked out. Do Ngoc Long, also arrested with Mike Morrow in 1990 but still awaiting trial, collapsed at the end of May and was transferred from Phang Dang Luu to Chi Hoa prison hospital. Both of these prisoners have since been transferred to labor camps outside of Ho Chi MinhCity. Other political prisoners have suffered health disorders and malnutrition during incarceration, and one prisoner reported on his release that he had been punished whenever his name was publicized by foreign human rights organizations. The government continues to violate prisoners' rights by permitting family members only sporadically to visit and deliver food and medicine to prisoners.

Almost all of the former South Vietnamese officials and civilians held continuously since 1975 for "reeducation" were released in 1992. Nguyen Khac Chinh, who had been held without charge or trial since December 1975, was not, possibly because he was one of a group of Catholic intellectuals opposed to the communist authorities. Despite Vietnam's announcement in 1991 that it would permit the International Committee of the Red Cross to monitor reeducation camp detainees, no terms for such an arrangement have been worked out.

The 1992 constitution abolished the Council of State and replaced it with a more powerful President, who is empowered to nominate the Premier, Chief Justice and Chief Inspector, and to replace the Council of Ministers with a Premier-nominated cabinet. General Le Duc Anh, a hard-liner who directed the invasion of Cambodia, was elected President (and armed forces commander-in-chief), and Vo Van Kiet, a reformer, was re-elected Premier. Their selection suggested a continuing two-track policy of economic reform coupled with tight political control.

The elections for the National Assembly brought less change than originally anticipated. Although a new election law permitted independent candidates, only two of 42 independents were found to be qualified as candidates by the Party-controlled Fatherland Front, and several of the more outspoken deputies from Ho Chi Minh City were not invited to run again. Even so, a number of incumbents lost their seats, including Madame Nho Ba Thanh, the head of the legislative drafting committee of the National Assembly, who was one of Vietnam's leading non-communists. The Party had increasing difficulty attracting new members and called for further efforts against ideological pollution and corruption.

Major constitutional changes recognized new rights to engage in business, own the means of production, and transfer interests in land. Innovations in civil and political rights were less dramatic. In the provision guaranteeing the freedoms of speech, press, assembly, association and demonstration, the new constitution dropped the qualifier "in accordance with the interests of socialism and of the people." The Communist Party is still designated the "leading force of the state and society," but all Party organizations are now to "operate within the framework of the Constitution and the law." "Oppressive investigations" were explicitly forbidden for the first time, but the term "oppressive" was never defined. A prohibition of punishment without a court-imposed guilty verdict, which had existed in the criminal procedure law, was also incorporated into the constitution. However, religious freedom continued to be limited by the warning that "no one can violate the freedom of faith or exploit it in a way at variance with the law and state policies."

An extraordinary protest movement in the Buddhist community for greater independence and freedom began in 1992, set off by the funeral of the Patriarch Thich Don Hau on May 3. Thich Don Hau, the most senior leader of the Unified Buddhist Church still at liberty, had stipulated that his funeral was to follow Buddhist tradition strictly, without any official intervention. Upon the Patriarch's death, however, the government swiftly bestowed upon him the Ho Chi Minh Medal and set about organizing the funeral, despite hunger strikes and threats of self-immolation on the part of many monks. Thich Huyen Quang, the senior leader of the Unified Buddhist Church who since February 1982 has been exiled from Ho Chi Minh City and placed under house arrest, was permitted to attend the funeral only after a day-long hunger strike. He delivered an oration condemning the government's attempt to dissolve the Unified Buddhist Church in 1981 and to establish a state-controlled Buddhist church with the same name.

Thich Huyen Quang also issued a nine-point petition calling on the government either to place him on trial or to annul the decree of house arrest; to account for the deaths of monks and nuns and the destruction of Buddhist property since 1975; to free religious and political prisoners, among them the Buddhists Thich Quang Do (who was rearrested on April 17, just three weeks after he was released from house arrest and internal exile imposed in 1982), Thich Duc Nhuan, Thich Tue Sy and Thich Tri Sieu; and to restore full rights to the original Unified Buddhist Church. Since then, the government has condemned the petition and swept pagodas and monasteries for copies of it. The government also interrogated and arrested monks, nuns and laypersons suspected of possessing or distributing copies and threatened Thich Huyen Quang with further penalties.

Relations between the Vatican and Hanoi have grown more cordial with the first visit of an official Vietnamese delegation to Rome in June. Yet, Msgr. Francois-Xavier Nguyen Van Thuan, appointed archbishop of Ho Chi Minh City in April 1975, was still unable to return from Rome to assume his duties. A major seminary reopened in Nha Trang this year, and the ordination of Msgr. Thomas Nguyen Van Tram, the new bishop of Xuan Loc diocese, drew a crowd of over 50,000 on May 7. The outspoken Catholic leaders, Father Chan Tin and Nguyen Ngoc Lan, remained under a tightly enforced administrative order of house arrest imposed in 1990, and one priest was sentenced to three years' house arrest for possessing a recording of one of their controversial sermons. In secular realms, too, censorship continued, even while dissent and debate increased. According to the official press, the authorities continued throughout 1992 to seize and destroy "decadent" literature and videotapes, including materials deems "superstitious" or "counterrevolutionary." The Culture Ministry confiscated 2,400 copies of a work that satirized the Party's favored authors while praising dissident writers such as Pham Thi Thoai and Nguyen Huy Thiep. In August, Phan Dinh Dieu, a prominent mathematician, circulated a petition urging the head of the party to accept more political openness and to drop its ideological rigidity.

The Right to Monitor

Vietnam does not permit open criticism of its human rights record by its own citizens, and has largely blocked international or foreign organizations from making independent investigations (exceptions being investigations into the status of returning boat people and American mia cases). Dr. Nguyen Dan Que, a member of Amnesty International, was sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment in 1991 for subversion, and pilloried in the official press for criticizing human rights abuses in Vietnam and other countries.

A telling indication of Hanoi's growing need to respond to human rights criticism was a September 28 broadcast of the official Voice of Vietnam in English. It acknowledged occasional reports of "an intellectual or a religious personality...brought to trial for acts in violation of social security," as well as unavoidable "shortcomings and mistakes" on the part of the Communist Party which were said to have been "corrected." However, the view of human rights as somehow inimical to national security prevailed, with the broadcast warning against "those who take advantage of the present open-door policy and democratic atmosphere in order to destabilize the political situation..."

U.S. Policy

The Bush administration moved toward normalizing relations with Vietnam after a breakthrough on the prisoner-of-war/ missing-in-action (POW/mia) issue in October when the Vietnamese government agreed to open its archives to U.S. investigators. Earlier, an American researcher working on the archives found and turned over to the Pentagon some 4,800 photographs of U.S. servicemen killed in action during the Vietnam War. President Bush said that after these developments, he was "convinced that we can begin writing the last chapter of the Vietnam War."

The administration did not make improvement in Vietnam's human rights situation a condition for establishing full diplomatic relations. Nonetheless, members of the administration and Congress continued to raise the cases of political prisoners with the Vietnamese government. Assistant Secretary of State for Asian and Pacific Affairs Richard Solomon raised human rights issues when he headed the highest-level U.S. delegation to Vietnam in March. In April, a delegation of the Senate Select Committee on mia Issues raised the case of Dr. Nguyen Dan Que. Senator Charles Robb brought medicine from Dr. Que's family, and although Senator Robb was not permitted to visit Dr. Que, authorities videotaped their delivery of the medicine to him in prison.

In March, a bipartisan group of 22 senators led by Senators Orrin Hatch and Joseph Lieberman, wrote to Premier Kiet to urge the release of Le Van Tien, Do Ngoc Long and Doan Thanh Liem. They also urged that Vietnam's laws be amended "to ensure the adequate protection of human rights."

Robert Lam and Giang To Pham, two Vietnamese-American businessmen who were arrested for unknown reasons and charged with attempting to "overthrow the government," were released on July 4, in an obvious goodwill gesture to the U.S.

The administration expanded humanitarian aid to Vietnam,even while extending the 17-year trade embargo and maintaining opposition to loans by the World Bank. On a visit to Hanoi in February, presidential envoy General John Vessey announced the first disaster assistance to Vietnam since 1975-$25,000 for victims of a cyclone. A package of approximately $3 million was announced during Secretary Solomon's March trip, which included expanded assistance in prosthetics and health care, free shipping for nongovernmental humanitarian assistance, and 15 Fulbright scholarships in 1992 and another 15 in 1993 for Vietnamese to study in the United States. Restrictions on commercial sales of items that meet basic human needs, such as food, medicine and farm machinery, were lifted in April, along with the ban on direct telecommunications with Vietnam. Finally, the administration promised in September to give nongovernmental organizations in Vietnam up to $2 million to help repatriate and resettle returning asylum-seekers, and to give the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees another $800,000 to assist returning unaccompanied Vietnamese children.

The Work of Asia Watch

At the end of 1992, Asia Watch received approval for the first time to send a delegation to Vietnam, to discuss criminal law reforms. Asia Watch hopes to send the delegation in early 1993.

Throughout 1992, Asia Watch produced updated lists of political prisoners in Vietnam, and urged members of Congress and the administration to raise these cases in encounters with Vietnamese officials. Asia Watch does not take a position on normalization of diplomatic relations between the United States and Vietnam, which the administration has conditioned on factors other than human rights. However, Asia Watch does support continued dialogue and contacts between the two countries to facilitate improvements in human rights conditions.

In August, Asia Watch published a report entitled "Refugees at Risk," which described the plight of certain groups of refugees subject to forcible return by the Hong Kong government. One such group is the ethnic Nung, a minority that was heavily recruited by the French, American and South Vietnamese militaries in the war against the communists. Since 1975, Nung veterans have been subject to forced labor, exile and deprivation of civil rights. Although Hong Kong has recognized some Nung as genuine political refugees, it has rejected other Nung who experienced severe persecution. Despite Asia Watch's appeals to the governments of Hong Kong and the United States and to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, four such veterans were forced back to Vietnam on August 4, 1992, and others followed in a forced return on November 20. Some of those returned experienced intense political interrogation, and difficulty obtaining identity documents necessary to secure basic services and rights.

Asia Watch also expressed concern for Vietnamese who by virtue of political acts committed while in Hong Kong may be subject to persecution or arrest for political crimes should they be forced back to Vietnam. Examples include artists, writers and political activists whose criticism of the current government hasbecome publicly known. Such persons should be considered refugees under international law, regardless of their reasons for fleeing Vietnam initially. The Vietnamese government's current repression of dissent undermines its vow to the British government not to persecute those who are forcibly returned.
HELSINKI WATCH OVERVIEW

Human Rights Developments

The map of Europe has changed radically since the demise of communism and the disintegration of the USSR and Yugoslavia, adding seventeen additional countries to the region that Helsinki Watch has traditionally monitored. The human rights situation in the former Soviet bloc has also been utterly transformed. The countries that formerly made up the monolithic Soviet empire had their common repressive policies and abusive practices and were seemingly impervious to the protests of Helsinki Watch. Now, however, we are dealing with new and needy independent states that to one extent or another want our blessings and approval as they reaffirm their own uniqueness. Although human rights abuses continue, they are no longer the same from country to country. Nor do they remain unchanging as was previously the case. The post-communist nations are in transition, and the human rights situations in these countries are also subject to sudden change.

Traditional forms of human rights abuses continue: political prisoners, deplorable prison conditions, lack of due process in the courts, denial of religious and cultural freedom, and the repression of free speech, free assembly, and a free press. Actions to intimidate the independent press and to stifle political opposition, often done under pretexts, are becoming increasingly common in the region, especially in parts of the former USSR, as well as in Croatia, Albania and Slovakia.

Conflicts over territory, sometimes portrayed by governments, accurately or inaccurately, as ethnic conflict, are also rampant. They have led to armed internal and international conflict in the former Yugoslavia (in Croatia and Bosnia-Hercegovina) and in the former Soviet Union (the Caucasus, Nagorno Karabakh and Moldova). In the territory that was formerly the Soviet Union, where situations of armed ethnic conflict seemed impossible just a few years ago, government forces and paramilitary groups now have at their disposal sophisticated heavy weaponry, and are using it to seize long-disputed territory or to resolve other bitter feuds. The tragic bloodbath in Bosnia-Hercegovina and Croatia has assumed particular horror because it is being conducted in the name of "ethnic cleansing." It stands as a symbol of the real and potential dangers that confront the former communist world and threaten Europe as a whole.

A major problem that has arisen in a number of the former communist countries concerns efforts to decommunize the bureaucracy and punish past abuses. Helsinki Watch believes that it is important that there be a full disclosure of past abuses and that those who committed crimes be punished. On the other hand, we oppose the punishment of people solely because of past associations. Helsinki Watch is concerned about the ways in which certain governments are handling the secret police files that have come into their possession and about laws that have been passed or are being considered to "lustrate" (i.e., purify) the society by denying employment in a wide-range of positions to former communists and others who belonged to specified organizations in the past. Czechoslovakia, which many of us expected to set high standards in the process of peaceful democratic change, instead unleashed a lustration process against former communists that has given rise to a witch hunt and become an unfortunate model for other countries in the region. Bulgaria has approached lustration piecemeal, by attaching provisions to legislation such as the law on banking and the draft law on scientific institutions. (The banking law was struck down by the Constitutional Court.) Germany has begun a wide-ranging process of decommunization that affects the entire civil service in what was formerly East Germany. Poland, Russia, Albania and Croatia, among others, are considering various forms of lustration laws or similar measures. The process is particularly worrisome because it is frequently used for ulterior political purposes.

Discrimination against ethnic minorities has become exacerbated in many of the countries that Helsinki Watch monitors, a consequence of nationalism and xenophobia that have come to the fore within the region since the demise of communism. In many countries, in both eastern and western Europe, there have been skinhead attacks on members of minority groups and refugees. Gypsies have been among the prime targets of such attacks, which also extend to foreigners in general. The attacks in eastern Europe are especially worrisome because thepolice are not schooled in sophisticated methods of crowd control and often share the antipathies of the attackers. In Serbia and Montenegro paramilitary groups-with the apparent blessing of the Serbian government-are terrorizing minorities, thereby extending "ethnic cleansing" policies to the current Yugoslavia. Similarly, repression against Albanians in Kosovo continues and the fear of armed conflict has greatly increased.

Minority rights are a problem throughout the former Soviet Union, but are aggravated-and resolved-in different ways. In remote regions of Russia, certain ethnic minorities have repeatedly been the targets of popular attacks, a pattern with which the Russian government has so far been unwilling or unable to cope. In the Caucasus and Moldova, the demands of minorities have led to violent clashes. The governments of the Baltic states have passed or are considering citizenship laws affecting the rights of minorities; Helsinki Watch is critical of some of the methods they have chosen.

The human rights situation in Turkey, long a source of great concern, deteriorated dramatically in 1992, despite the advent of a new, more liberal coalition government that promised to make major human rights reforms. Just about every human rights abuse in the lexicon is taking place in Turkey: summary execution by security forces, torture during police detention, disappearances, assassinations, violent suppression of demonstrations, censorship, arrests and killings of journalists, and the suppression of a large ethnic minority, the Kurds. The conflict in Northern Ireland remains acute, with human rights abuses committed both by the security forces and paramilitary groups.

The Right to Monitor

In the countries of the former Soviet bloc, where human rights monitoring was severely repressed under the communists, there is virtually no overt repression of human rights monitors at this time. Ironically, however, we now find a dearth of local human rights monitors. Many of the dissidents with whom we formerly worked have joined the new governments. Some have turned out to have views antithetical to our concept of human rights. Almost no one is truly impartial. Because our work depends on the existence of reliable human rights sources within each country, we have begun seeking out, encouraging and training new people who have the potential of becoming human rights monitors within their countries. As human rights abuses proliferate in the post-communist societies, new human rights monitoring groups are beginning to form.

In Turkey, where human rights monitors in the Kurdish southeast have been the victims of killings and disappearances, human rights groups are nevertheless permitted to function, albeit with frequent intimidation. In Northern Ireland, Greece and Germany, where Helsinki Watch has become increasingly engaged, the right to monitor has not, to our knowledge, been abused.

U.S. Policy

The U.S. government's policy toward the former Soviet Union and the former communist countries in Eastern Europe has, on the whole, been nurturing and benign. The United States has put its efforts into strengthening democratic institutions through exchanges and training programs, as well as programs of economic assistance.

While this is to be encouraged, Helsinki Watch is disturbed by the failure of U.S. government officials to speak out publicly about ongoing human rights abuses in these countries. U.S. human rights policy appears to be based on the assumption that the demise of communism and the turn toward a market economy will inevitably lead to democracy, and on the further assumption that democracy inevitably leads to respect for human rights. Neither, however, is necessarily the case.

The failure of U.S. human rights policy also stems from its mainly reactive stance without a comprehensive, forward-looking plan. While this is understandable to some extent, given the turmoil and chaos in the region, it has led, unfortunately, to inconsistency and waffling on major issues, such as the conflict in Yugoslavia. Throughout the war in Croatia, the U.S. remained virtually silent and it was only after war broke out in Bosnia-Hercegovina in April did the U.S. began to take a more forceful role, urging severe sanctions against Serbia and working hard to enlist other governments in the embargo. After the sanctions were in place, however, the U.S. seemed to disengage from theBosnian situation. Indeed in August, when international public opinion focused with horror on reports from Serbian-operated detention camps, U.S. determination to avoid military involvement in Bosnia-Hercegovina initially led State Department spokespersons to minimize the enormity of the crimes being committed in the camps. Ultimately, the U.S. government took the lead again, urging the establishment of a war crimes investigative body under U.N. auspices.

The State Department, before recognizing the successor states to the former Soviet Union, set certain conditions for recognition including a respect for human rights, then proceeded to recognize fledgling governments, many of which have only a tenuous hold on human rights principles. It would have been better to recognize the new states and urge that they take measures to ensure respect for the rights of all citizens. By implying in recognizing these states that they are respectful of human rights it became more difficult for the State Department subsequently to criticize the human rights policies of those governments. Despite abuses in a number of the successor states, only Azerbaijan has been subjected to sanctions, i.e., the withholding of aid under the Freedom Support Act because of its role in the Nagorno Karabakh conflict. Even then, the measures taken were less effective than they might have been because they were not even-handed, since no mention was made of Armenia's role in human rights abuses in the Nagorno Karabakh conflict.

In other countries, U.S human rights policy has too often been marked by silence; this is especially true in the case of Turkey. State Department officials acknowledge human rights abuses in Turkey but claim that they use quiet diplomacy in trying to improve the situation. There have been no strong public criticisms of the torture, killings and disappearances in Turkey, and, in the case of killings in southeastern Turkey at the time of the Kurdish New Year, a State Department spokesperson went so far as to praise the Turkish government for its "use of restraint." Turkey remains the third largest recipient of U.S. aid, but, despite an exacerbation of the consistent pattern of gross abuse in Turkey, the U.S. government has never invoked Section 502B of the Foreign Assistance Act to withhold aid from Turkey or to explain the extenuating circumstances that make such aid necessary.

The U.S. State Department has not publicly criticized the government of the U.K. for abuses in Northern Ireland, nor has it publicly condemned the German government for not being forceful in attempting to prevent right-wing violence in Germany.

Helsinki Watch urges the new Administration to be more forceful in its human rights policies by combining quiet diplomacy with public criticism and developing a consistent strategy for dealing with human rights abuses in the Helsinki signatory countries.

The Work of Helsinki Watch

The monitoring work of Helsinki Watch has been much easier in 1992, due to greater access in the countries that we monitor and to our own strong reputations with their governments. Especially in the former Soviet bloc where many government officials are former colleagues of ours in the human rights struggle, our reports and critiques are taken seriously, both by those who agree with us and by those who disagree. A critical report or letter to a government official from Helsinki Watch often occasions protracted debate in government circles and the press. It is gratifying, and also sobering, to know that we have such direct impact.

The former Soviet Union, as the largest and most complex of the countries in the region we cover, was always the main focus of our attention. With the breakup of the empire, we continue to focus attention on its constituent parts, a task that at times seems overwhelming. In 1992, Helsinki Watch expanded its staff to include a Central Asian specialist and opened a Moscow office. The Moscow office is used to monitor developments in Russia and as a taking off point for missions and research conducted in other parts of former Soviet territory.

Even before the breakup of the former Soviet Union, Helsinki Watch had established a program of missions to the various republics. Initially, we focused on what were known as "hot spots"-areas in which local unrest had escalated into violence, primarily due to nationalist and/or anti-communist protests. We investigated the ways in which Soviet armed forces contributed to the violence, either by inaction or overreaction. Invariably we found that the Sovietgovernment's response was dictated by the perceived political needs of the center.

Since the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the human rights situation has become as variegated as the countries themselves. Yet different patterns of problems have emerged that are specific to different regions. In the Caucasus, Moldova and parts of Central Asia, struggles to maintain political power and/or territorial integrity or for self-determination have escalated to armed conflicts. Helsinki Watch has sent missions and/or issued reports on conflicts in Georgia, Azerbaijan, Tajikistan and Moldova. In our reporting, we seek to ascertain the causes of the hostilities with the hope that governments in other former Soviet republics, by treating their minorities with greater care and understanding, might avoid such conflicts from erupting in the future.

In many of the countries of Central Asia, governments are led by former Communists who continue old, Soviet-inherited practices of political repression-cracking down on the nascent free press, free speech and free assembly-in an effort to fend off threats to their power. Former communists-now devoted nationalists-are also in positions of power in Belarus and Ukraine where they are engaged in continued, organized efforts at silencing public criticism of their governments (albeit on a milder scale than their Central Asian counterparts). Helsinki Watch has reported on some of these abuses and issued protests about others. Our work has been complicated by the fact that the violations occur under circumstances of rapid change in which the rule of law is non-existent. We frequently find ourselves protesting against abuses by a government which, soon afterwards, is no longer in power, as was the case with the Zviad Gamsakhurdia government in Georgia and, more recently, with the government of Rakhman Nabiev in Tajikistan.

Helsinki Watch has sent multiple missions to and issued reports on 11 of the 15 republics that are now successor states to the Soviet Union, and we continue to follow up in those regions where we have already begun work. Yet the work remains daunting: we have yet to begin work in Ukraine, Belarus, Turkmenistan and Kyrgyzstan, to say nothing of the vast expanse of Russia outside of Moscow and St. Petersburg.

Helsinki Watch now maintains a constant presence in the former Yugoslavia, detailing abuses as they occur. We have documented a range of abuses connected with the armed conflict there: summary killings and torture of civilians, the use of indiscriminate force, the taking of hostages, the mistreatment of prisoners of war, and the forcible displacement of civilians. Our work in Yugoslavia goes back some years, beginning with our reports on Serbian repression in Kosovo. We compiled detailed information about violations by both sides in the war in Croatia and brought this information directly to the presidents of both Serbia and Croatia. In 1992 we issued yet another report on the situation in Kosovo and lengthy documentation on violations of the laws of war in Bosnia-Hercegovina.

In Eastern and Central Europe, the major problems involve the de-communization process and ethnic and racial discrimination. Helsinki Watch has issued a number of critiques of the de-communization process, in Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria and Poland. We are preparing a report on de-communization in Germany and will continue to weigh in on this subject in each of the countries in which such procedures are being contemplated or are already under way.

In 1992 Helsinki Watch issued a report on the treatment of foreigners in Germany that attracted considerable attention in Germany. Helsinki Watch also criticized the deportation of Romanian Gypsies from Germany. We have issued three reports so far on discrimination against Gypsies in Europe (in Bulgaria, Romania and Czechoslovakia) and are planning others. In recent years, Helsinki Watch has issued reports on the treatment of Hungarians in Romania, Macedonians in Bulgaria, Turks in Greece and Greeks and Kurds in Turkey.

Helsinki Watch has entered the debate on discriminatory citizenship and minority laws, especially in Latvia, Estonia and Moldova, where laws have been passed or are being considered that would deny citizenship and/or property rights to some minorities or force non-native speakers to learn the titular language of the republic in order to hold positions in government and industry.

Helsinki Watch stepped up its work on Turkey still further in 1992, issuing many reports and newsletters on abuses and continuing to lobby the U.S. government to withhold or justify providing massive financial aid to Turkey in light of its pattern of gross violations of human rights.

In recent years Helsinki Watch has expanded its critiques to include certain countries in western Europe, most notably Germany, Greece and the United Kingdom. Our work in Germany is described above. In Greece, we continue to monitor the situation of the Turkish minority in Western Thrace, where there has recently been some noticeable improvement. In Northern Ireland we have monitored the conduct of both security forces and paramilitary groups in the ongoing conflict, most recently with a report examining the treatment of children in Northern Ireland and the system of extralegal justice that has evolved there. We have brought our complaints to the responsible officials in the United Kingdom, and they have received considerable attention there.

Helsinki Watch continues to report on prison conditions and conditions in police lockups, most recently in Romania, the U.K. and Spain. We have also issued two reports in conjunction with the Women's Rights Project of Human Rights Watch. One documents the Czechoslovak communists' practice of forcing or coercing Gypsy women to be sterilized and its carryover into the present. Another report that describes discriminatory practices toward women in Poland caused considerable discussion in Poland. Helsinki Watch also expressed concern about the Polish Medical Association's ethics code against the practice of abortion, pointing out that it was contradictory to the country's current abortion law.

In these turbulent times, we find that we are constantly setting and re-setting our priorities. New work is always undertaken with the recognition that, once we begin a project in a country, we are committed to continue our monitoring there on a regular basis as long as problems persist.
ALBANIA

Human Rights Developments

Multiparty elections were held in March 1992, the second such elections since reforms began in Albania at the end of 1990. In the first elections, in March 1991, the communist Labor Party won the majority. In the recent elections, in March 1992, the opposition Democratic Party won a majority (67.7 percent) of the seats in the Albanian parliament and Sali Berisha became president of Albania. International observers described the 1992 elections as free and fair. However, ethnically based parties and groups were not permitted to field candidates, a ban that violates principles enunciated by the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and serves to exacerbate tensions between Greek and Albanian communities in southern Albania. The Greek minority organization, Omonia, prevented from running directly, reorganized as the Union for Human Rights and won two seats in the parliament.

During the election campaign preceding the 1992 elections, the media became more open and reported on developments more accurately and objectively. However, not long after the Democratic Party came to power, some journalists and editors who wrote or printed articles that criticized the current government were dismissed, censored or harassed. Examples included the following:

 During the summer of 1992, Arian Melonashi, a television journalist, was dismissed from his job along with his sound and camera crew. Melonashi had prepared an interview with Azem Hajdari, a deputy chair of the Democratic Party and a critic of Berisha's government. Hajdari had been especially critical of a recently promulgated law that gave directors of enterprises the freedom to hire and dismiss workers without providing justification or recourse to appeal. The interview in question was never broadcast and Melonashi and his colleagues were dismissed because of their "absence" from work for several days, even though they were on assignment in Vienna for the television station. Melonashi and his colleagues took the case to court, which ruled in their favor. Despite the court's ruling, Melonashi's employer claimed that he would again dismiss Melonashi and his sound and camera crew if they returned to work.

 On July 20, Xhemal Lamcellari went on a hunger strike to protest his arrest. Lamcellari was a former lawyer and journalist for the paper Albapol, which was founded in 1991 by the Socialist Party as an official organ of the Ministry of Public Order but was banned in 1992 by the Berisha government. Lamcellari had criticized, among others, Pieter Arbnori, the president of the Albanianparliament and a former political prisoner under the dictatorial regime of Enver Hoxha.

 Several Democratic Party members who criticized the party's leadership in 1991 were later expelled from the party. In 1992, these former members founded a new political party, the Democratic Alliance, and established a semi-weekly newspaper entitled Koha Jone. The paper's editor-in-chief was arrested by local authorities in the town of Lezha and accused of lying and causing local unrest because in a campaign speech he quoted Blerim Cela, the Minister of State Control, as saying that Albanians "would be better off voting for [Serbian President Slobodan] Milosevic than for the [Albanian] Socialist [Party]," the renamed Labor Party.

The rehabilitation of former political prisoners in Albania remains a pressing problem. Many thousands during the Hoxha era were sentenced to exceptionally long terms of imprisonment followed by internal exile. Extended family members were caught in the web and sent into the harsh conditions of internal exile; many remained there for several generations. All of these prisoners have now been released. The government enacted a law on rehabilitation on September 30, 1991, which applies to about 15 to 20 percent of the former prisoners, those who were sentenced under Articles 53, 55 and 57 of the Penal Code for "agitation and propaganda," trying to cross the border illegally or engaging in anti-government activity. The law provides for the restoration of pensions, including time served in prison as working time. It also provides for the restoration of titles and honors, of homes and jobs, and of the right to seek higher education. The law also provides for compensation or return of confiscated property and for damages to be paid to former prisoners and their families. A draft law is now being prepared to deal with the remaining 80 percent of the former prisoners, those who were sentenced as war criminals, enemies of the people, or spies.

The government has provided some jobs in central and local government for former political prisoners. It also has arranged to waive the entrance examinations to higher educational establishments for 2,500 students from among the former prisoners and exiles. Yet, much remains to be done, and the government is handicapped by lack of funds. The former prisoners, most of whom have returned to major cities, live in squalid conditions in makeshift housing. Most of them have been unable to find jobs, and a large proportion are still in the process of proving that they are, indeed, former political prisoners.

After the Labor Party renamed itself the Socialist Party in mid-1991, hard-line Marxists founded the Communist Party and continued to follow the principles of Albania's former dictator, Enver Hoxha. On July 16, the Albanian parliament voted to ban the Communist Party and its newspaper, Zeri i se Vertetes (Voice of Truth). According to the Albanian Justice Ministry, the Law on Political Parties prohibits the existence of political parties whose aims and activities have "an anti-national, chauvinistic, racist, totalitarian, fascist, Stalinist, Enverist, communist and Marxist-Leninist character." Hysni Milloshi, the chairman of the Communist Party, was arrested on July 22 for illegal weapons possession. A law that took effect in June allowed leaders of political parties, members of parliament and government ministers to keep weapons; Milloshi lost that right after parliament banned his party in July.

There are new political prisoners in Albania now. Nineteen former Labor Party leaders have been arrested and are awaiting trial on various charges, including corruption, abuse of privileges and appropriation and misuse of state property. Among them is Enver Hoxha's 71-year-old widow, Nexhmije Hoxha, who was arrested in December 1990 on charges of corruption and since has been held in prison. Some of the 18 other former Labor Party officials have also been in prison for periods of a year or more, awaiting trial; others are being held under house arrest. On September 12, former President Ramiz Alia was placed under house arrest in his daughter's home where he lives; the house is surrounded by armed guards.

Albania's public prosecutor, Maksim Haxhia, who reportedly went against the wishes of Democratic Party leaders by refusing to initiate criminal proceedings and for moving too slowly in the cases of former communists, was removed from his job. Haxhia also angered the Berisha government by opposing a parliamentary law giving police the right to search houses without a warrant and for challengingpolice for using excessive force in the crackdown on crime. En route to conferences in Cannes and London, Haxhia's diplomatic passport was confiscated at the Tirana airport and he has not been allowed to leave the country. Under Albanian law, the prosecutor can only be fired on grounds of mental incompetence or for committing a crime. Haxhia is now being investigated on charges of falsifying a document relating to the appointment of a prosecutor to a local government position. Some believe these charges have been trumped up to justify firing him.

Although Helsinki Watch believes that those guilty of past abuses should be brought to justice, we object to the lengthy incarceration of former communists without trial as a violation of due process and the freedom from arbitrary detention. The defendants should be tried by an impartial court, affording all due process rights, within a reasonable period.

Helsinki Watch continues to urge that the cases of all prisoners currently in detention for non-political crimes also be reviewed. Because defense attorneys were banned in most cases prior to 1990, prisoners sentenced before then did not receive due process.

In May 1990, the scope of the death penalty was restricted under amendments to the criminal code. Women may no longer be sentenced to death. According to Amnesty International, the number of offenses punishable by death has been reduced from 34 to 11. These include treason, espionage, terrorism and pre-mediated murder, as well as some economic, non-violent crimes.

The use of the death penalty for common criminals increased in Albania in 1992. The death penalty is apparently being used by the Albanian government as a deterrent to violent crime. According to Amnesty International, eight death sentences were passed during the first six months of 1992. Three of the eight were commuted to life imprisonment. Two executions took place on June 25, when two brothers, Ditbardh and Josif Cuko, were hanged in the main square of Fier (in central Albania) at 1:00 a.m. The execution itself was not public but the bodies of the two men were left on the gallows throughout the day while spectators, including many who had traveled to Fier for the execution, were allowed to gather in the square. The two men had been convicted of bludgeoning five members of one family to death during a robbery on May 29. In early June, they were shown on television confessing to the murders. On June 11, they were tried and convicted in a courtroom in which angry members of the public reportedly urged the judge to render a verdict of guilty and to sentence them to death. The rapidity with which the two brothers were tried, sentenced and executed, and the reports of the trial itself, suggest that there were inadequacies in the legal process that led to their execution.

The Right to Monitor

In December 1990, the Forum for Human Rights was established and was later renamed the Albanian Helsinki Committee after the organization joined the International Helsinki Federation in March 1992. In September 1992, the chair of the group, who had reportedly been critical of the Berisha government, was replaced by a new chair more favorably disposed toward the current government. There is also an Association of Former Political Prisoners that generally supports the Berisha government's policies. No direct government interference in the activities of either group has been reported.

U.S. Policy

The U.S. did not devote much attention to human rights in Albania, focusing instead on its economic needs. Secretary of State James Baker visited Albania prior to the Albanian elections in March. In April, the U.S. government approved an aid package of $35 million for Albania. In early May, the U.S. took steps to grant Albania Most Favored Nation trade status, which was granted on August 26. During a meeting between Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger and Albanian Prime Minister Aleksandr Meksi in late May 1992, $10 million in food aid was promised. President Berisha met with President George Bush in June 1992 and was promised another $10 million in aid in raw materials. In all in 1992, the U.S. approved $83 million in aid for Albania.

During Secretary Eagleburger's meeting with Prime Minister Meksi in May, Eagleburger reportedly urged Albania not to adopt a militant position toward the status of Albanians in Kosovo, Yugoslavia. After the Albanian government drafteda law on religion in October, the U.S. protested several provisions. The draft law allowed the Albanian government to oversee the functioning of religious communities and to ensure that they do not violate "the constitution, the laws or the national interests" of the state. The law also required that the Albanian president approve the appointment of leaders of religious communities in the country. At the urging of the U.S., the Albanian government agreed not to endorse the law when it is brought before parliament for debate.

The Work of Helsinki Watch

Helsinki Watch continued to monitor the human rights situation in Albania throughout 1992. In October, two Helsinki Watch representatives traveled to Albania and met with government officials, human rights activists, members of the press and others. Helsinki Watch issued a protest about the removal from office of Attorney General Maksim Hoxhia. An article and a mission report were issued.
BULGARIA

Human Rights Developments

Bulgaria in 1992 continued to make steady progress toward respect for human rights and the strengthening of democratic institutions. In addition, it continued to develop ties to international and regional organizations, gaining full membership in the Council of Europe in May. Bulgaria also intensified efforts to bring to trial those accused of serious abuses during the communist era. Nevertheless, problems persisted with regard to the treatment of minorities, especially the Gypsy population, and new concerns arose regarding respect for freedom of association and expression for individuals formerly associated with the Communist Party.

Four comprehensive lustration (i.e., purification) bills have been drafted for consideration by the Bulgarian National Assembly. These bills would prohibit people who occupied certain enumerated positions in the Communist Party or were members or collaborators with the secret police from holding public office, but differ with respect to the list of past practices that qualify a person for exclusion and the scope of excluded positions in the future. Three of the bills would provide for ultimate recourse to the courts. A fourth bill entitled the "Law on Democratization" and introduced to parliament on September 9 provides for a commission elected by parliament to review complaints by individuals whose names have been included on a preliminary list of all persons banned from certain enumerated employment. The commission would publish a final list of all banned persons. No further appeal process is envisaged.

The National Assembly also attached lustration provisions to other bills. For example, the parliament passed a Banking Law in March banning high-ranking former Communists from sitting on banking commissions and receiving pensions. President Zhelev submitted this law to the Constitutional Court, which held on July 29 that the provisions violated Article 6 of the Bulgarian Constitution prohibiting discrimination on the basis of, among other things, opinion or political affiliation.

On July 23, before the Constitutional Court ruled on the Banking Law, parliament began consideration of a draft law which would prohibit former officials in the Communist Party, former staff of the State Security, teaching and research staff of the Academy for Social Sciences and Social Management, and anyone who "taught History of the Communist Party, Marxism-Leninism, Political Economy, Scientific Communism, Scientific Atheism or Party Building" from holding positions in the councils and executive bodies of scientific organizations.

Helsinki Watch supports efforts to ensure that all those holding positions of influence and power in government carry out their duties in a manner that is compatible with the development of democracy and the establishment of the rule of law. At the same time, the means pursued to achieve these ends should themselves reflect respect for individual rights. Unfortunately, the draft lustration laws currently before the Bulgarian parliament proceed from a concept of collective guilt, providing that people are to be punished not for specific acts but for belonging to specific groups. Furthermore, the burden of proof is put on the individual in question who is assumed guilty unless he or she is able to prove his or her innocence. This does not provide fair and adequate means bywhich to evaluate a person's culpability.

A udf member of parliament also introduced a bill that would invalidate the convictions issued by the People's Court between 1944-45. The People's Court, under Soviet guidance, tried a range of people, some of whom had committed war crimes and others who were political opponents of the Communists. The European Parliament issued a resolution on April 14 urging the government to withdraw this bill as it would pardon not only those who were innocent of any offenses, but also many who committed atrocious crimes. Helsinki Watch urges that all those who have committed gross human rights abuses be held accountable for their crimes and that the Bulgarian government reconsider the broad sweep of this legislation.

Most of the former communist leaders who were brought to trial in 1992 were charged only with economic crimes. After 18 months of trial, Todor Zhivkov, former head of the Bulgarian Communist Party, and his former aide, Milko Balev, were convicted on September 4 of embezzlement. Zhivkov was sentenced to seven years' imprisonment. Many other top communist officials, including former Prime Ministers Georgi Atanasov and Andrei Lukanov, have also been charged with misappropriation of state funds.

However, recent reports indicate that the prosecution of those responsible for the most serious human rights violations committed during the communist era may soon get under way. A parliamentary committee was established in February to collect evidence on human rights abuses such as the assimilation campaign against Bulgaria's ethnic and religious minorities committed by the former Bulgarian Communist Party and to submit a report to the Chief Prosecutor's Office. Furthermore, on June 25, Zhivkov was indicted for having set up two labor camps in which approximately 150 people died. In addition, Zhivkov, as well as former Foreign Minister Petar Mladenov, were indicted for their involvement in the forced assimilation campaign against Bulgarian Turks and Gypsies in the late 1980s.

The Gypsy population in Bulgaria lives in abject poverty and faces deep-seated prejudice. In 1992, Gypsies were the victims of abuse and mistreatment by local police officers. On June 28, several Gypsy men in the town of Pazardjik were chased out of an orchard allotted to the local police. When a crowd began to throw stones at the police, they opened fire, injuring two Gypsies in the process. The next morning at 4 a.m., police officers surrounded the area, armed with machine guns and search dogs. The police had been authorized by the Chief Secretary and the Regional Director of the Ministry of the Interior to conduct a "passport check and search of arms." Krassimir Kanev, adviser to President Zhelev on minority issues, reported:

The doors and windows of every house were broken down....In every home the furniture was turned upside down; wardrobes, sofas...were purposefully broken.... This was accompanied by all-round manhandling and beating of the inhabitants, as well as derogatory and discriminatory comments about the Roma people. Clubs and sticks were used against men, women, children, old people. Young women and girls became victims of sexual harassment.

As Helsinki Watch has reported before, the Bulgarian Constitution bans the registration of political parties organized along ethnic, racial or religious lines in violation of the right to peaceful association. During the October 1991 elections, both the Democratic Roma Union and the "Ilinden" organization (the organization of Macedonians named after the Ilinden uprising if August 12, 1903) were not allowed to participate as political parties. In a challenge to the constitutionality of the largely ethnic Turkish Movement for Rights and Freedoms (mrf), which is currently the third largest party in the parliament, the Constitutional Court's six to five vote on April 21 maintains the status quo, because seven votes are needed for an official decision by the Court. While the Constitutional Court's decision did not preclude the participation of mrf in future elections, the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee reported that:

The absence of a decision reaffirming the political rights of the mrf under the Constitution leaves the problem of minority rights unresolved. It also leaves open the possibility of further challengeto the association rights of the Bulgarian Turks and questions their ability to participate in the political process on a free and open basis.

In 1992, the print media operated without government interference. Smaller newspapers faced difficult economic obstacles, including a severe shortage of newsprint and difficulties in distribution. These shortages, however, did not appear to be part of a deliberate policy. Bulgarian television is still controlled by the state, and applications for licenses for competitive radio stations are processed very slowly.

The Right to Monitor

Both domestic and international human rights organizations were active in monitoring and reporting on the human rights situation in Bulgaria during 1992. Helsinki Watch is unaware of any human rights monitor who was threatened or prevented from carrying out his or her activities during this period.

U.S. Policy

Relations between the United States and Bulgaria continued to improve throughout 1992, with both countries concentrating on strengthening economic ties. Recognizing the great progress that Bulgaria has made over the last two years with regard to human rights, Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger on March 4 stated that the United States "believes Bulgaria's progress is sufficient now to merit inclusion with [Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary] in our assistance programs and initiatives."

State Department officials indicated that human rights in Bulgaria were discussed on several occasions, including meetings between President Bush and Prime Minister Filip Dimitrov on March 3 and between President Bush and Foreign Minister Stoyan Ganev on September 21.

Although the Bush administration's human rights policy towards Bulgaria was largely appropriate given the improved situation in the country, the U.S. government failed to address publicly such human rights concerns as police brutality toward Gypsies and due process violations in the decommunization process.

The Work Of Helsinki Watch

Helsinki Watch focused much of its efforts during 1992 on the issue of decommunization in Bulgaria. In May, a representative of Helsinki Watch met with President Zhelev, as well as with members of parliament, to discuss several proposed decommunization provisions that were being considered. On July 18, Helsinki Watch sent a letter to President Zhelev expressing concern about the concept of collective guilt embodied in the two comprehensive lustration bills, as well as similar riders to other legislation. Helsinki Watch urged the President to challenge the validity of these laws in Bulgaria's Constitutional Court.

On August 28, Helsinki Watch sent a letter to President Zhelev protesting the "Law for Additional Requirements for Scientific Organizations and the Higher Certifying Commission" which is still under consideration by the Bulgarian parliament. The letter stated:

Helsinki Watch is troubled by the broad language of the new law that imposes a penalty (denial of employment) for past activities that, in many cases, were neither criminal nor violative of fundamental human rights or the rule of law....Furthermore, this law violates the fundamental rights of the individual to freedom of association and expression....

In October, Helsinki Watch sent a follow-up mission to Bulgaria to investigate developments in the decommunization process. A representative of Helsinki Watch met with government officials, as well as individuals who have lost their employment because of their past political affiliations and activities. A newsletter on the mission's findings will be issued in early 1993.

In November, a Helsinki Watch staff person traveled to Bulgaria to investigate reported human rights concerns of minority groups. Helsinki Watch metwith representatives of the Gypsy minority and also had meetings with representatives from the government who are responsible for minority issues. A newsletter on the mission's findings will be issued in early 1993.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA

Human Rights Developments

The Federal Republic of Czechoslovakia will cease to be on January 1, 1993. The move toward permanent division of the Czech lands from Slovakia became more certain after the parliamentary elections on June 5-6, 1992, which resulted in Vladimir Meciar becoming Prime Minister of Slovakia and Vaclav Klaus becoming Prime Minister of the Czech republic. On July 17, the Slovak National Council issued a declaration of sovereignty. Within a few minutes of that declaration, President Havel announced that he was resigning, effective July 20. On September 24, after five rounds of voting, the federal parliament acknowledged its inability to elect a federal president. On September 3, the Slovakian constitution went into effect. As Czechoslovakia disintegrated, concerns increased about strident nationalism and the discriminatory treatment of ethnic minorities. In the Czech republic, measures against former communists continued.

In October 1991, the federal parliament approved a "lustration" law that excludes from a wide range of appointive positions-in government, state-owned companies, the academy and the media-those who are said to have collaborated with Czechoslovakia's repressive secret police agency, the StB, or who held positions in the Communist Party or other specified Communist-connected institutions since 1948. The law allows citizens to contest its findings before an independent commission. As of September 11, the Ministry of Internal Affairs had examined 146,000 applicants for government positions, 10,244 of whom were identified as having been secret police collaborators.

In a decision issued on March 5, the Governing Body of the International Labor Organization (ilo) wrote that "the persons covered by the [lustration law] are implicated essentially on the ground of their political opinion and not on account of any activities prejudicial to the security of the State within the meaning of Article 4 of the Convention [No. 111 on Discrimination in the Workplace]." The ilo estimates that the law would affect more than one million people, and called on the government to "scrap or change" it.

In the view of Helsinki Watch, the Czechoslovakian government and the Constitutional Court should repeal the lustration law. The law does not adequately guarantee a review of each case on an individual basis in a proceeding in which the accused is told the charges against him and is given sufficient opportunity to prepare a defense. Adequate consideration is not given to the possibility that false information might have been planted in police files, or that an individual might be able to cite extenuating circumstances in his or her defense. Furthermore, Helsinki Watch is concerned that with respect to past violations of human rights, persons are not charged with having violated a particular law or standard, but instead are being persecuted merely for having belonged to a now-discredited group.

In April, 99 members of parliament voted to ask the new Constitutional Court to review the law to determine its compliance with the Federal Charter of Basic Rights and Freedoms. By the end of November, the Court had not ruled on the case. Slovak Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar stated that his government would abolish the lustration law after January 1993.

On April 29, a list of journalists accused of collaborating with the former secret police was submitted to the parliament by the Federal Security and Information Service (fbis). Although the parliament voted to keep the list secret, it was leaked to the press within an hour. The names of some 380 journalists were made public, causing many of them to lose their jobs without ever having an opportunity to challenge the list's validity. By May, lists purporting to represent the entire roster of names in the StB files were unofficially circulating.

The treatment of Gypsies in Czechoslovakia has improved in some ways since 1989. Gypsies are now recognized as a national minority in both federal and republic documents outlining principles of government policy. Gypsies can publish and use the Romany language, form political parties, and establish culturalorganizations. Discrimination is forbidden by the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms of the Czech and Slovak Republics. Nevertheless, Gypsies face growing discrimination in housing, employment, and access to public and private services, and are increasingly the victims of physical and verbal attacks. Helsinki Watch received reports of police indifference and slow reaction to acts of violence against Gypsies. Some Gypsies also reported that their complaints are not accepted or pursued by the police.

Helsinki Watch also received reports that the police are often brutal in their dealings with Gypsies. For example, witnesses in the town of Lomnicka, Slovakia, reported that on May 5 fifty police entered the town and attacked men, women and children without justification. The police pointed pistols at several Gypsies' heads and shouted racial epithets such as "All Gypsies to be shot!" and "There you have it, you dirty Gypsy! All of you will die!"

Under the Communist regime, many Gypsy women were sterilized without their consent. As late as August 1990, Gypsy women were receiving monetary incentives to undergo sterilization. Complaints submitted by Gypsy women sterilized without their consent have been dismissed by local and republic prosecutors with only cursory investigations, and those responsible for carrying out these practices have not been prosecuted. Nor have government officials publicly condemned these past abuses.

As the likelihood of Czechoslovakia's break-up increased during 1992, the 600,000 ethnic Hungarians living in Slovakia expressed concerns about how they would be treated in an independent and increasingly nationalist Slovakia. During debates on the Slovak Constitution, Hungarian deputies walked out in protest over the preamble that read "We, the Slovak nation" and over an amendment stipulating that the Slovak language will be the "state" language of the republic.

Although in general the press operates freely in Czechoslovakia, the Slovak government appeared to be trying to restrict press freedoms on several occasions. In early August, the Slovak government barred several newspapers from government press conferences. Two of the papers, Slovensky vychod and Smer, are being sued by Prime Minister Meciar for libel. According to The Prague Post, the Slovak government also "canceled a deal to privatize the near monopoly press Danubiaprint" and "revoked a broadcasting license granted to a company during the previous administration." The government appears to be using technicalities to suppress press freedom. The newspaper Smena tried to privatize but was prevented by the government on technical grounds; it is now in serious financial difficulties. An alternative university in Trnava has been harassed by the government, which froze its bank account on the grounds that its rector, who was appointed by President Havel, does not have the correct academic qualifications.

The Right to Monitor

Helsinki Watch is not aware of any instance in which human rights or other independent monitors have been hindered in their work by the government of Czechoslovakia.

U.S. Policy

The Bush administration made no significant public comment on human rights developments in Czechoslovakia during 1992. Although the human rights record of the Czechoslovakian government was generally good, the administration failed to exploit opportunities to address human rights issues connected with the break-up of Czechoslovakia, as well as the extensive abuses associated with the lustration process.

The Bush administration did indicate its concern about growing nationalism in Slovakia, and indicated that it had raised its concerns with the leaders of that republic. At a hearing before the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Europe and the Middle East on September 29, Assistant Secretary of State for European and Canadian Affairs Thomas Niles called the developments in Slovakia "disquieting" and stated:

We are watching the situation there very closely and we have made quite clear to the government of Slovakia, to those who will by all appearance lead Slovakia into independence, Mr. Meciar and others, that certainly the quality of Slovakia's relationship with the United States will depend upon the observance of csce principles,respect for the rights of minorities, democratic principles....

The Work of Helsinki Watch

During 1992, Helsinki Watch focused primarily on two of the most important human rights concerns in Czechoslovakia: the decommunization process and the treatment of Gypsies.

Helsinki Watch engaged in a dialogue with the Czechoslovakian government regarding lustration legislation throughout late 1991 and 1992. In October 1991, after the federal parliament passed the lustration law, Helsinki Watch sent a letter to President Havel, criticizing the law as premised on the notion of collective guilt and urging that "each case should be treated on an individual basis in a proceeding in which the accused has ample opportunity to hear the charges and to defend himself."

In March, representatives from Helsinki Watch met with President Havel in Prague and raised their concerns about the lustration law. Previously, in December 1991, Helsinki Watch had sent a representative to Czechoslovakia to investigate the implementation of the lustration law. A newsletter issued in late April concluded that "Helsinki Watch has observed evidence of a `witch hunt' that already exceeds the literal terms of the law." Helsinki Watch called on the government of Czechoslovakia and its Constitutional Court to repeal the lustration law. Helsinki Watch also recommended that the Czechoslovakian government:

(1) set up an independent, non-governmental commission to investigate and report on abuses of the previous regime;

(2) prosecute those responsible for actual crimes, on the basis of specific charges and with full due process protections;

(3) assure that no prosecutions or other adverse actions against individuals-for example, in employment and education-take place solely on the basis of political associations or party membership.

An article written by Helsinki Watch regarding the lustration law entitled "Witch Hunt in Prague" appeared in The New York Review of Books in May 1992.

Helsinki Watch devoted much of its efforts in 1992 to a comprehensive investigation of the treatment of Gypsies in Czechoslovakia. A Helsinki Watch representative was in

the country from October 1991 to March 1992 to conduct interviews with the Gypsy population, experts on minority issues, and local and federal government officials. A report was issued in August.

On September 10, Helsinki Watch sent a letter to Josef Tuchnya, Slovakian Minister of the Interior, expressing concern about credible reports of police brutality and the use of racial slurs against the Gypsy community in the town of Lomnicka. Helsinki Watch called on the government to initiate a thorough investigation into these events.
ESTONIA, LATVIA AND LITHUANIA

Human Rights Developments

The Soviet legacy continues to create human rights problems for the governments of the Baltic states. These problems are difficult to solve because they pit the needs of numerically small nations that suffered a tragic fate under the Soviet regime against the rights of individuals associated with that regime. In 1992 the citizenship status and rights of minorities-primarily Russians-who moved to Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania during the Soviet occupation became an increasingly divisive issue. Lithuania and Latvia, for example, have taken measures to exclude individuals from elected office based on their political behavior during the Soviet period.

The Baltic countries are aware of the problems concerning minority rights in their state. The Latvian government has consistently recommended that the United Nations Human Rights Commission establish a permanent office in Latvia to monitor minority rights. In August, the Latvian government met with a jointdelegation from the Russian Foreign Ministry and the Moscow Helsinki Group, which resulted in a six-page report on the situation of Russians in that state. In Estonia, non-citizens have the right, guaranteed by the Estonian constitution, to vote in local elections. In October, Estonia invited a fact-finding mission from the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (csce) to examine that country's citizenship and minority rights legislation.

Yet the main problem-who shall have the right to become a citizen automatically-remains. Although international human rights law does not directly address the issue of citizenship in countries emerging from foreign rule, international standards can and should be used to guide citizenship regulations. The fairness of such regulations may be evaluated by two sets of criteria. The first is whether they refrain from treating as immigrants individuals who lived on the state's territory before the declaration or reestablishment of independence (excepting those who lived in the Baltic states only as part of their military duty); this approach is embodied in the so-called zero-option citizenship laws. The second, if the law treats such individuals as immigrants, is whether the language and residence qualifications are reasonable.

In addition, citizenship regulations should not deny eligibility to individuals who, while they were living in the republic during the Soviet period, were convicted of a serious crime, who received treatment for alcoholism or drug addiction, or belonged to the Communist Party or the Soviet security apparatus. Denying citizenship to previously convicted criminals effectively adds an additional, ex post facto penalty to the convicted person's punishment, which violates Article 15 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (iccpr); excluding persons who have received treatment for alcoholism or drug addiction violates Article 7 of the same Covenant, which prohibits "inhumane or degrading treatment or punishment," since it serves as a deterrent to needed medical treatment. Denying citizenship to the third category of individuals violates the freedom of association guaranteed in the Covenant's Article 22. Citizenship should be denied only to those former kgb or other security agents who are individually proven culpable in a court of law for specific crimes that were outlawed at the time of the acts in question.

Lithuania's zero-option citizenship law, which categorically excluded certain kinds of criminals, alcoholics and drug addicts, was in force through the end of 1991. A new citizenship law which then came into effect is aimed mainly at regulating citizenship for individuals who moved to Lithuania after independence.

On February 26, 1992, the Estonian Supreme Council issued a decree re-establishing the Estonian Citizenship Law of 1938. Under the law, which rejects the zero option, all individuals who were not Estonian citizens (or their direct descendants) as of June 16, 1940 (the date when Soviet troops took control of Estonia), or who did not appeal for citizenship to, and gain approval from, the Congress of Estonia in 1990 and 1991, must apply for citizenship. Requirements include two years of permanent residence (beginning March 30, 1990), a one-year waiting period, and knowledge of 1,000 words in the Estonian language. The law prohibits dual citizenship and categorically denies citizenship to, among others, military personnel currently serving in foreign armies, and former Soviet intelligence and security officers.

The new Estonian government is to be credited for seeking ways to liberalize the citizenship law. On October 19, it issued a program that suggested allowing dual citizenship, giving children born and educated in Estonia the opportunity to apply for citizenship one year before coming of age, and increasing access to Estonian language training. However, the same program, according to The Baltic Independent, also advocated "the voluntary re-migration of non-Estonians to their historic homelands."

The first post-Soviet parliamentary elections in Estonia, held on September 20, 1992, brought on a dispute concerning the voting rights of some 5,000 individuals who had applied for, but had not yet received, Estonian citizenship. In a public referendum 53 percent voted against granting them the right to vote in these elections. A popular referendum, however, is not an appropriate forum for resolving issues of individual rights, which should be handled in courts of law or legislative bodies.

Latvia has not yet adopted a law on citizenship. In October 1991, the Latvian Supreme Council issued guidelines for citizenship legislation that, amongother things, propose excessively lengthy residence requirements for individuals who were not Latvian citizens in 1940 (or their direct descendants) and would deny citizenship to these individuals if they have been convicted of criminal acts or are under criminal investigation while their citizenship applications are being considered; have been convicted of "spreading chauvinism, fascism, communism, or other totalitarian as well as social class dictatorial ideas, or inflaming national disorder and hatred"; have served as Communist Party or Komsomol (Communist Youth Party) personnel; are registered in institutions that treat alcoholism and drug addiction; or are living without legal financial resources.

It is widely believed that the Latvian draft law will not be adopted with all of these restrictions. In a letter to Helsinki Watch, the chair of the committee on Human Rights and Nationality Issues of the Latvian parliament stated that the committee would reconsider the categorical exclusion of previously convicted individuals, alcoholics, and drug addicts.

The treatment of Russians in Estonia and Latvia has become an extremely controversial issue in relations between these countries and the Russian government, which has been a vociferous champion of the rights of Russians in countries that were formerly part of the Soviet Union. The Russian government has twice invoked the need to protect the rights of local Russians as a requirement for the withdrawal of Russian troops from these countries. It reached an agreement on troop withdrawal with Lithuania, which has a less significant Russian minority than the other Baltic states and, as noted, has adopted a zero-option citizenship law.

In Lithuania, the rights of the Polish minority, which constitutes about 8 percent of that country's population, are cause for some concern. In 1992, the Lithuanian government began considering reorganizing administrative districts near Vilnius that have significant numbers of ethnic Poles. Poles fear that this action will have the effect of diminishing their political representation.

A Lithuanian law adopted on December 17, 1991 authorizes the annulment of parliamentary status for any deputy who can be shown to have collaborated with the Soviet kgb and other secret security agencies. A person can be deemed a collaborator if, among other things, he or she is listed on a kgb roster or if there is "evidence of recruitment as a resident, agent, confidential person, or informer." Several aspects of this provision are troublesome: it takes at face value the truthfulness of Soviet kgb records, which are unreliable at best; it does not take into account the circumstances under which a person may have been recruited as an informer, such as possible coercion; and it does not define a standard of proof.

If accusations are made against deputies to the Supreme Council of Lithuania, or against deputies to city and district councils, the legislative body in question must form a commission to investigate the charges. The accused deputy has the right to appeal the commission's conclusions to a court of law, and local electors have the opportunity to reinstate a deputy by majority vote. This procedure was invoked in 1992 against four deputies, including former Prime Minister Kazimera Prunskiene. Premier Prunskiene has so far denied the charges and has not sought re-election as a deputy; Virgilus Cepaitis was stripped of his parliamentary status; Jokubas Minkevicius resigned his seat; and Vladimir Berezov's case has not yet been decided. Despite the antipathy to the communist past that lies behind this legislation, Lithuanian voters, on October 26, in their first elections since independence, brought to power the Democratic Labor Party, which is composed of former communists.

On July 9, the Latvian Supreme Council voted to remove the parliamentary mandates of 15 deputies who had campaigned actively against Latvia's independence from May 1990 through August 1991. The vote was based not on decommunization legislation, but on the recommendation of a parliamentary commission formed especially to examine the case. The way this decision was made raises questions about both its fairness and the free speech and association rights of these individuals.

In the spring of 1992, the Latvian procuracy conducted an investigation into possible criminal activities of the deputies in question, but did not find sufficient evidence of criminal activity. The special parliamentary commission used only the information given to it by the procuracy, gathered no additional information, and held no special hearings on the matter. Although the accuseddeputies had an opportunity to speak for themselves in parliament, they apparently were never called to appear before the commission. Since there is as yet no Constitutional Court in Latvia (indeed, there is as yet no constitution in Latvia) that could rule on the parliament's actions, there was no avenue for appeal.

Over the course of 1992 legislation barring government posts to individuals on the basis of their political behavior prior to August 1991 was debated but not adopted. The Latvian election law, adopted October 20, 1992 requires candidates for public office to sign a document avowing that they were never agents of the Soviet security apparatus.

Estonia has neither considered nor adopted decommunization legislation.

A wide range of publications in the Baltic languages and in Russian, and representing diverse political views, are available in the Baltic states. However, a few incidents suggest lingering restrictions on freedom of the press. In July, Izvestia reported that the Lithuanian prosecutor general had demanded that the Justice Ministry halt the publication of Jura ir Krantas, an ultra-nationalist newspaper. The Lithuanian procuracy issued two warnings to the newspaper after the latter had published articles stating that people who moved to Lithuania during the Soviet period are colonists who should not be granted citizenship. In July, the paper lost its registration rights, and has ceased to publish. Criminal charges have been brought against its publisher, who is not, according to the procuracy, being held in detention while he awaits trial.

The Right to Monitor

Throughout 1992, government and nongovernmental organizations traveled to the Baltic states to investigate human rights conditions, in many cases at the invitation of Baltic authorities. No known restrictions were imposed on them.

U.S. Policy

The U.S. government in 1992 encouraged economic and social development in Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania and expressed concern over the stalemated issue of withdrawal of Russian troops from the region.

The administration has issued no public statements on citizenship and the Russian minority issue. Both the State Department and the Congressional csce Commission generally maintain that citizenship laws are internal matters for individual states to decide, that citizenship is a matter of political privilege and not a human right (positions shared by their Baltic counterparts), and that the Estonian citizenship law meets most European norms. The State Department does not consider excessive the 16-year residence requirement proposed by the Latvian government, since other European governments, such as Switzerland, have lengthy residence requirements.

No one denies that governments have the right to adopt citizenship laws, yet special consideration should be given to Russians and others who moved to the Baltic states at a time when the Soviet republics were all one country. Therefore, comparing Baltic citizenship laws that apply to established residents with European or American laws on new immigrants is misleading because it equates two groups that are dissimilar. The first category of people had no way of foreseeing a change in their political status, whereas the latter consciously make this change.

The csce Commission of the U.S. Congress is to be credited for hosting a meeting in the summer in Washington that brought together Russian and Baltic officials to discuss the rights of Russians in the Baltic states and the issue of citizenship. The meeting generated no concrete results, but provided an opportunity for a mediated dialogue.

The Work of Helsinki Watch

Helsinki Watch in 1992 continued to pursue the issue of overly restrictive citizenship requirements in the Baltic states. As part of its ongoing correspondence with the Latvian government, Helsinki Watch wrote to the parliamentary Committee on Human Rights and Nationality Issues explaining why it believed citizenship in Latvia was a human rights concern, and renewed its request that the Latvian parliament reconsider its October 1991 resolution on citizenship.

In 1992, the board of Human Rights Watch, of which Helsinki Watch is adivision, discussed and adopted a policy position identifying principles to be embodied in new citizenship laws. The policy position was included in an April Helsinki Watch newsletter, "New Citizenship Laws of the Republics of the Former USSR," which also provided an overview of citizenship laws not only in the Baltic states but also in other new states that were once part of the Soviet Union.

A letter addressed to Estonian interim president Arnold Ruutel on July 30 objected to the referendum held in June that determined the voting rights of people who had applied for, but not yet received, Estonian citizenship. The letter expressed Helsinki Watch's belief that a popular referendum was an inappropriate way to resolve questions that should be decided in a court of law, and asked the Estonian government to approach the problem in the same spirit of fairness embodied in Estonia's minority rights legislation.

In September, Helsinki Watch joined the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights in a roundtable discussion on citizenship and minority issues with Estonian Foreign Minister Jan Mannitsky.

GERMANY

Human Rights Developments

The fall of the Berlin Wall on November 9, 1989 began an astonishingly rapid process of unification for the Federal Republic of Germany (BRD) and the German Democratic Republic (DDR). Initially, many celebrated the remarkable changes that were under way. It was only a short time, however, before East and West Germans began to realize how fundamentally different their experiences had been during the post-World War II period, and to sense that many difficult issues, from right-wing violence to economic collapse, would confront the newly united Germany.

As the euphoria died down, Germans found themselves confronted once again with the devastation caused by dictatorship. For the second time in this century, they were forced to ask fundamental questions about their past and were confronted with the difficult question of how to assess individual responsibility and guilt for the practices of a repressive regime.

Although the burden of dealing with the communist past falls primarily on East Germans, the role played by West Germany ensures that this process will be essentially different than in other post-communist countries, where there are concerns about political instability and about the lack of resources needed to rebuild the economy and state infrastructure.

At least in part because it possesses the necessary resources and political will, Germany has moved more rapidly to address the abuses committed during its communist past than have its neighbors in Eastern Europe. Germany quickly opened the secret police, or "Stasi," files, passing comprehensive legislation to regulate access to the files, to protect Stasi victims and to give them access to their own files. Germany also expeditiously moved to begin documenting and prosecuting past abuses.

Germany is in the process of reviewing the "political integrity" of its civil servants and "cleansing" the civil service of all those who are judged to have been politically compromised. Temporary regulations enacted pursuant to the Unification Treaty provide that former East German civil servants can be fired or not rehired in the united German civil service if they worked for the former secret police, violated basic human rights or legal norms, or are deemed to be unsuited for employment. Each state has responsibility for devising procedures for implementing this review process.

Although the procedures have varied from state to state, all civil servants, including police, judges, prosecutors, teachers, and train and postal workers, have been required to complete questionnaires regarding their professional and political backgrounds. Many employees have been asked a series of questions regarding their party membership (past and present), the political and employment history of their family members, their contribution to the fall of the DDR, their religious affiliation, and their views on the fall of the communist system. Local commissions evaluate the questionnaires and, in most cases, hold interviews with employees whose dismissal has been recommended.

The review process raises a number of due process concerns. The questionnaires, as well as questions asked during the hearings, exceed what isappropriate inquiry by a government employer and violate the individual's protected right to hold political opinions without government interference and to associate freely with others. Furthermore, while employees called before the review commission are notified that they face dismissal, they often are not told the reason why. The review commissions frequently appear to assume the employee's guilt and to place the burden of proof on the employee to prove otherwise.

Many employees have been dismissed without ever having been accused of any specific misconduct. Instead, most have been found unsuitable for continued employment in the civil service simply because they held political party or government positions under the previous system. No serious effort has been made to provide evidence that an individual carried out his or her duties in a manner that was repressive, unethical or criminal in nature. Instead, the assumption has been made that any employee who held his position over an extended period of time must have satisfied Party dictates and these dictates were inherently abusive.

Germany has a long history of requiring political loyalty from its civil servants. In West Germany, especially during the 1970s and 1980s, several hundred thousand civil servants or applicants for the civil service were reviewed for political loyalty. Individuals were fired or not hired because of their membership in political parties or organizations that were considered dangerous to the free and democratic order. This was true even though the employee was accused of nothing more than legal political activity.

Gradually, more liberal states did away with this practice. However, there are still an estimated five cases that have not been resolved, and individuals who lost years of income in the civil service have not received compensation. The Federal Constitutional Court upheld this practice in 1975.

After several years of investigation, the International Labor Organization issued a report criticizing West Germany for its loyalty requirements for the civil service. A press release from the ilo dated February 23, 1987 stated:

Suitability for employment should be the crucial issue....The principle of proportionality should be observed....[T]he question of whether an applicant for the civil service or a civil servant is suitable for admission to employment or continued employment should be judged in every individual case with reference to the functions of the employment in question and the consequences of the actual behavior of the person affect.

The German government appears committed to investigate, document and prosecute past abuses under the former communist regime. Special prosecutorial units have been established to investigate DDR government abuses. For example, a working group within the Berlin Ministry of Justice, with 58 prosecutors, is working on over 900 registered cases of abuses. This special prosecutorial unit was responsible for the widely publicized trial of two border guards, Ingo Heinrich and Andreas Kuhnpast, who were convicted on January 20, 1992 of manslaughter in the shooting death of Chris Gueffroy as he attempted to cross the Berlin wall in 1989. The presiding judge rejected the defense that the defendants were only following orders. While acknowledging that the defendants were "at the end of a long chain of responsibility," the judge stated that they had violated "a basic human right" by shooting at an unarmed civilian trying to leave his country.

The former communist leader Erich Honecker, who is charged with manslaughter and corruption in connection with the border guard shootings, returned to Germany in July from his refuge in the Chilean Embassy in Moscow and is expected to be brought to trial in the near future. Many other top government and party officials are under investigation or have already been indicted for past abuses.

The German government has also moved to rehabilitate victims of past abuses. The Unification Treaty states that parties to the treaty intend "that a legal basis be created as soon as possible so that all people who were victims of politically motivated criminal prosecutions or other illegal or unconstitutional court decisions can be rehabilitated." The German parliament also passed a law requiring speedy review of past criminal convictions, and rehabilitation and compensation of those wrongfully convicted and imprisoned.

A commission was appointed by the federal parliament in March to conducta comprehensive investigation of the 40-year communist dictatorship in the DDR. The commission will not have prosecutorial authority, but will take testimony from victims and review documents related to communist rule. Its report, due in 1994, is expected to be a thorough examination of communist rule, including, among other things, the tools used to solicit informers, monitor dissidents and indoctrinate the public. West German policies that may have influenced the speed of democratization in East Germany will also be examined.

Since unification, Germany has been confronted by a dramatic increase in right-wing violence especially against foreigners. The recent wave of violence has shocked the world and damaged Germany's international reputation. Rioting skinheads throwing Molotov cocktails at refugee shelters, onlookers applauding and cheering, slogans such as "foreigners out" and "Germany for Germans," physical injury, fear and humiliation have become daily experiences for foreigners in unified Germany.

From January to mid-November 1992, there were over 1,800 crimes motivated by anti-foreigner sentiment in Germany. Sixteen deaths resulting from right-wing violence were reported in this same period, as compared to three deaths at the hands of right-wing extremists in 1991.

Although violence against foreigners occurs in both East and West Germany, in proportion to the population, there are many more attacks on foreigners in the East, and the probability of becoming the victim of racially motivated violence is far greater there. Similarly, the response of the police and local officials appears to be qualitatively different in the eastern states, with significant evidence of police unwillingness or inability to respond promptly and effectively to calls for assistance and protection by foreigners.

The official response during violence in Rostock in August 1992 is perhaps the most vivid example of the failure of the police to provide protection for foreigners. Following two days of violence by right-wing skinheads in front of an asylum shelter, 200 asylum seekers, mainly Romanian Gypsies, had to be evacuated on August 24. However, approximately 150 Vietnamese guest workers who lived in a building next to the shelter were not moved.

That evening the police protecting the building withdrew to a nearby hill, giving skinheads gathered nearby the opportunity to throw molotov cocktails and storm the building. Over the next two hours, the Vietnamese, as well some German journalists were trapped in the burning building while the police watched from a distance. The police moved in only after the foreigners had escaped to safety.

Helsinki Watch documented numerous cases in which the police stood by and watched while foreigners were attacked. In other cases, the police have failed to investigate attacks on foreigners, thereby making prosecution very difficult.

Those right-wing skinheads who have been brought to trial and convicted of serious crimes such as assault causing bodily injury have received very short prison terms or suspended sentences with probation. The courts have appeared remarkably understanding of right-wing skinheads and the economic and social reasons that may motivate them, while disregarding the racist sentiments behind many of the crimes.

Over the past two years, as the violence against foreigners has grown, the federal government's primary response has been to call for an amendment to the German constitution guaranteeing the right to political asylum. Federal and state governments have coupled their condemnations of such violence with calls for restricting the number of asylum seekers in Germany.

In September, less than a month after Romanian Gypsies were attacked by neo-Nazis in Rostock, the German government announced that it had concluded a treaty with Romania that would provide for the deportation of Romanian citizens whose asylum applications had been denied. This step was viewed by many German experts and the press as directed against the large number of Gypsies among Romanian asylum seekers. The treaty was portrayed by the German government as, among other things, a new effort to combat right-wing violence in Germany.

In October, the government proposed to deport asylum seekers without a court hearing when the country of origin is deemed a "safe country." The United Nations High Commissioner on Refugees protested against this proposal as potentially violative of Germany's international obligations not to return refugees to face persecution.

In November, after a Turkish woman and two Turkish girls were killed when neo-Nazis firebombed their hostel in the West German town of Mlln, the Germangovernment responded by banning the National Front, a small neo-Nazi group believed to have organized attacks on foreigners. According to The New York Times, the Republican Party, a far-right party that won seats in the local parliaments of several states in the spring of 1992, was prevented from holding a convention because it would have threatened state security and public order.

The Right to Monitor

Helsinki Watch received no information regarding human rights observers that were prevented from conducting their investigations and reporting on their findings.

U.S. Policy

The U.S. government has had little public comment on the rise in right-wing violence in united Germany. When the most recent wave of violent attacks against foreigners began, the U.S. government remained publicly silent. However, the State Department has indicated that it expressed its concern privately to the German government. On September 9, in response to a question regarding the resurgence of "fascism" in Germany, a spokesperson for the State Department stated:

We have noted the rise of right-wing groups [in Germany] in recent years and the increasing incidence of right-wing violence, and have raised our apprehensions about this phenomenon repeatedly in meetings with German officials.

However, the spokesperson continued:

It is clear from these discussions that the German government is also deeply concerned and is taking such measures as it can to deal with the problem.... Leaders of all mainstream parties have strongly condemned right-wing violence against foreigners, and police have been working to prevent such incidents.... We applaud these efforts, and will continue to encourage German authorities to combat this problem with determination.

The State Department's claim that the police were working to prevent right-wing violence came only two weeks after the violence in Rostock, where the police had withdrawn from the scene of the attack by right-wing skinheads, leaving 150 Vietnamese trapped in a burning building.

The Work of Helsinki Watch

Helsinki Watch's work in Germany centered on two principle issues: the decommunization process and the violent attacks against foreigners. In April, Helsinki Watch sent a mission to Germany to investigate the decommunization process in the former DDR, focusing especially on the process of reviewing the political and professional integrity of civil servants. A report issued in December 1992 concluded, among other things, that:

[T]he national government, as well as the state governments, has authorized a review process that goes well beyond what can be considered proper inquiry. Although the government has acknowledged the need for procedural protections, in practice many individuals have been denied these procedural safeguards....

Helsinki Watch recognizes that a carefully documented investigation that guarantees candidates all procedural safeguards necessarily results in long delays. Many Germans, especially those who were active in the democratization effort in the DDR, have pointed out that these delays slow down the democracy-building process in East German institutions and they are understandably impatient for this process to be completed. However, one of the distinguishing trademarks that separates a democracy from a totalitarian state is the procedural safeguards that protect the individual from arbitrary state action. Conducting evaluations in an abusive manner does little to further democracy and the rule of law in East Germany.

Helsinki Watch closely monitored the treatment of foreigners in Germany during 1992. In May and June, Helsinki Watch sent a fact-finding mission to Germany to investigate the increase in violent attacks against foreigners. A Helsinki Watch representative visited numerous asylum shelters, and conducted interviews with many foreigners who had been victims of right-wing violence. Helsinki Watch also spoke to representatives of refugee organizations and those fighting racism in Germany, as well as with police and government officials.

On August 27, after the above-described shocking events in Rostock, Helsinki Watch sent a letter to Federal Minister of Interior Rudolf Seiters calling on the federal and state governments to

investigate thoroughly the conduct of the police whose duty it was to protect the asylum home in Rostock. The results of this investigation should be made public and, if the charges are substantiated, proper steps should be taken up to and including criminal prosecution.

Helsinki Watch condemned the German government's announcement that it had entered into a treaty with Romania that would facilitate the deportation of Romanian asylum seekers whose applications had been rejected, and particularly criticized the government's portrayal of the treaty as a measure to combat violence against foreigners in Germany. Helsinki Watch sent a letter on September 24 to Chancellor Helmut Kohl stating:

Helsinki Watch strongly protests the German government's attempt to deal with the severe problems of xenophobia and racist violence confronting Germany by seeking scapegoats among the victims. Gypsies in Germany have a long history of persecution, and they continue to face persecution and hatred. As such, they are an easy, and defenseless target.

On October 25, Helsinki Watch issued a report entitled Foreigners Out: Xenophobia and Anti-Foreigner Violence in Germany. The report documents cases of right-wing violence against foreigners and the failure of the police and local officials to intervene to protect foreigners or to investigate cases of violence against foreigners. It also criticizes local authorities for failing to investigate the weak police response in these cases and to take disciplinary measures when there is evidence of misconduct. In addition, the report criticizes the federal government's response to the violence against foreigners, charging that the government ignored early warnings that asylum seekers should not be transferred to East Germany until local authorities could be properly trained and equipped to protect them.

Helsinki Watch concluded that the German government has failed to give "clear and unwavering support for the protection of foreigners," sending ambiguous signals to local police and authorities, as well as to the population as a whole. The report states:

Although the federal and state governments have condemned violence against foreigners, this condemnation occurs in the context of calls for restricting the number of asylum seekers in Germany. By linking these two issues, the government fails to acknowledge the severity of the crimes being committed against foreigners by German citizens. Instead it subtly shifts the focus and the blame to the foreigners themselves.
ROMANIA

Human Rights Developments

In 1992, Romania experienced none of the violence or political instability that had plagued the country during the first two years following the revolution. Both local and national elections were held in what observers viewed as a generally free and fair manner. The print media flourished, with a wide range of political views expressed. Human rights and election monitoring organizations, as well asa wide variety of professional and public interest associations, contributed to a strengthening of civil society. Nevertheless, Romania continued to confront human rights abuses, especially by local government officials and police, and to be hampered in the transition to democracy by weak judicial and governmental institutions. In addition, ethnic minorities continued to suffer discrimination.

On February 9, local elections were held in Romania for the first time since the 1989 revolution. Only minor irregularities were reported on election day, in contrast to the national elections in May 1990, when voters were subjected to intimidation, harassment and sometimes physical violence. Democratic opposition candidates won 251 mayoral and city council races, running especially strong in Bucharest and other major cities. However, right-wing nationalist candidates who have since taken numerous steps violating citizens rights to assembly and free expression were elected in Cluj, Baia Mare and Buzau.

Although the balloting took place in a peaceful and orderly manner, the Hungarian candidate for mayor in Trgu Mures was barred from running by a local court decision that was clearly illegal and motivated by anti-Hungarian sentiment. The candidacy of Istvan Kiraly, who was running for mayor for the Democratic Union of Hungarians from Romania (udmr), was contested by seven ethnic Romanians who alleged that he had been involved in the March 1990 violence in Trgu Mures. The court justified its decision, in part, on its findings that a) Kiraly "began the electoral campaign by attacking rival political formations, by exhibiting an attitude of partiality toward his ethnic Hungarian colleagues, inciting an anti-Romanian attitude, and thereby proving that he is not a reliable citizen with regard to all segments of the population;" b) Kiraly spoke at a session of the Executive Board of the Municipal Council of the National Union of Trgu Mures on April 6, 1990, urging the exclusive use of the Hungarian language in the area, including the use of Hungarian for town names, street signs and store names; and c) Kiraly prepared a map of Mures county with all names in Hungarian and permanently posted the map at the udmr headquarters in Trgu Mures, and he entered only the Hungarian names of all cities in Mures into a computer. Such findings, even if factually grounded, cannot justify disqualifying Kiraly, because all reflect no more than the legitimate exercise of his right to freedom of expression.

The general success of the local elections was due, in large part, to the tireless efforts of over 7,000 domestic election observers. After these elections, the parliament passed a law that placed severe restrictions on the activities of domestic observers. For example, local election boards were given discretion to dismiss domestic observers, and only one observer was allowed at each polling place.

The national and presidential elections, held on September 27, were conducted without incident, according to international and national observers. However, Romania's electoral commission called for a recount on September 30, after reporting that over 3.6 million votes had been declared void. The Democratic Convention, the main opposition alliance, voiced concern that the counting procedure was inaccurate.

On October 4, the president of the Constitutional Court released the final results of the election: President Ion Iliescu won 47.34 percent of the vote, followed by Emil Constantinescu of the Democratic Convention with 31.24 percent. Because no candidate obtained a majority, a runoff for the presidency was held on October 11. Iliescu defeated Constantinescu with 61.4 percent of the vote.

Helsinki Watch received reports that there were at least four attacks on Gypsies in Romania during 1992. In one instance, on July 3, approximately 50 masked and uniformed persons who identified themselves as soldiers entered Rahova Square, beat Gypsies and destroyed Gypsy businesses near the square. The group then proceeded to a restaurant on the corner of Calea Rahova and Strada Margeanului where they damaged the restaurant and beat Gypsies sitting on the sidewalk. Although formal complaints were filed with the police and the Office of the Prosecutor General, no individuals have yet been charged in the case.

Tensions between ethnic Romanians and ethnic Hungarians remained high throughout 1992, and increasing nationalism and xenophobia present a serious obstacle to respect for human rights. The right-wing mayor of Cluj, Gheorghe Funar, banned the use of Hungarian and bilingual signs and fined ethnic Hungarians for posting Hungarian signs in their businesses. In addition, on April 28, Funar issued an executive order requiring that anyone wishing to hold ameeting notify the town hall at least three days in advance, and provide the names of the organizers and participants, the goal of the meeting, and its location and duration. During 1992, Funar prevented several organizations perceived as supportive of the Hungarian minority's demands for greater rights from holding meetings in Cluj. For example, on April 24, the mayor cancelled a "Conference on Local Administration" organized by members of a Dutch foundation and the udmr. Similarly, a board meeting of the Soros Foundation was allowed to take place only with the presence of "observers" from the mayor's office.

On February 12, the Romanian parliament passed the Law on the Organization and Operation of the Romanian Intelligence Service which provides that the archives of the former Securitate are to remain sealed for forty years. However, since then selective portions of the files have been leaked to the public, as they had been prior to the passage of the law. The files were used especially against government opponents, including the opposition press. In mid-April, according to Radio Free Europe, documents from the files on two journalists who were known for their criticism of the government and the secret police were sent to the press and foreign embassies in Bucharest.

Throughout 1992, Romanian human rights organizations, as well as the Association of Former Political Prisoners, called for a "trial of communism." However, there was no indication that substantial progress had been made in the investigation and prosecution of individuals responsible for serious abuses during the communist era. On April 20, the Romanian Supreme Court did reinstate prison terms ranging from eight to sixteen years for 21 former Communist Party officials accused of mass killings during the revolution in December 1989. The 21 had been acquitted by a lower court.

Detainees in police stations and lock-ups report a consistent pattern of abuse and physical mistreatment, as well as the absolute failure by the police to inform detainees of their due process rights as now required by Romanian law. Helsinki Watch has received numerous reports of physical abuse by police during the initial interrogation period. For example, Helsinki Watch interviewed detainees who reported that they had been beaten with rubber and wooden clubs, severely beaten while tied to a stick suspended between two tables, and jumped on after being rolled up in a carpet. Physical restraints such as leg irons and handcuffs continue to be used as means of punishment.

Although the Code of Penal Procedure guarantees a defendant access to a lawyer before any statement is taken and requires that the defendant be informed of that right, current and former prisoners report a systematic disregard of these guarantees. Most detainees do not see a lawyer before they are interrogated by the police and their statements are taken without counsel present, even when they request that a lawyer be present. Most detainees report that they were not informed of the right to see a lawyer even after several months of confinement.

Prison conditions in Romania reflect decades of neglect, as well as the disastrous economic situation in the country. Overcrowding makes it difficult to separate different categories of prisoners, or to provide each prisoner with his or her own bed. As in the police stations and lock-ups, methods of restraint such as handcuffs and leg irons continue to be used for very long periods solely as a form of punishment. Isolation cells are frequently used for punishment of relatively minor breaches of internal prison rules. There is also frequent use of such degrading treatment as shaving inmates' heads and requiring inmates to stand with their faces to the wall in the presence of visitors.

Helsinki Watch continued to receive reports of efforts by the government to restrict and intimidate journalists. For example, on April 9, the credentials of Gilda Lazar to report on activities of the President's Office were withdrawn. The President's Office criticized Lazar for her "permanently hostile and defiant attitude." In addition, journalists were occasionally threatened with criminal prosecution for libel for their critical comments about government figures.

The Right to Monitor

Helsinki Watch is unaware of any instance in which human rights groups or other independent human rights monitors have been hindered in their work by the Romanian government.

U.S. Policy

By 1992, the Bush administration had become convinced that Romania was makingprogress toward respect for human rights, and increased its efforts to reward Romania for its progress. Several high-level meetings were held between the U.S. and Romanian governments during the year. State Department reports indicated that human rights concerns were raised during these meetings, especially in the context of restoring Most Favored Nation (mfn) trade status to Romania.

In June, the Bush administration submitted a bilateral trade agreement to Congress that would restore mfn status to Romania. However, Congress postponed consideration of the trade agreement to await the results of the national elections in September.

On September 29, after the first round of the national elections, Assistant Secretary of State for European and Canadian Affairs Thomas Niles testified before the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Europe and the Middle East:

Enormous progress has been made in Romania, admittedly starting from a relatively low level beginning in December 1989 with the death of the dictator Ceausescu.

I would not today claim, nor would I think representatives of Romania claim, that a perfect situation has been achieved or that all levels of the country, for example, the administration, behaves in a way consistent with the guarantees of religious freedom and the absence of ethnic persecution that are in the constitution....

We have had problems with the activities of the mayor of Cluj, Funar, who was a presidential candidate....But I would argue, Congressman, that the trends in Romania are in the right direction, and that Romania has conducted elections which are judged by foreign observers, including those of the U.S., as being free and fair. And on that basis, it would be appropriate for the United States to continue the process of developing our relationship with this new Romania, and to give mfn treatment.

On September 30, Congress voted against ratification of the Romanian-American Trade Accord granting mfn trade status to Romania, in part because of continued concerns about the treatment of ethnic minorities in Romania and the lack of respect for Romania's own constitutional principles at the local level.

The Work of Helsinki Watch

At the end of 1991, Helsinki Watch conducted an investigation of conditions in Romania's prisons. A report entitled Prison Conditions in Romania, issued in June, concluded that although the Ministry of Justice and the Directorate of Prisons appeared to be committed to modernizing and humanizing the prisons, many aspects of the law, including the prohibition of the use of physical restraints as a form of punishment, and the ban on humiliating treatment such as shaving detainees' heads and forcing them to face the wall in the presence of prison personnel or visitors, are simply not implemented. Helsinki Watch recommended that, among other things, the Ministry of Justice and the Directorate of Prisons issue new directives to all prison directors making clear exactly what rules and regulations are currently in effect. Such directives should specify that the failure to implement current rules and regulations will result in disciplinary action and possible termination of employment. Specifically, all prison directors should be informed that no restrictions on food are allowed, physical restraints prohibited, and humiliating practices such as shaving heads and forcing prisoners to stand with their faces to the wall are not allowed. Helsinki Watch also recommended that confidential communications with a lawyer be guaranteed and that there be no restriction on a prisoner's right to discuss judicial issues, mistreatment or prison conditions.

On February 5, Helsinki Watch sent a letter to President Iliescu expressing concern that the ethnic Hungarian candidate for mayor in the town of Trgu Mures had been disqualified by the local court. Helsinki Watch criticized the court's decision:

Instead of strictly applying the law to this case, the Trgu Mures court appears to have engaged in a review of Mr. Kiraly's opinionsand, because of his allegedly pro-Hungarian views, appears to have determined that it did not find him a worthy candidate for public office. ...This is not a proper role for the judiciary. It should be left to the electorate to determine whether Mr. Kiraly is worthy of being mayor. That is the essence of the democratic process. Unfortunately, that process has been thwarted in this case.

Helsinki Watch sent a mission to Romania in July to investigate the treatment of detainees in police lock-ups. A newsletter was issued in November criticizing, among other things, the cramped and dirty cells in many facilities, the lack of ventilation, the detainees' infrequent opportunity to exercise, and the continued use of physical restraints as a means of punishment. During the mission, Helsinki Watch also received reports of frequent police beatings during interrogation, as well as the almost complete isolation of detainees from their families and legal representatives during the early stages of the investigation.

In July, Helsinki Watch representatives also conducted a follow-up investigation into conditions in Romanian orphanages. A newsletter with the mission's findings was released in December.

Throughout 1992, Helsinki Watch monitored the treatment of minorities in Romania. A Helsinki Watch representative was in Romania in November to investigate the treatment of Hungarians. A report will be issued in early 1993.

On September 24, Helsinki Watch sent a letter to President Iliescu expressing concern about reports that Romania and Germany had entered into a treaty providing for the deportation of Romanians whose political asylum applications in Germany had been rejected, although Helsinki Watch has documented significant discrimination and mistreatment of Gypsies in Romania. This treaty was viewed by refugee associations and the press as targeting Romanian Gypsies who make up 60 to 70 percent of the Romanian asylum population in Germany, and was seen as a discriminatory measure to deport the minority group that is most hated and least protected of all those seeking asylum in Germany. Helsinki Watch stated:

Many of the Gypsies who are seeking political asylum in Germany fled Romania to escape violent mob attacks, deep-rooted prejudice and discrimination. Should these individuals be returned to Romania, Helsinki Watch urges you, as the President of Romania, to take every measure necessary to guarantee their safety....

Helsinki Watch will continue to monitor the treatment of Gypsies in Romania and will make a special effort to monitor the treatment and living conditions of those being returned from Germany.

During November, Helsinki Watch also conducted a follow-up investigation of the treatment of Gypsies, focusing especially on efforts to investigate and prosecute those involved in attacks on Gypsy villages since 1990. A newsletter on the mission's findings will be issued in early 1993.
THE FORMER SOVIET UNION

Human Rights Developments

The dramatic collapse of the Soviet Union at the end of 1991 has left human rights in a turbulent state. The Soviet system of rule had for many years been notorious for systematic violations of human rights. Although this system has been discredited and discarded, it has not yet been thoroughly dismantled: Soviet-era governments remain in place in many of the new states, as do certain features of the legal and criminal justice systems. The very uncertainty of this transitional phase is a cause for concern that the fledgling states will lack the will or capacity to protect human rights.

Ten of the former Soviet republics have united in the Commonwealth of Independent States (cis). The three Baltic nations and Georgia and Azerbaijan have rejected that option.

All of the former Soviet republics have been admitted to the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (csce), binding their governments to respectthe human rights standards expected of member states. Some progress toward fulfilling this obligation has been made: constitutions are being written that promote basic rights and freedoms, freedom of religion is guaranteed in all of the states, some states have begun to reform their criminal justice systems and have granted broad amnesties to people serving criminal sentences, and nearly every state has allowed access for human rights fact-finding missions.

In many states of the former Soviet Union, government leaders have added their voices to the general call for a commitment to institutionalizing democratic principles and basic human freedoms. This process is lengthy and ongoing, and in 1992 progress was still measured in small steps. Meaningful progress has already been seen in the efforts of some new states to acknowledge past abuses and to review extant legislation to bring it into conformity with international standards.

The human rights situation has become as varied as the states themselves. Yet certain patterns of problems have emerged that are specific to the transition from Soviet rule. In the Caucasus, Moldova, and parts of Central Asia, struggles to maintain power in the face of political opposition, or to preserve territorial integrity in the face of separatist forces, have escalated into armed conflicts that have deprived thousands of basic freedoms.

The ousters of Georgian president Zviad Gamsakhurdia and Tajik president Rakhmon Nabiev in 1992, both of whose administrations were responsible for reprehensible human rights violations, has brought on the implosion of both of these states, and the resulting political and social chaos has put basic civil and political rights in jeopardy. In three Central Asian countries (Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan), governments are led by former Communists who continue old, Soviet-inherited practices of political repression-cracking down on the nascent free press and restricting the right to free speech and assembly-in an effort to fend off threats to their rule. Former communists, most of whom now bear the label of "democrat" or "nationalist," are also in positions of power in Belarus, Russia and Ukraine, where they attempt to silence public criticism leveled against their governments.

Each state has also inherited certain human rights problems from the Soviet system. Throughout the former USSR, residence permits continue to limit individuals' choices of where they wish to live. Individuals everywhere must still request government permission in order to travel abroad. Laws designed to protect "the honor and dignity" of the president are still on the books and, in some places, still enforced. Speculation is no longer considered a crime, yet individuals in Russia convicted of this and other economic crimes continue to languish in prisons, overlooked by recent amnesties that have released persons jailed for violent crimes.

As a result of the break-up of the Soviet Union and the creation of new states, millions of individuals have now become ethnic minorities in foreign states. In some areas the lack of legal or political structures to guarantee minority rights-or the lack of will to enforce them-poses real and potential problems concerning, for example, language rights and language training, discrimination in employment and education, and protection from ethnically motivated violence. Moreover, the Soviet legacy of deportation and repression of certain nationalities remains a source of ethnic strife as demonstrated in the recent Ossetian-Ingush conflict.

Armed Conflict

The principle of self-determination and the notion of homeland have become powerful beacons for ethnic and national groups in the former USSR, and have been invoked in nearly all of the armed conflicts there. During 1992 groups in Nagorno Karabakh, South Ossetia, Abkhazia, and in eastern Moldova fought wars seeking independence from Azerbaijan, Georgia and Moldova. The existing states, for their part, invoked the principle of inviolability of borders in their armed engagements with separatist forces.

In all of these armed conflicts, parties frequently violated rules of war intended to protect noncombatants that are set out in common Article 3 of the 1949 Geneva Conventions and its Second Additional Protocol of 1977-both of which apply to internal armed conflicts-as well as other international instruments. Civilians have become helpless victims of indiscriminate shelling, summary executions, sniper activity, and hostage- taking. Roadblocks have madeneighboring towns, villages, and even neighborhoods inaccessible. Blockades of transport, energy and other supplies have left thousands of people in a state of desperation.

Azerbaijan: Nagorno Karabakh

Armed conflict in and around Nagorno Karabakh, an Armenian- majority enclave located within the territory of Azerbaijan, has been the bloodiest of the armed conflicts. It began in 1988 and escalated dramatically in 1992, causing hundreds of civilian deaths and creating 256,000 refugees, according to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (unhrc). In 1992 the conflict grew far more lethal as both sides-the Azerbaijani National Army and free-lance militias fighting along with it, and ethnic Armenians and mercenaries fighting in the Popular Liberation Army of Artsakh-began using missile systems, armed personnel carriers, heavy artillery and comparable conventional weapons (all readily available through a very active and lucrative private arms market) and brought the armed conflict to a new, vicious intensity. The lack of any restraining force after the collapse of the Soviet Union accelerated the conflict. The conflict became a pivotal factor in the internal politics of both Armenia and Azerbaijan, intensifying nationalist rhetoric and hardening Azerbaijan's resolve to end the conflict through combat. Indeed, President Abulfaz Elcibey made a promise during his election campaign in June to solve the Karabakh problem within three months or resign.

Whichever side held the strategic advantage in Nagorno Karabakh at any given moment was the one that most egregiously violated the rules of war. While Azerbaijani forces held outposts in Shusha and Khojaly, they pounded the capital of Nagorno Karabakh, Stepanakert, and other Armenian towns and villages with shells and grenades. The indiscriminate shelling and sniper shooting killed or maimed hundreds of civilians, destroyed homes, hospitals and other objects that are not legitimate military targets, and generally terrorized the civilian population. During the winter of 1992, Armenian forces went on the offensive, forcing almost the entire Azerbaijani population of the enclave to flee, and committing unconscionable acts of violence against civilians as they fled. The most notorious of these attacks occurred on February 25 in the village of Khojaly. A large column of residents, accompanied by a few dozen retreating fighters, fled the city as it fell to Armenian forces. As they approached the border with Azerbaijan, they came across an Armenian military post and were cruelly fired upon. At least 161 civilians are known to have been murdered in this incident, although Azerbaijani officials estimate that about 800 perished. Armenian forces killed unarmed civilians and soldiers who were hors de combat, and looted and sometimes burned homes. In its counter offensive, launched in the summer, Azerbaijani forces indiscriminately bombarded Armenian towns and villages from SU-25 aircraft and ground-launched missiles. The Armenian government does not categorize civilian casualties according to the circumstances of their death or injury. Based on interviews conducted in November with more than 50 civilians who were witnesses to or casualties of indiscriminate air bombings, Helsinki Watch estimates that at least 56 civilians were killed as a result of these attacks in August and September alone.

Both sides in the conflict seized and exchanged civilian hostages, and also held corpses hostage, so frequently that the practice became an institution involving private individuals and military and government officials. Both sides held hostages, including women, in prisons or detention centers and distributed hostages as "insurance" among private families whose members were being held by the other side.

Attempts to negotiate an end to the conflict have been unsuccessful. The csce made a valiant effort in the Rome talks during the summer, which were hampered by questions concerning the political status of the self-styled Nagorno Karabakh republic. The talks did not prevent the further escalation of the war.

Georgia: South Ossetia

The fight for control over South Ossetia began in the winter of 1990-1991 and has left more than 700 people dead and 1,500 wounded, many of them civilians. In the early winter of 1992 the armed conflict ebbed. However, when Russian Interior Ministry troops, deployed in the region since January 1991, withdrew in late April 1992, the conflict intensified as Georgian forces shelled the main city ofTskhinvali, and South Ossetian separatist forces renewed their shelling and strafing of Georgian villages inside the separatist region. The flow of refugees once again rose, and by May 1,500 new refugees were reported to have arrived in Vladikavkaz, the capital of North Ossetia.

As in Nagorno Karabakh, hostage-taking was a common practice in South Ossetia. Both sides to the conflict openly admitted that they took hostages in order to secure the release of their own hostages or to raise money for arms. In addition, hostages were beaten, threatened and sometimes killed.

On May 20, a band of Georgian irregulars ambushed a bus and two vans carrying Ossetian refugees, shooting to death 36 and wounding 16. Among the casualties were women, senior citizens, and children between the ages of three and 12. The Georgian State Committee promised to investigate the incident, but reportedly clashed with South Ossetian officials, who did not want Georgian interference. No serious attempt was made to find the guilty parties, who are presumed to be based in Georgian villages within South Ossetia.

In early July, an agreement was reached between government officials from Russia, North Ossetia, Georgia and representatives of the self-styled government of South Ossetia. As part of this pact, about 1,500 joint peacekeeping forces, consisting of Russian, Georgian and Ossetian soldiers, were deployed in South Ossetia in mid-July and thus far have been successful in defusing the armed conflict in that region. The Georgian State Council formed a commission to rebuild villages ruined by the conflict and provide for the return of refugees.

During intense moments in the violence, Ossetian refugees in North Ossetia numbered as many as 140,000, according to the unhrc. As the conflict wound down, Ossetian refugees began returning to their homes in South Ossetia. However, most Georgians who fled South Ossetia during the conflict have not returned, nor have Ossetians who left their homes in other parts of Georgia. The latter fled as a result of systematic anti-Ossetian reprisals that began in January 1991, when Ossetians were threatened, robbed, beaten and forced to flee. Most of these acts of violence were carried out by rag-tag paramilitary groups, who enjoyed immunity from local police.

Georgia: Abkhazia

Abkhazia is one of two autonomous republics in Georgia. Its population of about 525,000 (according to the 1989 census) is 17.8 percent Abkhazian, 45.7 percent Georgian and 7.1 percent Russian. Georgian National Guard units were sent to Abkhazia supposedly to secure the release of Georgian state officials kidnapped by supporters of former president Zviad Gamsakhurdia. These units clashed with troops of the Abkhaz Ministry of Interior. Negotiations between the Abkhaz government and the Georgian State Council resulted in a cease-fire and the withdrawal of the Georgian National Guard on August 17. The next day, however, the National Guard re-entered Sukhumi, the capital of Abkhazia, and a second secessionist war began in Georgia.

The war in Abkhazia is the culmination of 12 years of intermittent tension between Sukhumi and Tbilisi, the capital of Georgia, which began in 1978 when the Abkhaz Autonomous Socialist Republic sought unsuccessfully to secede from Georgia and join the Russian republic. Tensions renewed in 1988 and erupted into ethnic violence in 1989 over the status of Abkhaz State University, and in 1990 when the Abkhaz Supreme Soviet declared independence from Georgia. On July 23, 1992, the same body suspended the 1978 Abkhaz constitution and reinstated the constitution of 1925, according to which Abkhazia had the status of a union republic.

Northern Abkhazia is now controlled by Abkhaz forces, supported by volunteers of the Federation of Mountain Peoples. The Georgian National Guard, along with Mkhedroni and other paramilitary groups, control Sukhumi. Hundreds of people have lost their lives in this conflict, many of them civilians who were victims of summary executions and sniper fire. Both sides to the conflict take hostages, burn houses belonging to members of the "enemy" ethnic group, and engage in marauding.

Georgian refugees from Gagra told Helsinki Watch that when Abkhaz forces seized the town in early October they basically forbade Georgian men from leaving. One female refugee told of Georgian men being forced to sign documents stating that they were prepared to fight against Georgia. Her neighbor, a 39-year-old Georgian man, was beaten and shot in the head, apparently after refusing to sign such a document. Other Georgian refugees from Gagra told Helsinki Watchthat Abkhaz forces shot elderly people attempting to flee the town, and that sniper shooting in the town and surrounding villages killed civilians and made people hostages in their own homes.

Although Helsinki Watch has not yet interviewed a significant number of Abkhaz refugees from the conflict zone, it learned from reliable sources that villages near Tvarcheli (populated by Abkhazians and Armenians in Georgian-controlled Abkhazia) have been burned, and that in the village of Kindgi, Georgian troops summarily executed two Abkhazian brothers, the younger of whom was nine years old. Abkhaz representatives also reported to Helsinki Watch that in October Georgian forces intentionally burned the Abkhaz Institute of Language and Literature in Sukhumi, where Abkhaz historical archives are kept. The Abkhaz representatives noted that the Georgian-controlled militia refused to let volunteers put the fire out.

Moldova

Human rights abuses and violations of humanitarian law were rampant in 1992 in Moldova, the western-most republic of the former Soviet Union, bordering Romania. They ranged from indiscriminate attacks on civilians and civilian structures, to the indiscriminate use of land mines, to acts of discrimination, including dismissals from work on the basis of ethnic origin and political conviction.

The post-World War II period saw a heavy influx of Russians and Ukrainians into Bessarabia and other parts of what is today the Republic of Moldova as part of a policy to dilute the native Romanian population living there. Though newcomers in a historical sense, many of the 562,000 Russians registered as residing in Moldova in the latest census (1989) have lived for large parts if not all of their lives on Moldovan soil. Having enjoyed the advantages of longstanding policies that promoted the primacy of Russian culture in the region, as indeed it was promoted throughout the Soviet Union, many Russians now fear a reduced status within Moldova as a minority community (they represent some 13 percent of the overall population). The struggle for cultural primacy in Moldova, involving not only Moldovans and Russians but also vocal minority groups such as the Gagauz, Jews and Bulgarians, is at the heart of ethnic tensions currently plaguing the republic.

Mounting tensions over cultural dominance, raised by the birth of a Moldovan-oriented republic in lands where the principal culture previously had been Russian, erupted in March 1992, claiming hundreds of casualties, many civilian. At issue was political and territorial control of the eastern areas of Moldova along the Dniester River, which resulted in a bloody conflict. At its peak, some 100,000 refugees and displaced persons are believed to have fled of the area of combat. The conflict pits supporters of the Moldovan government against backers of the secessionist insurgency that has laid claim to land along the river, supplemented by elements from Russian and other outside military formations. Attacks continued sporadically throughout the spring in the eastern areas, reaching a peak in June during a four-day rampage in the right-bank city of Bendery which was characterized by indiscriminate shooting at civilian structures. A cease-fire agreement was declared in July and, despite some technical violations, has succeeded in suspending the violence since early August. However, the republican leadership still faces the challenge of forging a political settlement with the leaders of the two separatist groups, the "Dniester Moldovan Republic" (DMR, formerly the "Dniester Soviet Socialist Republic," proclaimed in September 1990) and the ethnic Gagauz community, an Orthodox Christian Turkic minority (3.5 percent of the republic's population in 1989), which is seeking an autonomous status for areas in the south of the republic. The Moldovan government has refused to recognize the independence of either breakaway unit, although it is discussing granting a variety of forms of local autonomy.

The secessionist movements of the Gagauz and of the DMR began to take shape in the late 1980s when Moldovan authorities began to institutionalize the dominance of Moldovan culture, for example by adopting a series of legislative acts including declaring Moldovan (almost identical to Romanian) the state language and the Romanian tricolor the state flag. The laws were passed with such a rapid hand that some residents not integrated into Moldovan culture began to feel isolated and anxious, more particularly since the law on the implementation of the state language on the territory of Moldova threatened to remove thoseunable to prove a minimum fluency in Moldovan from their places of work by 1994, five years from the date of its enactment.

In the months leading up to the outbreak of sustained armed conflict in Moldova, secessionists rallied around the DMR which, as home to a proportionally high percentage of ethnic Russians and Ukrainians (23 percent and 28 percent, respectively) symbolized to some a bastion of Slavic culture in Moldovan lands. Elements of the Russian 14th Army, stationed in Moldova and most highly concentrated on the left bank of the Dniester, bolstered the war effort by exhibiting sympathy with the separatists.

In the increasingly tense atmosphere, civilians on both sides of the political debate began to arm themselves. The ad hoc military formations, including ordinary street police armed with pistols and rifles, gradually were joined by informal forces sympathetic to their causes. The affinities of the Russian 14th Army for the heavily Slavic DMR cause brought on a rapid escalation of the sporadic clashes that had characterized the conflict prior to 1992, as did the arrival of mercenaries for the DMR side, including Cossacks and volunteers from Russia and Ukraine. The Moldovan military force was enhanced by added weaponry obtained through barter from Romania.

Negotiations currently are under way between Moldovan and DMR representatives, as they are between Moldova and the Gagauz leadership, but national and ethnic tensions persist.

Russia: North Ossetia

Ingush and Ossetian informal paramilitary groups clashed on October 31 in a battle for control over the Prigorodny district of North Ossetia, a region of the Russian Federation that borders Georgia to the south. Although a cease-fire was declared on November 1, fighting continued. About 3,000 Interior Ministry troops and two battalions of paratroopers from the Russian Army were deployed to enforce a state of emergency, which the Russian Federation government declared on November 2 in both North Ossetia and Ingushetia. The number of Russian Federation military personnel in the region totals about 10,000. The number of battle deaths is between 150 and 250, according to itar-tass and Russian television.

The Ingush claim a historic right to land in the Prigorodny district. In 1944, Stalin deported the Ingush population from Chechen-Ingushetia and granted to North Ossetia the Prigorodny district, which had made up a large part of original Ingush territory. Ossetians believe that the Ingush used the 1991 USSR law rehabilitating the deported peoples to justify the capture of territory that Ossetians believe is theirs. The district is a suburb of Vladikavkaz, the capital of North Ossetia.

Many of the villages in the district had a mixed Ingush-Ossetian population. Ingush claim that houses belonging to Ingush in 17 villages of the district were systematically destroyed and pillaged by Ossetian National Guardsmen and "auxiliary" fighters, and that the Russian Army facilitated this action by blocking off the villages and allowing the Ossetians to enter. Ossetian residents claim that Ingush fighters shot at their homes and forced them to leave. Both sides seized hostages, and by November 9, Ossetians held 450 Ingush, and Ingush held 120 Ossetians.

Nearly all of the approximately 40,000 Ingush who live in the district and in Vladikavkaz have been displaced by the conflict, many of them reportedly forcibly. Nazan, the capital of Ingushetia, is said to be overflowing with refugees. Both sides claim they are victims of ethnic cleansing.

Press access to regions under the state of emergency is limited. According to an order issued on November 14 by Sergei Shakhrai, the head of the temporary state of emergency administration in Vladikavkaz, all journalists in the region must obtain accreditation from the temporary administration or leave, and can send their work to be published only after the head of the temporary administration has had the opportunity to do a "preliminary review" of it. The state of emergency is to be in effect for one month.

Tajikistan

Unlike the conflicts described above, armed clashes in Tajikistan stem not from separatist ethnic and national groups but from opposition to the communist-led regime that remained intact until May. The opening shots of the civil war now raging in Tajikistan were fired in late April and early May when massive ralliesof supporters and opponents of then-president Rakhmon Nabiev gripped the capital, Dushanbe, for nearly two weeks.

On May 1, President Nabiev decreed the formation of a national guard to maintain order in the troubled republic. Violating both internal law and United Nations guidelines on police force, Nabiev implemented the decree by distributing approximately 1,800 automatic weapons to men who were participating in the government-organized pro-Nabiev demonstrations. When the rallies ended, the guardsmen returned to their home region of Kuliab (located in the south of the republic) with their weapons and reportedly drove out supporters of the opposition who had not already been intimidated and forced to leave the region. Since that time, Kuliab has refused to submit to the central government, and warfare between pro- and anti-Nabiev forces has battered Kurgan-Tiube (50 miles south of Dushanbe).

Loyalties on both sides of the armed conflict stem from a tangle of political, regional, and clan ties. Civilians have become victims of sniper shooting, indiscriminate shelling and blockades. The United States Committee for Refugees estimates that as many as 100,000 Tajiks are now internally displaced as a result of the conflict, and Russian sources report that about half of these individuals are from Kurgan-Tiube alone.

Many Nabiev supporters fleeing Kurgan-Tiube settled in Kuliab, where they believed they would be safe. The blockading of Kuliab by anti-Nabiev forces reportedly prevented the delivery of food, and subjected hundreds of thousands of people to hunger. By November, pro-Nabiev forces had surrounded the outskirts of Dushanbe, blocking the delivery of food, fuel, and other supplies.

The conflict in Kurgan-Tiube has aroused animosity against Uzbeks, who account for about one fifth of Tajikistan's population and who are frequently perceived as being loyal to Nabiev. In late August, hundreds of Uzbeks fled the region, some claiming that they were expelled by motley bands of anti-Nabiev fighters. Political and religious factions in Afghanistan have armed both sides in the Tajik conflict with relative ease because of the poorly guarded Tajik-Afghan border. Both sides have also attacked stores of Russian army weapons and Russian army troops, police stations, and prisons with impunity.

Ethnically Biased Attacks

During the Soviet period, national rivalries and antipathies were largely subsumed into collective antipathy for the political establishment. The communist authorities also conducted a highly effective propaganda campaign calling for the "friendship of the peoples" which mitigated open expression of ethnic tensions. With the collapse of the Soviet Union, however, the bonds that kept ethnic hostilities in check, at least officially, were loosened, releasing much of the potent hostilities now fueling both the intensive, sustained military engagements described above and sporadic, largely spontaneous expressions of ethnic bias, such as street beatings and other forms of harassment.

Attacks on Russians

In many cases, Russians, as the representatives of the culture that dominated the Soviet Union for 70 years, have been the targets of these hostilities in areas outside their namesake territory.

In Moldova

Long-standing ethnic friction between Moldovans and Russians was exacerbated in 1992 by the outbreak of an armed internal conflict over control of a narrow territory in eastern Moldova, the self-proclaimed "Dniester Moldovan Republic." Although politics and territorial ambition are at least as much the cause of the armed conflict as are ethnic frictions, in most cases ethnic Moldovans are assumed to support the Moldovan government's anti-secessionist stance and Russians to support the insurgency. These stereotypes in many cases are erroneous. Nonetheless, in the charged atmosphere following the intense armed clashes in March, when hundreds were killed and wounded on both sides, there have been incidents of non-combat-related attacks against Russians, some mere harassment and some considerably more violent. The advocacy group Unity (Unitatia-Edinstvo), based in the Moldovan capital of Chisinau, has gathered information on such attacks and reports that since 1989 between 30 and 40 harassing attacks have been perpetrated in Moldova for what it defines as reasonsof ethnic bias. No statistics are available for 1992 alone, nor has Unity determined what percent of these alleged attacks were perpetrated against those believed to be Russians. Unity further charges that none of these attacks, all of which it claims have been registered with law enforcement authorities, has led to prosecutions.

One recent attack on an ethnic Russian in Chisinau may be illustrative of current tensions. On June 23, following four days of heavy fighting in the right-bank city of Bendery, Vitalii Balin, a 61-year-old economist, was attacked at his place of work by three men, resulting in a two-week hospitalization, lengthy convalescence, and partial loss of hearing in his right ear. According to the victim's wife, one of the men, who was known to Balin, had lost his brother in the war and was under the incorrect impression that Balin had been collecting money to help in the war effort. The men beat Balin and threatened to kill his family if he reported the incident. Local officials rejected the claim that was filed as a basis for initiating a criminal case against the attackers, and the Balins have decided not to pursue a civil case, according to the victim's wife, for fear of retribution.

In Uzbekistan

There have been numerous attacks against Russians and other people of apparent European extraction in Uzbekistan. These individuals are conspicuous physically, distinct in physiognomy and dress (while many indigenous residents of Uzbekistan wear Western styles, it generally is not true that individuals of European descent wear Central Asian styles).

For example, in June, Elena L., a 23-three-year-old Russian woman who was born and raised in Uzbekistan, was attacked as she walked down a street in the capital city of Tashkent, itself a largely Slavicized city. She reported to Helsinki Watch that a group of young, apparently Uzbek men shouted "shameless Russian!," ripping her shirt, running after her and causing her to flee in terror. There have been numerous such attacks as a result, some speculate, of a raised consciousness of traditional Central Asian customs that are incompatible with the Western habits widely adopted under the Soviet system and maintained today by almost all Russians.

Attacks on Jews

The Union of Councils of Soviet Jews reported a rise in violence motivated by anti-Semitism in 1992. On July 8, for example, a Jewish cultural club in Penza, Russia, was desecrated. Sacred music was burned, and musical instruments and ceremonial candles were destroyed. Local police reportedly did not investigate the incident.

There have also been numerous reports of vigilante attacks on Jews in Uzbekistan. The Bay Area Council for Soviet Jews reported on April 2, 1992, that 15-year-old Tabob Kharanbaev, an Uzbek, was arrested for theft while visiting in Dushanbe, Tajikistan; in custody he was beaten, robbed, threatened with rape and death, and abused with anti- Semitic taunts. The Union of Councils of Soviet Jews reported that on February 20 three men broke into the home of a Jewish family in Chilanzar, near the Uzbekistan capital of Tashkent, beat several of them, and coerced them into relinquishing 50,000 rubles with threats of violence and anti-Semitic slurs, such as "Why haven't you left for Israel yet?" Much of the continued harassment of Jews in 1992 appears to be due to long-standing resentment toward their privileged opportunities for emigration and purported enrichment abroad.

Attacks in Kazakhstan

On October 19, the Regional Council of People's Deputies of Ust'-Kamenogorsk issued an order expelling Chechens, a Muslim minority originating in the Caucasus mountains, from the region of in the wake of the October 18 mob attack on Chechens in the village of Ovechii Kliuch. The onslaught was incited by rumors that Chechens had been responsible for the deaths of four ethnic Kazakhs in town, according to Commonwealth and Russian media reports and Western sources. Public outcry condemned the decision, and a delegation from Alma-Ata made up of government officials and members of social organizations immediately went to Ust-Kamenagorsk. Although as a result of this visit local officials repealed the order within two days of its adoption, it echoes the very policies of forcibledeportation of nations that originally brought many Chechen settlers to Kazakhstan in the 1930s and 1940s, and vividly reflects both the animosities that increasingly are surfacing in the form of inter- ethnic violence, and the local government's willingness, in some cases, to take legal action on the basis of these animosities.

Attacks in Russia

In 1989, Cossack regiments began to form once again in the Krasnodar region in southern Russia, and by 1992 they claimed to have divisions in almost all of the more than 300 districts in the region. In late December 1991, and again in April 1992, the leader of these regiments sent an ultimatum to the Krasnodar regional government to deport non-Slavs such as Armenians, Kurds and Meskhetian Turks, who in recent years had fled to the area from other parts of the former USSR racked by ethnic violence. The Krasnodar regional government agreed to grant Meskhetian Turks only temporary permanent residence status until they have resettled in Georgia or Turkey.

Cossack bands reportedly have pressured individual families of Armenians to leave their homes. According to a representative from the Human Rights Center of Memorial (a Moscow-based group), in late April a group of Cossacks reportedly arrived at an Armenian family's home in Krasnodar, asked them whether they had a residence permit, and told them they had to leave. Several days later a band of 20 demonstrated in the family's yard.

In other parts of Russia, scattered attacks against Azerbaijanis in late July raised fears that such attacks are growing more systematic. The violence often involved vandalizing market goods sold by Caucasians. According to Russian sources, in the Siberian town of Norilsk a gang of youths vandalized market stalls belonging to Caucasians in order to settle scores of a previous, drunken brawl. In response, local authorities conducted residence permit checks in hotels and dormitories. Several days later in Saiangorsk, a city in southern Siberia, an anti-Azerbaijani attack swept a workers' dormitory and spread to hotel rooms and apartment buildings housing Azerbaijanis, causing some damage. Public transportation drivers in Briansk (in western Russia) threatened in late July to strike if Caucasians were not expelled within two days. Staking similar demands, a group of local merchants blocked the main road in Volgoda.

In St. Petersburg, efforts to fight organized crime (in which many Azerbaijanis and Chechens are reportedly involved) overstepped their boundaries during the summer and became a general anti-Caucasian crackdown. Russian newspapers reported attacks on Azerbaijanis in the markets of St. Petersburg organized by the Special Purpose Militia Units (omon) to avenge the deaths of policemen apparently killed by Azerbaijanis.

In Moscow on February 24, the omon raided a hotel where many Chechens had taken up residence, allegedly to verify residence permits and arrest racketeers. The omon reportedly beat up a number of Chechens whom they had detained, some of whom required hospitalization. In response to pressure from the Human Rights Committee of the Russian parliament, which had investigated the incident, the Moscow city administration issued an order to stop the expulsions. The Law and Order Committee of the Russian parliament began an investigation of the beatings that took place during the raid, but no result has come to light.

Attacks in Tajikistan

The chaos and civil war in Tajikistan has instilled deep fears among Russian, Uzbek, Jewish, Afghan and other minorities living there. Afghan families who sought refuge in Tajikistan from the civil war at home claim that increasingly they have become victims of beatings and robberies. A recent report of the U.S. Committee for Refugees suggested that it is not clear whether pure ethnic animosity motivated these attacks. Regardless, the local police have not responded adequately to the victims' appeals for help when attacks do occur.

Attacks in Ukraine

An anti-Gypsy pogrom took place on May 13 in the Odessa district center of Tartarbunary. According to Izvestia, rumors had circulated that Gypsies were responsible for the brutal murder of a family in nearby Ivanchenko. A mob of 2,500 descended on a group of 21 houses inhabited ostensibly by "relatives" of the Gypsy suspects and demolished 16 houses, leaving scores homeless. To date noone has been charged in connection with the attack.

The political tug-of-war over possession of Crimea has aroused anti-Crimean Tatar sentiment in Ukraine. According to local sources, on October 1 unidentified individuals attacked a settlement of Crimean Tatars on a state farm in Krasnyi Rai, destroying several homes.

Excessive Use of Force

In 1992, law enforcement officers continued to display a lack of knowledge of-or willingness to use-nonlethal crowd-control methods. In Tajikistan, security troops subordinate to the Committee for National Defense (knb, or formerly the kgb) deployed near the former knb building used excessive and lethal force against a column of anti-Nabiev protesters at a demonstration on May 10. A group of about 1,000 marched to the former knb building to demand that President Nabiev fulfill his promise to address them. When the crowd began dismantling a barbed-wire barricade in front of the building, knb security troops, perched on the roof of the building and in windows of high floors, opened fire using automatic weapons. Eleven people died as a result of their wounds, and scores were wounded. One law enforcement official was wounded. According to eyewitnesses interviewed by Helsinki Watch and Memorial, most of the people in the crowd were unarmed, although some people in the middle of it had hunting rifles. However, these people did not fire their guns at the security troops, most of whom could not be seen from the street. omon troops (who were deployed at one end of the street and were visible to the demonstrators), fired one round of machine-gun warning shots before the knb opened fire. No tear gas or other nonlethal form of crowd control was used, nor was an attempt made to address the crowd to appeal for calm. The incident provoked a brief clash a few minutes later between anti-Nabiev forces (who arrived on the scene in an armed personnel carrier) and the security troops.

In Uzbekistan, a student demonstration on January 16-17 protesting the simultaneous rise in food prices and delayed issuance of stipends from Tashkent State University was forcefully dispersed by Interior Ministry troops, leaving two students dead from gunshot wounds and scores injured. No criminal charges have been brought against the troops.

In Russia, riot police in February violently beat unarmed communist protestors as the protesters tried to force their way on to the main square in Moscow. According to The Washington Post, several troops severely kicked and beat with truncheons a 16-year-old boy in military garb, who had climbed to the top of a barricade and waved a red flag with Lenin's portrait on it.

In August, The Los Angeles Times reported that riot police severely beat African demonstrators who were protesting the killing of a Zimbabwe student by a Moscow police officer. The police apparently "chased the fleeing students and surrounded several of them, then began kicking them in the groin and beating them with fists and rubber truncheons." Police claim the demonstration was blocking traffic.

Freedom of Speech and of the Press

Fragile governments concerned about future political and ethnic stability frequently silenced critics in 1992 by closing or dismantling media sources, confiscating or banning newspapers, and detaining, arresting, harassing and even physically attacking perceived opponents of the status quo.

Azerbaijan

The Azerbaijani government has set restrictions on press coverage of the war in Nagorno Karabakh. On July 10, as the Azerbaijani counter-offensive was getting under way, the Azerbaijani government announced that press access to Nagorno Karabakh and environs would be limited to those journalists "working for the analytical information center of the Azerbaijani Defense Ministry, Azerbaijani television,...Ostankino [cis television], and `Vesti' [cis television]." The measure was aimed at preventing "subjective interpretations of events and the divulging of military secrets."

Apart from its reporting on Nagorno Karabakh, the press in Azerbaijan is not subject to government restrictions. However, the suspicious deaths during the summer of a Baky journalist and his wife is cause for concern that informal paramilitary groups will exert pressure on the press. In one incident in late August, Salim Mamedov, editor of the newspaper January 20, and his wife Firangizreportedly were killed by unknown gunmen, one of whom was in military uniform. According to the Baky newspaper Vyshka, the bodies were found in Mamedov's home with multiple knife and gunshot wounds. Few believe that the murder was an ordinary common crime. The Azerbaijani parliament, in response to pressure from local journalists, promised a full investigation.

In another incident, Minister of Interior I. Hamidov on October 1 severely beat members of the staff of Mirror in response to an article in it that had said that the Interior Ministry in Nakhichevan (an autonomous republic of Azerbaijan) lacked leadership. According to Turan, President Elcibey met with a group of 36 journalists who had protested the beatings to "express his solidarity" with their concerns about the free press in Azerbaijan.

Georgia

The Georgian government's attempt to quash the movement supporting ousted president Zviad Gamsakhurdia has included a crackdown on the press. Radio Liberty reports that on June 25, the day after a coup attempt failed to reinstate Gamsakhurdia, Georgian Procurator Vakhtang Razmadze closed temporarily two pro-Gamsakhurdia newspapers, Iveria Express and Tavisupali Sakartvelo.

Paramilitary groups loyal to the government are reported to harass pro-Gamsakhurdia journalists repeatedly. For example, the editor-in-chief of Tavisupali Sakartvelo and one of its correspondents claim that in February they were brought to a Tbilisi police station and told they should not attend any pro- Gamsakhurdia rallies. The office of Iveria Express was ransacked at least four times after its closure and re-opening.

Moldova

Largely because of the tense atmosphere created by the armed secessionist movement and military efforts to quell it, the right to express views dissenting from both the "Dniester Moldovan Republic" (DMR) and the Moldovan government was restricted in both the media and public life in 1992. Authorities of the secessionist DMR have closed or dismantled (by, for example, removing editorial boards) at least four Dneister newspapers, including Slobodzeiskie Novosti, and have established central control over radio and television broadcasting. Jamming of Moldovan radio in the territories nominally under the control of the DMR, begun in 1991, continued in 1992. Likewise, distribution of the printed media on both sides of the political divide has been impeded.

Although the armed conflict along the Dniester River unquestionably has exacerbated violations of free speech sharply, the entire span of media in Moldova is plagued by the legacy of continued economic dependence on government subsidies, which often impairs unbiased reporting. This problem, compounded by an inadequate system of professional accountability, has resulted in a press that in some cases has played a role in intensifying rather than helping to explain tensions in Moldova. Helsinki Watch interviewed many individuals involved in the armed struggle who indicated that they had joined the fighting in response to reports-many inaccurate and alarming-of atrocities being committed in the disputed area and elsewhere.

Some individuals in the region of the DMR professing opposition either to the de facto existence of the DMR or to the Moldovan government's failure to recognize it were harassed, dismissed from work and physically attacked. Systematic, organized raids on doctors and teachers trained outside the DMR were carried out apparently as punishment for their presumed position to the DMR.

Russia

The number of available newspapers and journals professing a wide variety of views inspires some confidence that freedom of expression is on firm ground in Russia. However, political speech that is critical of the Russian parliament or impugns the Yeltsin administration is on much shakier ground.

In the most controversial media issue in 1992, the Russian parliament voted on July 17 to take over ownership and control of Izvestia, the leading newspaper of the Russian Federation. Izvestia had been openly critical of the parliament and its chair, Ruslan Khasbulatov. At the same time in July, the parliament postponed voting on a measure creating a media oversight committee that would have been empowered to impose censorship on radio and television stations. The Press and Information Ministry refused to re-register Izvestia as theparliament's newspaper, and Mikhail Poltaranin, Press and Information Minister, announced that he was prepared to take the matter to the Constitutional Court of Russia. In August the Court requested that parliament cease its efforts, and so far the parliament has not succeeded in taking over the newspaper, which is now protected from further takeover efforts by a presidential decree.

The parliament claimed that the Izvestia takeover was purely a property issue since Izvestia previously had been in the possession of the USSR Supreme Soviet. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, a journalists' collective assumed control of the newspaper and its facilities. Although the property claims of the Russian Supreme Soviet may have some validity, political motivations pervade the controversy.

Some attempts have been made to accommodate opposition views on government-owned television. In early July, for example, Ostankino (cis television) agreed to meet some of the demands of nationalist right-wing groups who had staged demonstrations in front of the television studio for one month. In response, Ostankino granted time to three opposition political parties for a bi-monthly television program.

Turkmenistan

There were several reported incidents in 1992 of suppression of critical voices in Turkmenistan, both in politics and in the media. In February, several leaders of the political opposition in Turkmenistan were detained by authorities and otherwise discouraged from attending their scheduled meeting with U.S. Secretary of State James Baker, who was in Ashgabat on a diplomatic mission. Among them was Akhmukhamed Velsapar, a writer and activist in the banned Agzybirlik (Unity) movement who had publicly criticized the republic's social ills, such as high unemployment and infant mortality. Velsapar and some ten others were placed under house arrest on October 24 and November 1, and two of their apartments were ransacked following meetings with visiting representatives of Amnesty International.

Mukhammedmurat Salamatov, who is the founder and editor of Daianch (Turkmenistan's first independent journal), was arrested on March 11 at Ashgabat airport, and some 24,500 copies of the journal found in his possession were confiscated. He was tried three times on charges of violating the republic's press law, and although charges were eventually dropped, he was beaten by unknown individuals on October 3 and he reports that he and his family continue to be harassed and threatened. He believes the incidents were an attempt to silence the journal's criticism of President Niyazov and the republic's Minister of Internal Affairs.

Ukraine

Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk attempted to quell open disapproval of the fragile Ukrainian government. On August 26, he issued a statement threatening foreign visitors with expulsion from Ukraine without the right to return if they "carry out activity that undermines the country's unity, political stability, and ethnic harmony." The statement was aimed at intimidating members of the World Forum of Ukrainians, a diaspora organization, which during its meeting in Kiev had criticized the Ukrainian government and called for its dissolution. No deportations have been reported.

In October, the Ukrainian government began to investigate two individuals on charges of slandering the state. According to The Moscow Times, one of them, Vladimir Kniazhitskii, had been quoted in a Ukrainian newspaper calling President Kravchuk "a cog" in the old Soviet bureaucracy. The other, Valentina Yerofeeva, had described both Kravchuk and Russian President Boris Yeltsin as "degenerates," impugning them for having turned their backs on the Communist Party.

Uzbekistan

The year 1992 has seen a crackdown on critics of the government of Uzbek President Islam Karimov that is unprecedented in the area in recent years. Abuses range from the broad use of detention and arrest, to strictures on public gatherings, and physical attacks on opposition leaders, their offices and homes. As a result, several leading figures in Uzbekistan's political opposition, particularly Birlik (Unity), and its human rights community have fled therepublic.

The violent attack of June 29 on several members of the Birlik popular movement was perhaps the crudest incident of repression of free speech. Abdurakhim Pulatov, co-chair of Birlik, and Miralim Adilov, legal consultant and member of the Birlik central presidium, were both hospitalized with serious head injuries, and two other Birlik members were wounded, when a gang of unidentified men attacked and beat them with metal rods outside the Tashkent procuracy building, in full view of law enforcement officials who had just finished interrogating Pulatov and Adilov. On October 19, upon his return to Tashkent from Turkey, where he had been receiving medical treatment, Pulatov was again assaulted. According to Birlik and Western sources, the attackers, who were armed, were turned over to the police. According to police officials, the attackers were knb agents who were assigned to protect Pulatov. No charges have been brought.

Other leading Birlik members were also harassed in 1992. According to a Birlik co-chair, the chair of the Khwarazm chapter, Abdulla Iusupov, was beaten near his home on January 12; Pulat Akhunov, former member of the USSR Supreme Soviet and currently deputy chair of the Birlik political party (an unregistered party which is separate from the Birlik movement), was attacked at the Tashkent airport on January 21 by three unidentified assailants, and later arrested on July 29 in the city of Shakhrikhan, Andijan oblast', on what are believed to be trumped-up charges of assault; and Bobir Shakirov, chair of the social organization "National Mejlis" and a former political prisoner, was attacked and beaten twice in July. On August 15, Shakirov's apartment was ransacked and he was arrested. He is now in pre-trial detention on charges of organizing an unsanctioned meeting.

Erk is the only registered opposition political party in Uzbekistan. According to Erk chair Muhammad Solih, however, Erk too suffers from government harassment: in 1992 its bank account was confiscated and its newspaper banned. Solih resigned his seat in parliament in July to protest what he perceived as the undemocratic conduct of President Karimov's administration. No progress was made in 1992 in Birlik's series of efforts to become registered as a political party. The highly restrictive Law on Public Organizations, adopted in February 1991, outlaws all parties that promote a religious platform; as a result, the Islamic Renaissance Party, for example, which exists in other republics, remains banned in Uzbekistan. According to a report in Nezavisimaia Gazeta, at least 19 activists from the Islamic Center and Birlik movement were arrested on March 17-18 in the eastern city of Namangan, considered a center of Islamic revival, for reasons that have yet to be explained.

The expression of dissenting political views in the press has also been restricted in Uzbekistan. The newspaper Erk frequently has been denied access to newsprint and has appeared with the telltale marks of censorship-sections blocked-out-although its namesake movement is legally registered. The newspaper's funds and equipment, such as its computer, were confiscated. Like the popular movement Birlik's newspaper, which appears in independent Uzbek- and Russian- language versions-Mustaqil Haftalik and Nezavisimyi Ezhenedel'nik, respectively-is unregistered and must be published outside the republic (in Russia) and illegally distributed on Uzbekistan territory. Birlik leaders have reported that the newspapers have been confiscated at the airport as they enter Uzbekistan.

Anti-Defamation Laws

Ukraine and some Central Asian governments use anti- defamation laws to stifle criticism and intimidate political opposition. Modeled on the 1990 USSR law criminalizing slander of the USSR president, laws defending the honor and dignity of the president and, in some cases, members of other executive bodies were enforced in Kazakhstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan in 1992. In Kazakhstan, existing legislation limits criticism of public officials other than the president as well, and they carry penalties of fines and up to two years of detention either under house arrest or in prison. The law on the protection of the honor and dignity of public officials adopted in March, and its apparently wide application, has effectively removed checks on the power of politicians and lawmakers.

Kazakhstan

Several individuals are currently under arrest on charges of violating Article 170-3 of the Kazakhstan criminal code, which protects the "honor and dignity of the president of the republic." On August 19, publicist Karishal Asanov was charged and arrested under subsection 2 of the Article for his book Thoughts About a People's Fate or A Word About the Spectre of "Sovereignty," excerpts of which appeared in an article entitled "Don't Believe the President's Smile" in the third issue of Haq (Truth), the newspaper of the outlawed radical political party Alash. In it he questions President Nazarbaev's competence to govern Kazakhstan and states that "the habits of a dictator do not allow Mr. N.A. Nazarbaev to hide even under the cover of presidential power." Bolatbek Akhmetaliev, one of the Alash leaders, has been held since December 15, 1991, for violations of this same subsection, allegedly committed during a public demonstration.

Akhmetaliev is also being charged under Article 170-4 subsection 2 of the Kazakhstan criminal code, allegedly for having "publicly slandered the honor and dignity of a people's deputy," Mufti Ratbek Haji Nysanbai-uli in December 1991. In view of these and other criminal charges, Akhmetaliev underwent psychiatric analysis, scheduled for April 27, 1992, and was diagnosed to have a "psychopathy" that the President's office claims will be accounted for in considering the criminal act for which he is incriminated.

On August 14, Demokraticheskaia Rossiia Press reported that the editorial board of the newspaper Birlescu (Unity), was facing charges, among other things, of insulting the Kazakhstan prime minister and the mayor of the Kazakhstan capital, Alma-Ata. Birlescu is the publication of the independent trade union confederation of the same name, which came under heated attack in 1992. On September 15, the People's Court of Petropavlovsk reconfirmed an earlier decision to ban the newspaper Voznesenskii Prospekt for insulting the honor and dignity of President Nazarbaev, according to a report in The Express Chronicle.

Tajikistan

The Procuracy of Tajikistan brought charges in February against Mirbobo Mirakhimov, the former leader of the Tajik political movement "Rastokhez," and Shodmon Iusupov, chair of the Democratic Party of Tajikistan, for insulting the honor and dignity of then-President Rakhmon Nabiev. Iusupov had spoken out at a demonstration in January, stating that Nabiev's politics "were not intelligent but very stupid politics." Charges against Iusupov were dropped in the spring, and Mirakhimov's case was suspended until further notice.

Ukraine

The Khar'kov chapter of "Memorial" reports that several of its members have been fined heavily, in one instance as much as 40,000 rubles, for apparent violations of the law protecting the dignity and honor of members of executive bodies.

Uzbekistan

According to Birlik leaders, a Tashkent lawyer named Suleimanov was sentenced this year to six months of deprivation of freedom for allegedly slandering the Uzbekistan president. Charges were brought in connection with articles he published in Komsomol'skaia Pravda in which he criticized the procuracy and other government bodies in Uzbekistan.

Freedom of Association and Assembly

Regulations limiting freedom of association and assembly are widely applied in Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan and Georgia. Several organized groups have been banned in Kazakhstan, including Alash, allegedly for their involvement in violent activities, and most trade unions, whose newspapers have also been closed by government order. According to the Kazakhstan President's office, Bolatbek Akhmetaliev and other Alash members are currently imprisoned, among other things, on charges of organizing an unsanctioned meeting and demonstration on October 1, 1991, allegedly "with the goal of preventing the meeting of the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan with other leaders of other republics of the cis," in purported violation of Article 183-1 of the Kazakhstan criminal code.

The new Turkmenistan constitution, adopted on May 18, 1992, bans all political parties that claim an ethnic or religious platform. Moreover, theconstitution does not explicitly guarantee the right to hold meetings, demonstrations or assemblies, but permits such gatherings only "within the framework provided by the current legislation."

Uzbekistan enforces particularly restrictive laws on assembly, requiring permission from local authorities not only for public demonstrations but also for gatherings in private homes. These regulations have been applied on numerous occasions in 1992 to prevent public displays of criticism. Most illustrative of violations of this basic freedom are the police activities and subsequent mass arrests that followed a series of attempted demonstrations scheduled to protest the opening of the session of the Uzbekistan Supreme Soviet on July 2. On this date, Birlik and Erk planned a series of joint public demonstrations to be held in several cities throughout the republic. According to witnesses, in the early hours of that day, Ministry of Internal Affairs (mvd) and other law enforcement officials blocked the main square in the capital and closed major arteries of traffic that would have allowed people to congregate in the city. Scores of arrests were carried out in Tashkent, Bukhara, Kokand, Namangan and Samarkand.

On January 16-17, Ministry of Internal Affairs troops were sent in to calm a demonstration on the campus of Tashkent State University. In the ensuing chaos, two students were killed and tens of others wounded by shots apparently fired by mvd troops. According to students enrolled at the university at the time, in the immediate aftermath of the violence, measures were taken to make organized protests difficult: most classes at the university were suspended for approximately two months, and students living in dormitories were forced out of them and ordered to re-enroll at educational institutions in other cities, while students from outlying areas were brought in their stead.

Criminal Justice System

Right to Counsel

The right of detainees to timely access to legal counsel was violated on a regular basis in those areas of the former Soviet Union that saw armed conflict in 1992. This occurred especially in circumstances surrounding the apprehension of suspected criminals during times of a state of emergency or other war-like situations.

In Moldova, several inmates and former prisoners with whom Helsinki Watch spoke reported that they were advised by prison wardens and investigators that they should defend themselves and not hope ever to have legal counsel. As a result, Igor' Yermakov, arrested for illegal possession of a weapon by Moldovan government authorities in the war-torn city of Bendery, has been in prison since June 20 and has not had access to counsel.

In Kazakhstan, Bolatbek Akhmetaliev, an Alash leader, at first was denied the right to engage a Moscow attorney for his defense. The investigation went on without Akhmetaliev's counsel of choice, but once the investigation was finished he was allowed to hire a Moscow lawyer. The attorney claimed he was permitted infrequent access to his client, despite the fact that by law the accused has the right to meet his lawyer every day.

In Tajikistan, Dushanbe Mayor Ikramov, who was arrested and detained in March in connection with alleged corruption, was consistently denied access to his lawyer. At one point the lawyer, Igor' Naumkin, was prevented from meeting with his client for 31 consecutive days. Subsequently, Mr. Ikramov was moved from Dushanbe to a jail in northern Tajikistan without the knowledge of his lawyer.

Administrative Detention

Administrative detention, the legal practice of holding individuals for up to 15 days for such misdemeanors as petty hooliganism and participating in unsanctioned gatherings is an abusive practice left over from the Soviet era. No successor states to the former Soviet Union have repealed the laws authorizing this practice, which exceeds accepted international norms, and indeed some periodically have extended the detention to one month. In practice, administrative arrest and detention are used to restrict the movement and communication of individuals who voice opinions contrary to those of the government, and as such has proved a legal instrument for violating the freedom of speech.

Azerbaijan

Attempts to curb use of administrative detention suffered a setback in Azerbaijan in 1992 when acting president Isa Kamberov issued a decree on June 3 granting "internal department chiefs" the right to double the length of stay under administrative detention, according to an Interfax report, "due to the tense situation in the republic, to the escalation of aggression on the part of the Armenian armed forces, and to the need of the disarmament of the unlawfully formed detachments." As a result, many individuals were held in prisons for one month-and in some cases well beyond that time-without being charged. The same decree, which was enforced for one month, also granted the Internal Ministry the authority to conduct searches of private homes without a warrant.

Georgia

During the period of rule by the Georgian State Council, Gamsakhurdia supporters were widely and routinely subject to harassment in the form of administrative arrest primarily for participating in unsanctioned gatherings. Police and Mkhedrioni, a paramilitary group that is not directly under government control, took suspects to police stations, subjected them to degrading treatment and sometimes beatings, and in some cases in the autumn, detained them longer than 15 days, apparently to keep them off the streets during the October 11 elections.

Uzbekistan

Pulat Akhunov, deputy chair of the outlawed Birlik party and an activist in its movement of the same name, was detained twice in June. According to a report in The Express Chronicle, Akhunov was arrested during a traffic check and held for ten days beginning on June 26 on charges of "offending a police officer," an event which coincided with his efforts to conduct a joint meeting of the leaders of the oblast' chapters of the Birlik popular movement and Erk. His detention was extended by ten days for his apparent participation in a prison brawl. He was arrested again on July 28 on what Birlik co-chair Abdurakhim Pulatov believes are trumped-up charges of assault. Deputy chair of the Society for Human Rights of Uzbekistan, Mikhail Ardzinov, was held for ten days apparently without formal charges, during which he held a hunger strike in protest. Birlik supporters K. Akhmedov and N. Eshniiazov were held under administrative arrest for ten and fifteen days, respectively. Following numerous stints in administrative detention, Yadgor Obid, a member of Birlik's central council, fled Uzbekistan.

Economic Crimes

According to the Russian Ministry of Justice, since 1989 some 17,000 persons have been convicted under article 154 of the Russian criminal code for speculation. About 5,400 were convicted in 1991. Speculation, which carries a sentence of between three and seven years of imprisonment, was made legal by a decree of January 29, 1992, yet thousands of these individuals remain in prison. A general amnesty issued in June allowed the release (subject to certain restrictions) of, among others, inmates who had served 20 months of sentences of up to five years. Some "economic prisoners" were accordingly released under this amnesty, but no special provisions were made to speed the release of all people convicted of speculation.

Death Penalty

The death penalty remains in place in all of the former Soviet republics except Georgia and Armenia, where it was officially rescinded in previous years. (In Georgia, however, summary executions reportedly take place to punish Georgian troops who engage in marauding in Abkhazia.) During the Soviet era, death penalty cases, which were usually tried at first instance in republic supreme courts, could be appealed to the USSR Supreme Court. After the break-up of the Soviet Union, death penalty cases continue to be tried in the first instance in republic supreme courts, leaving defendants without a separate court of judicial appeal.

In January, President Boris Yeltsin established a clemency commission to review death sentences. Since then only one execution has been carried out, and all others are under the commission's consideration.

Responding to international pressure, the Azerbaijani government in May suspended the execution of five Armenian men charged with murder. The case is now under consideration by President Elcibey.

Political Prisoners

On February 7, the last 10 individuals charged during the Soviet era with political crimes were released from Perm-35 prison. Sadly, new names were added to the rolls of political prisoners in individual former republics.

During the past few years efforts have been made on the part of the rsfsr and now the Russian Federation to seek out and identify cases of illegal imprisonment. In 1992, this job fell largely to the Human Rights Committee of the Russian Supreme Soviet. In a meeting in September during a visit to New York, committee chair Sergei Kovolev, responding to the question of whether there were still political prisoners being held in Russia, answered "yes and no." He explained that he did not know of any, but did not exclude the possibility that some remained behind, bypassed in the amnesties of the late 1980s and early 1990s that released political prisoners en masse, or imprisoned on non-political charges. Kovalev reported that his committee was flooded with letters of inquiry which, because of the lack of manpower, were largely neglected, but that the committee was investigating certain particularly compelling cases. To date, no cases have been found to be political.

In Moldova, several individuals who protested against the conduct of the self-proclaimed Dniester Moldovan Republic (DMR) or who were active in those political groups that were known to oppose the DMR, primarily the Christian-Democratic Popular Front, were arrested by DMR authorities on criminal charges during the course of the armed conflict in Moldova's eastern territories. It is believed that their arrests were politically motivated and that criminal proceedings against them were initiated as a cover-up.

The most egregious arrest was that of Stefan Urtu, former chair of the Tiraspol' branch of the Popular Front and dean of the Physics and Mathematics Department at the Shevchenko Pedagogical Institute in Tiraspol'. On June 2, in a sweep that brought into municipal detention centers at least three other activists from the Popular Front on similar charges, Stefan Urtu was arrested in his home, beaten by arresting officials, and charged with having committed a "terrorist act" as defined in Article 63 of the Moldovan ssr criminal code. Depending on which part of the article under which he is being charged (the DMR Procurator General has not clarified this point), Urtu could face the death penalty. He was held without access to legal counsel for over two months, and then released on September 6, although charges against him have not been dropped. Urtu has maintained his innocence, and it is widely believed that the charges against him were a fabrication used to silence his dissent.

Numerous individuals who are active in opposition movements and the opposition media in Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan were also detained as a form of political harassment on charges ranging from traffic violations to illegal assembly.

Rehabilitation of Victims of Soviet Oppression

The successor states continue to make progress in rehabilitating victims of abusive and punitive Soviet policies. The biggest breakthrough in this process in 1992 was the opening to public scrutiny of the long secret kgb files, allowing the nature and extent of such abuses to come to light. As documents are unearthed in archives, including warrants for execution, issues that have long plagued the Soviet Union's international relations are being resolved. Most dramatic among these revelations this year were documents released on October 14 proving Soviet responsibility for the massacre of 20,000 Poles in Katyn forest. Ordinary citizens, on the other hand, had little success in 1992 in gaining access to the files, and have much longer to wait before archival facilities can accommodate all those pursuing inquiries.

The successor states acknowledge but do not assume responsibility for past crimes, and have failed in their legal obligation to compensate adequately victims of these injustices. There is little likelihood that the successor states will make full compensation of victims a priority in the foreseeable future since state coffers are largely empty during this transitional time, and economic demands are more than the nascent economic structure can satisfy. Moreover, on a symbolic level, there is clearly an unwillingness on the part of the newly independent states to pay for the abuses of the former USSR.

Psychiatric Abuse

Systematic, government-sponsored abuse of psychiatry for political reasons appears to have come to an end in the former USSR. Progress has been made in instituting legal provisions for humane and responsible health care for the mentally ill, although it has been pursued more successfully and vigorously in some regions of the former Soviet Union than in others. In Russia, for example, the mental care legislative act "On Psychiatric Care and the Citizens' Rights With Regard to Such Care" was passed on July 2, 1992, setting minimum standards for humane treatment of psychiatric patients, including limitations on how long a patient may be incarcerated before being allowed access to legal counsel, and rights to correspondence, visits, and informed consent before treatment is given. The principles articulated in "On Psychiatric Care" improve on those laid out in Russia's mental health care law adopted in January 1988. Georgian authorities are preparing a similar draft law, as may be other former republics. Despite such progress, there is still no effective review system, and no standardized mechanism for issuing accreditation to psychiatric facilities.

The American Psychiatric Association has noted a general improvement in the attitude of former Soviet psychiatrists and mental health professionals and administrators toward patients in 1992, but bemoans the fact that the profession remains largely discredited by its past record of abuse and lacks the education necessary to reverse its legacy of mistrust and ignorance. This process is further impeded by the slowness of the system to replace those authorities who are responsible for past abuses with enlightened, appropriately trained cadres.

One of the most notorious restrictions on mentally ill patients from the Soviet era that persists today is the existence of a register of individuals who have been released from mental facilities and who as a result are stigmatized and deprived of certain rights, including the right to drive a car, travel abroad, and hold some jobs. Before the glasnost period of reform, there had been millions of individuals on the register. There is no information available on the current size of the register. Legislative bodies in most of the former republics are discussing amending the practice, although the prospect for progress on this issue in the immediate future is unclear.

Much work remains to be done in the legal sphere. Except in Russia, there are no laws in the former Soviet Union that guarantee minimum humane treatment of mental patients. In the absence of any standardized methods for disseminating legislation, even those laws that do exist to protect the rights of mental patients rarely find their way into the hands of mental health professionals or, more important, the patients themselves. Moreover, there are no provisions for enforcement of the guarantees enshrined in the current law.

Conscientious Objection

In a departure from the experience of past years, only a handful of cases of punishment for conscientious objection have reached the attention of advocacy groups in 1992. This may be explained in part by a lack of information on cases of imprisonment of conscientious objectors, and in part by the relative enthusiasm with which men of conscription age are willing to serve in national as opposed to "Soviet" armies. To date, only Azerbaijan, Moldova and Ukraine have ratified laws on alternative service. Armenian legislation provides options for individuals whose religious beliefs conflict with state requirements, but the republic has not yet passed a law concerning enforcement of this option or for accommodating pacifist objections. Turkmenistan issued a decree, reported by Interfax on July 16, approving alternative service on construction sites. Draft laws on alternative service in Belarus, Kyrgyzstan and Russia are expected to come before legislatures in 1993.

An added complication is that not all new states have adopted citizenship laws, and even in those that have, many residents have not yet declared their intention to adopt a new citizenship. Thus, there are many officially stateless individuals whose obligations to serve in the military are unclear.

According to the Moscow Helsinki Group, local procuracies in the Russian Federation are currently pressing criminal charges against more than 400 people who have refused to begin military service. While it is not known how many of these are currently in pretrial detention, 41 are currently serving sentences handed down in 1991 and 1992 for refusing to serve.

The Moldovan parliament passed the law "On Alternative Service" on July 9, 1992, featuring provisions for males between the ages of 18 and 27 to refusemilitary service "due to religious or pacifist convictions" (Article 3) on condition that they instead perform "government service...that has a civil and socially useful character" (Article 4). The Chisinau branch of "Memorial" reports that several men of German origin who had decided not to adopt Moldovan citizenship were obliged to serve in the Moldovan Republican Army, and some sustained casualties. Their objections to military service apparently were neither religious nor pacifist but political, a category not accounted for under the new law.

Armenia and Ukraine have adopted legal provisions permitting alternative service on the basis of religious objection. In Armenia, the "Law on Freedom of Conscience and Religious Organizations," adopted on June 17, 1991, grants the option of civil service to individuals whose religious beliefs prevent their involvement in the armed forces. The Ukrainian law, passed in 1992 based on a draft prepared in December 1991, also makes alternative service available only to those who exhibit "genuine religious conviction" (apparently not defined in the law), and in addition mandates service in non-combat capacities of double the length of those who serve in the military.

Although most successor states have shown increased sensitivity to the issue of conscientious objection, in some states there has been legislative backsliding, particularly in those regions embroiled in regional armed conflict. Article 9 of the law "On the Armed Forces of the Azerbaijani Republic," adopted in October 1991, offers 24 months of alternative civil service to men between the ages of 18 and 25 "for reasons of conscience," six months longer service than a regular tour in the armed forces. On June 11, 1992, however, in the heat of the bloody escalation of the fighting in the disputed enclave of Nagorno Karabakh, the Azerbaijani parliament suspended this alternative; it is unclear when it will be reinstated. The Acting President of Tajikistan, a republic burdened with the demands of a civil war, issued a decree on October 14 declaring that "resolute measures" would be taken against individuals evading conscription. Though not facing the pressures of armed internal conflict, Turkmenistan, too, took a harsher stand on the issue by stiffening penalties against deserters and threatening them with criminal charges.

The Right to Monitor

The Memorial Human Rights Center reports unimpeded access in its monitoring activities, which have taken place in Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Moldova, Russia and Ukraine. In the summer of 1992, the Moscow Helsinki Group, together with other human rights groups specializing in prisoners' rights and prison reform, abuses in the military, and abuses in psychiatry and the rights of the mentally ill, opened the Moscow Human Rights Center. The Russian government facilitated this endeavor by making office space available in downtown Moscow, and it is to be hoped that the Russian government will continue to support this and other human rights projects.

Governments in Russia, Central Asia and Georgia have been less cooperative in granting local activists access to prisons. For example, a planned visit to prisons that was part of an international conference on prison reform held in November in Moscow was disrupted by the Russian authorities' decision to allow only the foreign visitors access to prisons. The authorities reversed this decision only in response to pressure from the conference organizers.

In Uzbekistan, members of the Birlik movement attempted to form a human rights organization in the spring of 1992 but were denied registration by the government. Although the movement has a political agenda, that should not have impeded their freedom of association.

International human rights monitors worked and traveled almost unimpeded in the former Soviet Union in 1992. A notable exception was the expulsion of two representatives of Amnesty International from Turkmenistan on October 25 on the pretext that they had been traveling on invalid visas. They were also forbidden to leave the republic through Russia, and thus were forced to travel out by way of Azerbaijan.

U.S. Policy

The U.S. government has provided diplomatic and financial support for the fledgling states that were established following the December 1991 Minsk agreement that effectively dismantled the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.U.S. policy, on the whole, has been nurturing and benign.

In an address in Princeton in December 1991, Secretary of State Baker defined the principles on which the U.S. government would base its relations with the successor states to the Soviet Union as "respect for human rights, particularly respect for equal rights for minorities; adherence to democracy and to free markets; and of course nuclear safety." The dizzying speed with which the successor states have adopted, rejected and revised their own social and political experiments has made it difficult to ascertain how well these states are adhering to Baker's principles during a chaotic period of transition. Because U.S. policy has been largely reactive rather than forward-looking, it has been only marginally effective in curbing violations of rights by the new governments and in mitigating the internal strife that threatens the freedoms of millions of individuals.

Many remnants of the former Soviet infrastructure, including organs of state security, remain in place today and continue to function as they used to, inviting arbitrary and sometimes corrupt implementation in the area of law enforcement. In addition, many members of the Soviet bureaucracy remain in their previous jobs or have been reshuffled for the sake of appearances but retain their previous responsibilities. Former communists remain as president in Kazakhstan, Moldova, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and Uzbekistan. Moreover, several leaders who came to power by exploiting nationalist sentiments have proven to be at least abusive as their communist predecessors. Most egregious was Zviad Gamsakhurdia, who came to power in Georgia in May 1990 and was ousted by force in January 1992, in part because of widespread dissatisfaction over his violations of freedom of speech. In addition, Abulfaz Elcibey who was swept to power in Azerbaijan on a groundswell of popular support in June 1992, has since launched a counter-offensive in Nagorno Karabakh that has caused an escalation in the conflict with many new civilian casualties.

U.S. policy toward the former Soviet Union in 1992 suffered most from an apparent belief that the shedding of communism and the turn to a market economy would necessarily be accompanied by democracy and a respect for human rights. In his statement of April 9 before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Secretary Baker repeatedly linked the concepts of "building democracy" and "building free markets." During his week-long whirlwind tour of the newly independent states in early February, Secretary Baker seemed satisfied with those who paid lip service to this simplistic yardstick. For example, following his February meeting with Uzbek President Islam Karimov, who won in an election in which several opposition parties were forbidden to participate, Mr. Baker stated: "The President in our meetings in effect recited those principles [relating to democracy, the free market and human rights] back to me today. I am well pleased by what I heard." The same sentiment was echoed in Baker's warm speech during his visit to Tbilisi, Georgia, on May 25, when he praised the work of State Council member Eduard Shevardnadze while ignoring violations of free speech in the troubled republic, which have silenced many real and alleged supporters of ousted president Gamsakhurdia.

On October 26, President Bush approved the "Freedom for Russian and Emerging Eurasian Democracies and Open Markets Support Act" (Freedom Support Act), which provides for the distribution of $410 million to the new states in humanitarian aid and development programs. Secretary Baker has characterized the Act as "every bit as much a policy statement...as a legislative package." The Freedom Support Act contains a crucial provision whereby aid and other economic benefits can be withheld from any of the countries that violate human rights.

The U.S. Congress exercised its prerogative to withhold aid to successor states on human rights grounds. An amendment to the Freedom Support Act denies aid to Azerbaijan beginning January 1, 1993, to protest human rights abuses committed by Azerbaijan during the protracted conflict in Nagorno Karabakh and Azerbaijan's blockade of Nagorno Karabakh and Armenia. The amendment (which the Bush Administration repeatedly opposed) is laudable but lacks even-handedness with regard to Armenia, which is unofficially supporting the Armenians in Nagorno Karabakh who are also responsible for human rights abuses.

In the course of 1992 the State Department took the lead in the international community by opening a far-flung network of embassies in the newly independent states. By the end of the year, U.S. embassies were operating, with varying degrees of efficiency, in the capitals of all of the former Sovietrepublics. A new consulate, in Vladivostok, Russia, was also opened on September 22. Ambassadors were approved for all countries except Armenia. In addition, some 500 Peace Corps volunteers are expected to be in place throughout the former Soviet Union by the end of fiscal year 1993.

Mobilizing qualified cadres of foreign service officers with backgrounds in development and the local cultures is a colossal task and, given time constraints, has been met admirably by the State Department. To date, however, there is only one U.S. foreign service officer in the entire former Soviet Union who is charged with the responsibility of monitoring violations of human rights on a full-time basis: the second secretary at the U.S. embassy in Russia. Because human rights violations continue on a large scale in the former USSR, the State Department should increase the attention paid to human rights within the diplomatic service.

One of the most important steps toward bringing the twelve former Soviet republics into conformity with international human rights standards was taken in January 1992 when all new states (except Georgia, which was admitted in March) joined the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (csce). During 1992, the U.S. government's Helsinki Commission (also known as csce) sent congressional and staff delegations to all of the successor states where, according to their August report, they "paid special attention to human rights issues and the process of democratization in the new states."

The U.S. Congress in 1992 initiated the Benjamin Franklin Fellowship Program, which provides $7 million from 1992-1994 to offer citizens of the successor states a higher education in the United States in the fields of law, business, public administration and economics. Students are selected on the basis of academic merit, and must return to their home countries for at least two years upon completion of their American education. The program, which is desperately needed, should be expanded, in the view of Helsinki Watch, to include journalism and human rights training in addition to the law.

Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty and Voice of America, U.S. government-funded radio stations that for decades have broadcast alternative programming into the former Soviet Union, came under attack again in 1992 as legislators were assessing the stations' continued usefulness. It is to the credit of the U.S. government that the level of funding for these important services has been maintained in 1992. Until legal mechanisms for ensuring freedom of speech are established and implemented in all of the new states, the U.S. government should continue to provide uncensored views and information through the radio broadcasts and research institutes.

In January 1992, President Bush pledged $645 million in economic aid to the newly independent states during 1992 and 1993. Government agencies such as the U.S. Agency for International Development have greatly expanded their previous development interests in the former Soviet Union. One such effort is "Operation Provide Hope" and "Operation Provide Hope II," through which massive humanitarian aid was delivered throughout the former Soviet Union. The human rights aspect of this program lies in its commitment to educational training in the legal and judicial systems, manifested in joint projects for study of the rule of law in which judges and legal experts will be brought to the United States for training, and in programs to provide U.S. legal experts to assist in revising legislation to conform to international standards.

The Work of Helsinki Watch

In 1992, Helsinki Watch maintained its traditional monitoring on the territory of the former Soviet Union and, thanks in large part to the opening of its Moscow office in November 1991, has extended and made permanent its presence in areas that previously were accessible only by sending occasional fact-finding missions. The loosening of restrictions on foreign visitors that has taken place in the last few years, particularly on international human rights monitors, has given Helsinki Watch the opportunity to work as an integral part of the human rights community in Russia and elsewhere in the region. The office is engaged in the vital exchange of information and mutual support with local human rights groups and with those in need.

One of the most important advances in 1992 has been the promotion of cooperative relations with local human rights groups, a dream long thwarted during the Soviet era. In June, a Helsinki Watch representative completed a jointmission to Tajikistan with members of the Human Rights Group of the Moscow- based organization "Memorial," which has branches throughout the former Soviet Union; a joint report will be issued on their findings in December. In November another joint Helsinki Watch-Memorial mission visited Georgia to investigate reports of police abuses and violations of free speech.

In 1992, Helsinki Watch representatives traveled on one or more occasions to Armenia, Azerbaijan, Moldova, Tajikistan, Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan, and issued or will issue reports on the findings of each mission. The missions to Armenia and Azerbaijan in April, May and October investigated abuses committed in connection with the internal battle for territorial and political autonomy in Nagorno Karabakh and included a follow- up mission to look into evidence of reckless air bombings in the beleaguered territory. The missions to Tajikistan in June gathered information about the May demonstrations, and the mission to Moldova in August explored allegations of human rights abuses perpetrated during the bloody conflict over the secessionist movement in the eastern areas of the republic as well as the increased tensions among ethnic groups living in the region. A November mission to Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan investigated police harassment and the crackdown on free speech and press. Each of these missions widens Helsinki Watch's network of contacts with local journalists and the human rights community and strengthens future work in the region.

Helsinki Watch has dedicated much of its resources to investigating the tragic turmoil in the Caucasus mountains-in Armenia, Georgia and Azerbaijan. Protests against suppression of free speech and concomitant violence generated two related newsletters, "Conflict in Georgia: Human Rights Violations by the Government of Zviad Gamsakhurdia," in December 1991, and "Human Rights Violations in the New Georgia" in January 1992, following Zviad Gamsakhurdia's ouster. In March, Helsinki Watch published Bloodshed in the Caucasus: Violations of Humanitarian Law and Human Rights in the Georgian-South Ossetian Conflict, concerning violations in the ongoing battle for control of South Ossetia. In June, Helsinki Watch issued a newsletter, called "Helsinki Watch Deplores Murder of Refugees in South Ossetia," about the brutal murder of some 36 refugees by Georgian irregulars as they fled the theater of conflict in South Ossetia on May 20.

On the basis of its two-week mission in April and May to Armenia and Azerbaijan, including Nagorno Karabakh, Helsinki Watch published Bloodshed in the Caucasus: Escalation of the Armed Conflict in Nagorno Karabakh, which details the latest phases in what may be the most long-lived armed conflict to have scarred the face of the former Soviet Union. The report includes information concerning the notorious "Operation Ring" campaign, and the slaughters in Khojaly and Maraga, sites of some of the most brutal fighting in Nagorno Karabakh.

As violence increased in the spring of 1992, Helsinki Watch issued a newsletter, "Overview of Areas of Armed Conflict in the Former USSR," outlining the nature of the abuses and giving background on the areas of greatest concern. The August Helsinki Watch mission to Moldova resulted in a report, Borders and Bloodshed: Human Rights Violations in Moldova, in December.

In addition to the continued monitoring of these "hot spots," Helsinki Watch has also maintained a strong hand in protesting abuses that result from the legacy of the inadequate Soviet political and legal systems. Reviving the debate on a problem with which the organization has taken issue for many years, Helsinki Watch released a newsletter, "Russian Residence and Travel Restrictions" in August, which challenged the abusive practice, born of the Soviet period, of limiting internal and external travel, a violation of the fundamental right to freedom of movement.

In April, Helsinki Watch sent a letter to Russian Minister of Justice Nikolai Fyodorov protesting the continued imprisonment of individuals serving terms for speculation and requesting further information on the subject. The letter has gone unanswered.

On July 9, a letter was sent to Uzbekistan President Islam Karimov protesting the brutal beatings of several leaders of the political opposition movement Birlik on June 29, including Abdurakhim Pulatov, co-chair of the popular movement, and Miralim Adilov, his legal counsel and a fellow member of Birlik. In its reply, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs emphasized Uzbekistan's right to deal with internal problems as it deemed fit.

In response to reports that Bolatbek Akhmetaliev, a leader of the outlawedAlash party, was being mistreated in detention, among other things on charges of slandering the Kazakhstan president, Helsinki Watch sent a letter of inquiry and concern in August. The President's office confirmed that Akhmetaliev had been handcuffed in the hospital and was under psychiatric care.

Helsinki Watch sent a letter on November 5 to Turkmenistan President Niyazov condemning the house arrests of individuals who expressed dissenting opinions and urging an immediate end to systematic violations of freedom of movement and speech in the republic.

Helsinki Watch representatives have also participated in international conferences on prison reform and on women's rights, both of which took place in Moscow in November. In addition Helsinki Watch has continued to provide a forum in the U.S. for visiting and resident specialists in the field of human rights, and has met with diplomats from the region stationed in the United States. Guests have included Sergei Kovalev, chair of the Human Rights Committee of the Russian Supreme Soviet, and Lydia Semina, staff director of the human rights committee and a member of the Russian Human Rights Project Group; Andrei Kozyrev, Foreign Minister of the Russian Federation; Abdurakhim Pulatov, leader of Uzbekistan's Birlik movement; Lydia Grafova, founder of Civilian Assistance, a refugee advocacy group, and observer for Literaturnaia Gazeta; Evgenii Zakharov, co-chairman of the Khar'kov (Ukraine) branch of Memorial; Seyran Bagdasarian, deputy to the parliament of Armenia; and Revaz Gvarliani, a Georgian film director and producer of human rights-related films.
TURKEY

Human Rights Developments

The human rights situation in Turkey worsened considerably in 1992. Killings by security forces, in house raids and during peaceful demonstrations, increased substantially over the previous year. So did assassinations by unknown assailants in southeast Turkey, including the killing of eleven journalists-with no serious efforts by the Turkish government to investigate these murders. Torture continued unabated. Sixteen people died in suspicious circumstances while in police custody. Free expression continued to be severely restricted; writers and journalists were detained and prosecuted, and journals were banned and confiscated. Freedom of assembly and association were also sharply restricted. Government abuses of Kurdish civilians in southeast Turkey accelerated, and Kurdish ethnic identity continued to be under attack.

The coalition government that took office in late November 1991 (made up of Suleyman Demirel's True Path Party and Erdal Inonu's Social Democratic Party) made a number of promises. Among them vows to end torture; to enact significant legal reforms; to draft a new constitution and, meanwhile, to repeal certain restrictive provisions in the current constitution; to acknowledge the "Kurdish reality"; and to respect freedom of the press. None of these promises has been kept.

A legal reform bill was passed by Parliament on November 18 and ratified by President Turgut Ozal. Although the new law shortens detention periods somewhat for people suspected of ordinary crimes, it preserves possible 30-day detentions for political suspects. And the maximum detention period for ordinary criminal suspects (eight days) is far longer than detention periods that have been outlawed by the European Court of Human Rights. The new law also assures a detainee's right to meet in private with his or her lawyer during every stage of the interrogation; this right already exists under Turkish law, but is almost never observed in practice. The law also assures legal representation for those who cannot afford it-a new development-but if a defendant is found guilty, the Union of Bar Associations can ask for return of court and defense fees.

During the first days of the Demirel government, the administration took some positive steps: the notorious Eskisehir Prison was shut down; 227 people who had been deprived of their citizenship for political reasons regained it; and some films and cassettes were removed from a list of banned artistic works. Since then, one Kurdish-language paper has been allowed to be published and distributed; a Kurdish institute has been permitted to open in Istanbul (but not to hang a sign outside its office); and a policy of allowing parents freedom to choose their children's names, including Kurdish names, was adopted.

Turkey faces serious problems: extremist left-wing groups, chiefly Dev Sol (Revolutionary Left), assassinated 54 police and other officials in western Turkey in 1992, and set off bombs in crowded civilian areas as well. The Kurdish Workers Party (pkk), a separatist group that espouses the use of violence for political ends, continues to wage guerrilla warfare in the southeast, frequently in violation of international humanitarian law, or the laws of war.

But instead of attempting to capture, question and indict people suspected of illegal activity, Turkish security forces killed suspects in house raids, thus acting as investigator, judge, jury and executioner. Police routinely asserted that such deaths occurred in shoot-outs between police and "terrorists." In many cases, eyewitnesses reported that no firing came from the attacked house or apartment. Reliable reports indicated that while the occupants of raided premises were shot and killed, no police were killed or wounded during the raids. This discrepancy suggests that the killings were, in fact, summary, extra-judicial executions, in violation of international human rights and humanitarian law. The practice demonstrates the Demirel government's apparent abandonment of its stated commitment to a "state of law based on human rights and freedoms."

Seventy-four people were known to have been killed in house raids in 1992, as compared to 19 people shot and killed in such raids in 1991. Of the 1992 shootings, 40 alleged terrorists were killed in western Turkey-in Istanbul, Ankara, Adana and Mersin-and 34 alleged pkk members were killed in southeast Turkey.

Contrary to international law and standards, Turkish police continued to shoot and kill peaceful demonstrators-more than 100 during 1992. By contrast, in 1991 ten people were killed by police using live ammunition as a method of crowd control. In March 1992, during the celebration of the Kurdish New Year, government troops opened fire and killed at least 91 demonstrators in three towns in the southeast. Nine others were killed in demonstrations in the southeast in mid-August. Peaceful demonstrators were also killed in Istanbul, Izmir, Adana, Antalya and the southeast. No one has been charged in connection with any of these deaths.

During 1992, torture continued to be routinely and systematically used during the interrogation of both political and non-political suspects. Sixteen people died in suspicious circumstances while under interrogation in police headquarters-five in western Turkey and 11 in the southeast. Police asserted that six of the 13 had committed suicide; three of the five were children, ages 13, 17 and 17. No one has been charged for any of the 16 deaths, and only two cases are being investigated.

Torture takes place in police interrogation centers. Although a 1989 decree ordered that detainees have immediate access to lawyers, such access is consistently denied in practice.

In August, Helsinki Watch interviewed 24 victims of torture in four cities in western Turkey: Istanbul, Ankara, Adana and Antalya. Some were Kurds, some were left-wing activists, and some were suspected of ordinary crimes. All told horrifying tales of their treatment at the hands of the police. Torture techniques included: suspension by arms or wrists, blindfolded and naked (the "Palestine hanger"), while electric shocks were applied to genitals and other sensitive body parts; falaka (beating the soles of the feet); rape and sexual abuse; severe beatings; attacks with highly pressurized water; being dragged by the hair or having hair pulled out; having one's face pushed into a septic tank; and being placed in a cell with an attack dog and repeatedly bitten. Nine of the detainees were released and never charged with a crime. Charges against others included political offenses like distributing magazines or literature; attending a leftist's funeral; writing for a left-wing or pro-Kurdish journal; occupying a university building in a protest action; taking photos at a student demonstration; hanging posters for a journal; and covering a student demonstration. None had been allowed to see a lawyer; only one had seen a doctor while in detention.

Torture is not confined to adults. In January, Helsinki Watch issued a report detailing the torture by police of nine children between the ages of 13 and 17. Some were suspected of political offenses such as distributing literature or attending a protest rally. Some were suspected of ordinary crimes. Most were released without being charged with any crime. Torture techniques used including slapping, punching, hitting with truncheons, falaka, the Palestine hanger,electric shock, and inserting a truncheon into the anus. None of the children had been allowed to see lawyers; none of the children's families was notified of their whereabouts. During 1992, Helsinki Watch continued to receive reports of the torture of children.

The pkk's guerrilla war, begun in 1984, markedly intensified during 1992. Of the approximately 5,000 deaths that have resulted in the past eight years, 2,000 occurred in 1992. Many who died were unarmed civilians, caught in the middle between the pkk and security forces, targeted for attacks by both sides.

In 1992, the military markedly stepped up its attacks and frequently killed civilians and destroyed civilian homes, in some cases bombing villages from the air. At least one city, Sirnak, was nearly obliterated by Turkish security forces in August. The Turkish government stated that the pkk had attacked Sirnak, provoking the attack, but Sirnak residents denied the claim. Homes and shops were so badly damaged and the residents so fearful that only between 2,000 and 3,000 people remain in a city that had contained 35,000. Helsinki Watch has received reports of similar destruction in other towns in the southeast.

In addition, Kurdish villagers were frequently forced by the government to choose between acting as village guards, thus making them targets of pkk attacks, and abandoning their homes and fields. The Diyarbakir Human Rights Association branch has listed 400 villages that have been abandoned in the southeast.

The pkk continued to attack and kill large numbers of village guards as well as civilians; in many cases bodies of victims were suspended from telephone poles with notes indicating they had been killed as informers.

During 1992 there was a disturbing increase in the number of suspicious deaths in southeast Turkey. More than 100 people were killed by unknown assailants; most of the victims had been leaders or in positions of responsibility in the Kurdish community, including doctors,political leaders, lawyers, teachers, human rights activists, businessmen. Eleven were journalists, all but one of whom had written for left-wing or pro-Kurdish journals, and several had written about purported connections between a "counter-guerrilla" force and Turkish security forces. Nine of the eleven were deliberately targeted for assassination, including several shot with one bullet in the back of the head. Although there were eyewitnesses to several of the murders, the Turkish government has made no serious effort to investigate the murders or to find the killers, who appear to have acted with impunity.

Kurdish ethnic identity continued to be under attack in 1992. Although the authorities repealed a law forbidding the speaking of Kurdish on the street, using Kurdish in court or in other official settings is still forbidden. Kurdish associations have been closed. Education in the Kurdish language is forbidden. Cassettes with Kurdish songs are frequently confiscated by the police. Kurds have been detained and interrogated for working with the Mesopotamia Cultural Center in Istanbul. Kurdish cannot be spoken on Turkish television, nor can advertisements for a Kurdish newspaper appear. Kurds have been detained and arrested for singing Kurdish songs at wedding ceremonies in Izmir, Adana and Gaziantep.

During 1992, scores of journalists, editors and writers were beaten, interrogated, tortured, charged, tried and sometimes convicted for what they had written, edited or published in Turkey. Most were charged under the very broad Anti-Terror Law for such offenses as "criticizing" or "insulting" the president, public officers, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk or the military; printing "anti-military propaganda"; "praising an action proscribed as a crime"; "praising a terrorist organization"; or spreading "separatist propaganda."

Turkish authorities also raided editorial offices and confiscated and banned dozens of issues of small, left-wing or pro-Kurdish journals. The most frequent targets were the journals Ozgur Gundem (Free Agenda), 2000'e Dogru (Towards 2000), Yeni Ulke (New Land), and Mucadele (Struggle).

Freedom of assembly continued to be restricted. During 1992, dozens of meetings, demonstrations and marches were banned, and dozens of demonstrators and marchers were prosecuted. Moreover, as noted, police used live ammunition as a method of crowd control, and shot and killed more than 100 non-violent demonstrators.

Many independent Turkish associations were harassed, restricted, raided and sometimes closed during 1992, and many of their members were detained, tortured and indicted. Some associations closed during 1992 were the Association forStruggle against High Cost of Living and Unemployment, the Association for Rights and Freedoms, the Association for a Patriotic and Democratic Culture, the Association of the Unemployed, the Patriotic Women's Association, the Art and Culture Association of Kartal, the Folklore Education Association, and the People's Houses of Karsiyaka, Adana and Bursa. The associations' members were charged with such offenses as "shouting illegal slogans," "possessing confiscated or prohibited publications," violating the Law on Associations or the Anti-Terror Law, "having links with illegal organizations," engaging in "activities incompatible with [the organization's] aims," or "carrying out illegal activities."

The Right to Monitor

The Human Rights Association (hra), a large organization with 20,000 members and 40 branches throughout Turkey, continued to operate with legal authorization, monitoring human rights developments during 1992. However, the association suffered from regular governmental abuse. Association branches were raided; the Istanbul and Bursa branches were raided several times during the year. The Adana branch has been closed by authorities. In addition, hra officers and members were detained, tortured and sometimes charged with violations of the law of associations, spreading separatist propaganda, or committing offenses such as "organizing a funeral."

One human rights monitor, Siddik Tan, an active hra board member from Batman in southeast Turkey, was murdered on June 20 by three unidentified armed attackers. Tan had been injured in an earlier attack, on July 2, 1991, by a bomb that had been placed in his car. No one has been charged with his death, and Turkish authorities have made no serious effort to find his murderers. Nor have Turkish authorities made any serious effort to find the killers of Vedat Aydin, one of the founders of the Diyarbakir hra, who was murdered in Diyarbakir on July 5, 1991.

hra officials reported that death threats against hra members were common. In May, a leaflet containing death threats against 28 people was widely circulated in southeast Turkey. All 28 were Kurds; all were either members of Parliament or had spoken out on behalf of Kurds in Turkey. One, writer and journalist Musa Anter, was murdered on September 20. Some of the 28 had investigated human rights violations against Kurds. Four were members of the hra: Yavuz Binbay, president, Van hra;

Sekvan Aytug, president, Sirnak hra; Faik Tunefan, member, Istanbul hra; and Omer Hazar, member, Istanbul hra.

One of the four, Yavuz Binbay, was beaten almost to death by security officers in southeast Turkey during the Kurdish New Year celebrations in March. He suffered six skull fractures and a crack in the orbit of his eye, as well as a series of heart attacks following the assault. On April 3, he was arrested on charges of unlawful assembly, unauthorized demonstration and spreading separatist propaganda.

Sekvan Aytug, another hra president on the death-threat list, was arrested on May 14 in Sirnak, charged with "organizing certain funeral activities." He was severely tortured during interrogation.

U.S. Policy

The Bush administration has had no positive impact on human rights in Turkey. Although the State Department continues to report behind-the-scenes efforts to persuade the Turkish government to end torture, the abuse continues at the same rate as before. In a statement to the House Subcommittee on Europe and the Middle East reported below, Assistant Secretary of State for European and Canadian Affairs Thomas M.T. Niles acknowledged that torture has not diminished under the new government. But the State Department has made no effort to persuade Turkey to end the use of deadly force during house raids in western and southeast Turkey, to outlaw the use of deadly force against peaceful demonstrators, or to investigate the murders of journalists and community leaders in the southeast. Nor has the U.S. government condemned Turkey for its armed attacks against civilians in the southeast. During the Kurdish New Year killings by security forces of at least 91 peaceful demonstrators, State Department spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler went so far as to congratulate Turkey on its "use of restraint."

The Bush administration, like the Reagan administration, has never linked human rights to foreign aid for Turkey. Nor has it explained to Congress, as required by section 502B of the Foreign Assistance Act, what "extraordinary circumstances" warrant provision of military and security assistance to Turkey in light of its consistent pattern of gross violations of human rights.

Turkey continues to be a close and important U.S. ally. Turkey's support of the U.S.-led coalition during the Gulf War, its permission for U.S. planes based in Turkey to fly missions over northern Iraq to protect the Iraqi Kurds, and its potential influence over the Turkic republics in the former Soviet Union, all contribute to its importance as a U.S. ally. Turkey continues to be the third largest recipient of U.S. aid; for fiscal year 1992 it received grants for $578 million in military assistance and economic support funds. For fiscal year 1993, in an important departure from past assistance patterns, Turkey will receive $450 million in military assistance in the form of loans (not grants), and $125 million in economic support funds-grants. In addition, $180 million worth of excess military equipment (helicopters, aircraft, vehicles and the like) was transferred to Turkey in 1991 and 1992.

In February, after a two-hour meeting in the White House with Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel, President Bush said, "Turkey is indeed a friend, a partner of the United States, and it's also a model to others, especially those newly independent republics of Central Asia." He referred to the relationship between the United States and Turkey as an "enhanced partnership." He made no mention of ongoing human rights violations in Turkey.

The U.S. continues to provide anti-terrorism training to Turkish police. During an August fact-finding mission, Helsinki Watch found that 74 police officials had been trained in the United States under the Anti-terrorism Assistance program during 1992. These officials were in charge of, or employed in, the Anti-Terror sections of police interrogation centers-the places in which political suspects are interrogated, and torture routinely takes place. In one police center, Helsinki Watch saw on the wall a U.S. Department of State certificate stating that the official in charge had been trained in the United States.

On a more positive note, the chapter on Turkey in the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in 1991 provided a picture of human rights abuses in Turkey that was more accurate than earlier reports. Issued in January 1992, the report stated that Turkey "has not succeeded in reducing the incidence of torture of persons in police custody." It also discussed several cases of torture.

Other human rights abuses described in the report included the deaths of 18 people in police custody, "the use of excessive force against noncombatants in the southeast by security forces trying to suppress terrorism," restrictions on freedom of expression, and the absence of the right of detainees to have an attorney present during interrogation.

However, the report downplayed the severity of other human rights abuses in Turkey. For example, it represented that "[t]here were no known political killings attributable to the government," in disregard of security force killings of suspects in house raids and of nonviolent demonstrators. In addition, the report stated that peaceful assemblies are permitted but may be restricted to designated cites. It failed to report that dozens of meetings, demonstrations and marches were banned in 1991, and dozens of demonstrators and marchers were detained, beaten and sometimes prosecuted. The report mentioned the use of live ammunition for crowd control only in the case of security forces' killing of demonstrators during the funeral of human rights activist Vedat Aydil. It neglected to report that three other peaceful demonstrators had been killed by security forces.

Moreover, in discussing freedom of association, the report cited the closing of branches of only one association-Ozgur Dernegi (Freedom Association). It neglected to state that dozens of other associations or their branches had been closed, including Ozgur-Der (The Association of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms); the Kadikoy, Cankaya and Kecioren branches of the People's Houses; the Construction Workers' Solidarity Association; and the Revolutionary Youth Association.

Discussing torture, the report listed common torture techniques such as the use of cold water hoses, electric shocks, beating of the genitalia, and hangingby the arms. It failed to describe other appalling forms of torture, such as rape, truncheons forced into the vagina or anus, sleep deprivation, denial of food or water, and placing a suspect in a small cell with an attack dog. The report also failed to state that children as well as adults are tortured.

In a written statement prepared for a hearing on Turkey held by the House Subcommittee on Europe and the Middle East on September 29, Secretary Niles acknowledged that torture has not decreased:

    On the issue of torture, it had previously been our impression that, reflecting the policy of the new government, the trend was in a favorable direction. Recent reports, however, indicate that allegations of torture have not diminished, and torture may have actually increased.

On free expression, Secretary Niles was more sanguine:

    I have previously expressed our satisfaction that laws on thought crimes have been abolished, and are no longer a basis for arrests.

The secretary neglected to report that journalists and writers are now prosecuted for thought crimes under the broad and vague Anti-Terror Law, enacted in 1991, and that a number of journalists are currently serving prison sentences for their writings.

The State Department also glossed over persistent restrictions on Kurdish cultural rights. State Department spokesman Richard Boucher said on October 8 that the U.S. has

"supported the efforts the Turkish government is making to ensure the cultural and political rights of all the Turkish citizens, including those of Kurdish origin...." In referring to the Turkish government's efforts "to ensure the cultural rights of its Kurdish minority," Boucher ignored continuing restrictions on the use of Kurdish in courts, schools and official settings, and the ongoing harassment of Kurds attempting to express their ethnic identity, as described above.

The Work of Helsinki Watch

During 1992, Helsinki Watch continued its attempts to improve human rights in Turkey by focusing attention on Turkey's appalling human rights record and trying to persuade the Bush administration to pressure the Turkish government to end human rights abuses. Helsinki Watch sent three missions to Turkey during the year: one in January to meet with government officials and others and to release "Nothing Unusual": The Torture of Children in Turkey; another to southeast Turkey at the end of April to investigate killings by security forces during the Kurdish New Year celebrations; and the third to Istanbul, Ankara, Adana and Antalya in August to visit police interrogation centers, to interview recent victims of torture, and to measure the new government's compliance with its pledges on human rights.

In August, Helsinki Watch met with State Department officials and Congressional committee staff members to report on the dreadful state of human rights in Turkey, and to urge an investigation of U.S. training of Turkish police under the Anti-terrorism Assistance program.

Helsinki Watch issued three major reports. The first, "Nothing Unusual": The Torture of Children in Turkey, released in January, described the routine torture of children under the age of 18. The second, Denying Human Rights and Ethnic Identity: The Greeks of Turkey, released in March, described the harassment and abuse of the small remaining Greek community in Turkey. The third, Broken Promises: Torture and Killings Continue in Turkey. was released in December.

In addition, seven newsletters were issued: "Violence against Civilians Increasing," released in January; "Kurds Massacred: Turkish Forces Kill Scores of Peaceful Demonstrators," "Five Journalists Killed; Free Expression Restricted," and "Eleven Deaths in Detention Since February; Three were Children who 'Committed Suicide'", all released in June; "Human Rights Activist Murdered; Human Rights Association Under Attack," released in July; "Eight Journalists Killed Since February; A Ninth Critically Wounded," released in August; and "Censorship by Assassination: Eleven Journalists and one Newspaper DistributorMurdered Since February," released in December. One of the reports ("Nothing Unusual") and two newsletters were translated into Turkish and distributed in Turkey, resulting in considerable additional press attention.

Helsinki Watch published four op-ed articles in 1992 on Turkish human rights abuses: two in The Washington Post (including one reprinted in The International Herald Tribune), one in The New York Times, and one in Kathimerini, an influential Athens daily. Letters to the editor were also published in The New York Times and The Washington Post.
UNITED KINGDOM

Human Rights Developments

The United Kingdom continues to receive little attention from the international human rights community. Yet in recent years freedom of expression in Britain has been restricted; there is an appalling use of lethal force by all sides in Northern Ireland, where U.K. emergency legislation suspends basic due process guarantees; and conditions in many prisons violate international standards.

Violations of human rights continued in Northern Ireland during 1992. Security forces shot and killed five people in disputed circumstances, and questions continued to be raised about the thoroughness and impartiality of investigations of killings by security force members. Paramilitary groups killed 63 people and set off more than 150 bombs. Security forces also continued to harass civilians-both children and adults-and to damage civilians' property in house raids. Both children and adult detainees continued to be abused physically and verbally.

More than 3,000 people have been killed in Northern Ireland since 1969 in political violence associated with "The Troubles." A state of emergency has existed in the province since its partition from the Irish Free State in 1922. Emergency laws give the security forces-the Royal Ulster Constabulary (ruc) and the British Army-broad powers to stop people on the street, to question and search them, to search their homes, to detain them for as long as seven days without charges, and to exclude people from Northern Ireland or Great Britain.

In addition, the right to trial by jury for offenses connected to political violence has been suspended. The right to silence has been restricted by rules that permit a court to draw adverse inferences from a person's refusal to answer questions. And evidentiary rules in non-jury courts permit the admission into evidence of unreliable confessions, some of which may have been secured by abusive treatment in detention. Three of four Ulster Defense Regiment soldiers who had been convicted of a 1983 murder were released in July 1992 when the Court of Appeal held that police officers had lied at their trial in 1986.

Helsinki Watch continues to be extremely concerned about the use of lethal force by security forces and paramilitaries. The five people killed by security forces in 1992 were shot in two incidents:

 Irish Republican Army (ira) members Peter Clancy, Kevin Barry O'Donnell, Patrick Vincent and Sean Farrell were shot and killed on February 16 by undercover soldiers after attacking the Coalisland ruc station. The ruc reported that uniformed troops encountered armed men and an exchange of gunfire ensued. However, eyewitnesses reported that the victims had just driven up to St. Patrick's Church and were still in their car when surrounded by troops who immediately opened fire. Questions were raised as to whether the men could have been arrested, rather than killed.

 Peter McBride was shot dead in the New Lodge area of Belfast by two regular British Army soldiers on September 4. McBride had been stopped, questioned and searched by an army patrol. He broke away from the patrol and ran down a street. The soldiers chased him, took firing positions and shot him in the back. The soldiers were charged with murder the next day.

The standard applied for the use of lethal force by security forces in Northern Ireland continues to be "such force as is reasonable in the circumstances." This standard provides too much leeway and leads inevitably to abuses. Instead, deadly force should be permitted only when absolutely necessary,and only in proportion to the immediate danger posed by a suspect.

Sixty-three people were killed by paramilitaries between January 1 and October 28, 1992. Roughly half were killed by republicans, chiefly the ira, and half by loyalists, chiefly the Ulster Freedom Fighters (uff). In addition, more than 150 bombs were set off-some as large as 500 pounds. Paramilitary killings violate not only domestic criminal law but also, in the case of civilian victims, the principles underlying international humanitarian law.

A Helsinki Watch mission that visited Northern Ireland in April found that children were frequently stopped on the street, kicked, hit, insulted and abused by security forces. Street harassment of adults continued as well.

Ill-treatment of detainees during interrogation also continued in 1992. Children under 18 and adults were threatened, tricked, insulted and frequently physically assaulted by police during interrogation.

On the positive side, security force members were charged or prosecuted in two cases: two Ulster Defense Regiment soldiers and a civilian were found guilty of a 1989 murder, and investigations of disputed killings by security forces resulted in charges being brought against two Royal Marine Commandos and one police officer in two cases.

The United Kingdom has one of the highest prisoner-to-population ratios in Europe-about 97 per 100,000. Overcrowding is a serious problem in England, and is particularly serious in local, pretrial prisons where two or three prisoners are frequently confined in cells designated for one. Sanitary conditions are abysmal in some British prisons, and many prisons are just now installing in-cell plumbing. Prisoners often lack clean clothing and bedding, and do not have access to regular showers. Prisoners also suffer from excessive idleness in the large pretrial prisons where few work or educational programs are offered, forcing some inmates to spend all but a few hours locked in their cells.

Free expression continues to be restricted in the U.K. The Official Secrets Act provides criminal penalties for revealing a broad range of foreign policy, defense and military information, regardless of whether the material has been previously disclosed elsewhere or its release is in the public interest. There is no affirmative right in the U.K. to engage in peaceful public assembly or to hold a meeting in a public place, and there is no practical right of appeal from police decisions to restrict or ban public assembly. A broadcasting ban prohibits spoken words by people who "solicit or invite support for" a list of proscribed groups in Northern Ireland.

The Right to Monitor

There is no evidence to indicate that human rights monitors are harassed by government officials in the United Kingdom.

U.S. Policy

There have been no public indications that the Bush administration has attempted to persuade the government of the United Kingdom to improve human rights conditions. About U.S. policy in Northern Ireland, Ralph R. Johnson, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European and Canadian Affairs, said in May 1990:

The United States advocates peaceful solutions to the problems of Northern Ireland. Consequently, we support the efforts of the United Kingdom and Ireland to use the Anglo-Irish Agreement to address the social, economic, political, and security problems of Northern Ireland.

This means, in our view...finding acceptable political solutions, and eliminating terrorism.

Johnson went on to say that U.S. support for human rights in Northern Ireland includes promoting "fairness in the administration of justice."

Despite these statements, the administration has not publicly criticized in its own voice the U.K. or the Northern Ireland Office for the improper use of lethal force by security forces, restrictions on the right to a fair trial, abuses of detainees during interrogation, or street harassment and house raids against civilians. The chapter on the U.K. in the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in 1991 does raise some questions about humanrights in Northern Ireland, but puts these in the voices of others who have criticized such things as: extrajudicial killings and allegations of a "shoot to kill" policy on the part of security forces; in-house investigations of killings by security forces; the treatment of accused terrorists in police custody; and conditions in prisons.

The U.S. government contributed $19,704,000 in fiscal year 1992 to the International Fund for Ireland, which aims to improve the economic and commercial life of areas of Northern Ireland that have suffered severely from sectarian strife since 1969.

The Work of Helsinki Watch

During 1992, Helsinki Watch continued to monitor human rights developments in the United Kingdom. A fact-finding mission to Northern Ireland in April investigated abuses of children under 18. This was followed in July by a report, Children in Northern Ireland: Abused by Security Forces and Paramilitaries, which received a good deal of attention from the press and the government.

The report found that the extent of violence inflicted on children is appalling. Children have lost their lives in political violence at the hands of both paramilitaries and security forces. In addition, police officers and soldiers harass young people on the street-hitting, kicking, insulting and threatening them; police officers in interrogation centers insult, trick and threaten youngsters and sometimes physically assault them; and children are locked up in adult detention centers and prisons in shameful conditions.

As for paramilitary groups, the report found that both the ira and the Ulster Defense Association (uda) act as alternative police forces, punishing children they believe to be "anti-social" by shootings, severe beatings and sometimes banishment from Northern Ireland.

In June, Helsinki Watch and the Human Rights Watch Prison Project issued a report entitled Prison Conditions in the United Kingdom, which was based on a July 1991 mission to the U.K. The report concluded that prison conditions in England are characterized by serious overcrowding, excessive idle time for most prisoners, and unsanitary conditions. The report stated that prison conditions in Northern Ireland are generally better than those in England, although conditions at Belfast Remand Prison were similar to those at local prisons in England. Most prisoners in Northern Ireland do not have access to in-cell plumbing.
THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLICS

Human Rights Developments

Although five new states emerged in 1992 from the former Yugoslavia, human rights problems in each are interrelated and, therefore, will be discussed in one chapter. Continuing armed conflict in Croatia and, particularly, the outbreak of war in Bosnia-Hercegovina have been marked by appalling brutality inflicted on the civilian population and extreme violations of international humanitarian law. Violence and discrimination against minority groups in Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia-Hercegovina exacerbated ethnic tensions in each republic. Repression in Kosovo and violations of civil and political rights in Serbia and Croatia continued.

The dissolution of post-World War II Yugoslavia became final in 1992 with international recognition of three new states (Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia-Hercegovina), the secession of Macedonia and the formation of a new Yugoslav state (the union of Montenegro and Serbia, including the provinces of Vojvodina and Kosovo). Croatia's and Slovenia's independence were recognized by the European Community and other countries on January 15. The European Community recognized Bosnia-Hercegovina's independence on April 6. The United States recognized Croatia, Slovenia and Bosnia-Hercegovina as independent states on April 7. The three former Yugoslav republics were admitted as member states to the United Nations on May 22. The republic of Macedonia also declared its sovereignty but the international community on the whole has not recognized that republic's independence because Greece objects to Macedonia's name, which it regards as part of Greek heritage. On April 27, the republics of Montenegro and Serbia (including the provinces of Vojvodina and Kosovo) joined to form a newYugoslav state. Few countries have recognized the current Yugoslav state as the legitimate successor to the former Yugoslavia. In September, Yugoslavia was expelled from the United Nations.

Violations of the Rules of War in Bosnia-Hercegovina and Croatia

With the support of the Yugoslav armed forces and the Serbian government, Serbian insurgents in Croatia had seized over 30 percent of Croatia's territory by January 1992, when a cease-fire between the warring factions was brokered by Cyrus Vance, Special Representative to the U.N. Secretary General. U.N. peacekeeping troops were sent to Croatia and, although full-scale fighting has subsided in most parts of the country (with the exception of some areas that border Bosnia-Hercegovina), violations of the rules of war continue in Croatia.

After Bosnia-Hercegovina's independence was recognized by the international community on April 7, Serbian armed forces and paramilitary groups and the Yugoslav People's Army (jna) launched an offensive and eventually captured 70 percent of Bosnia-Hercegovina's territory. Serbian and Yugoslav forces fought against the Bosnian (i.e., predominantly Muslim) army and Croatian forces that are both indigenous to Bosnia-Hercegovina and from Croatia proper.

On May 19, the jna announced that it was withdrawing from Bosnia-Hercegovina. However, the Belgrade authorities claimed that 80 percent of the Yugoslav Army troops in Bosnia-Hercegovina were Bosnian Serbs who would be free to remain in Bosnia-Hercegovina and fight on behalf of Serbian forces in the republic after the jna withdrawal. The result was that a force of at least 30,000 men and large quantities of war materiel, including combat planes, remained behind. Paramilitary groups based in Serbia continued to operate in Bosnia, with the knowledge and apparent support of the Serbian government. Weaponry, fuel, spare parts and other support are sent from Yugoslavia to Serbian-controlled areas of Bosnia-Hercegovina on a regular basis. Serbs and, to a lesser extent, Montenegrins from Yugoslavia cross the border to fight on behalf of the so-called army of the Serbian Republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina, the name adopted by the remnants of the former jna in Bosnia-Hercegovina.

Members of the Croatian military were also active in Bosnia-Hercegovina, particularly during the early stages of the conflict. In addition, Croats from Bosnia formed their own army-the Croatian Defense Council (hvo)-and, in some cases, fought with the predominantly Muslim Bosnian troops against Serbian forces. Croatian and Bosnian troops in Bosnia-Hercegovina receive military and other support from the republic of Croatia. Although Croatian and Bosnian (i.e., predominantly Muslim) troops are nominally aligned, tensions have increased between them. Armed clashes between Bosnian and Croatian forces in October exacerbated those tensions and led to the displacement of Muslims in the town of Prozor.

Since April, the extent and brutality of the violence in Bosnia-Hercegovina has led to extreme violations of the rules of war by all parties. The most egregious violations in both Croatia and Bosnia-Hercegovina involved the policy of "ethnic cleansing" implemented by Serbian forces. Muslim and Croatian forces also are using intimidation, harassment and violence against Serbs in some parts of Bosnia-Hercegovina and Croatia to force the flight of Serbs from areas under their control.

The Serbian policy of "ethnic cleansing" involves the summary execution, disappearance, arbitrary detention, deportation and forcible displacement of hundreds of thousands of people on the basis of their religion or nationality. The goal is to rid all Serbian-controlled areas of non-Serbs, or at least to diminish their numbers significantly. Non-Serbs who were deported from Serbian-controlled areas of Bosnia-Hercegovina were forced to sign prepared statements relinquishing ownership of their property to the Serbian authorities in the region. Serbian forces indiscriminately bombed, shelled and otherwise attacked Bosnian towns, cities and villages. They also deliberately shot at civilians, including displaced persons and refugees. Such indiscriminate use of force usually served no military purpose but was aimed at terrorizing the civilian population to induce its surrender or flight. Rampant rape and sexual abuse of women throughout Serbian-controlled areas of Bosnia-Hercegovina served a similar purpose. Deliberate and systematic torture was widespread in Serbian-controlled detention camps throughout Bosnia-Hercegovina, and summary executions, disappearances, severe beatings and sexual abuse were common there. The extentof the violence and its selective nature along ethnic and religious lines suggest crimes of genocidal character against Muslim and, to a lesser extent, Croatian populations in Bosnia-Hercegovina.

Despite a tenuous truce in Croatia, Serbian forces there also continued their campaign of "ethnic cleansing" in areas under their control. Non-Serbs who remain in the Serbian-controlled areas of the so-called Krajina region and eastern Slavonia have been murdered, disappeared, deported and forcibly displaced. In the latter part of 1992, "ethnic cleansing" in Serbian-controlled areas of eastern Slavonia increased despite the deployment of U.N. peacekeeping troops to the region. Moderate Serbs who voiced their opposition to the increasing violence and totalitarianism in Serbian-controlled areas were also murdered.

Croatian forces in Croatia and Croatian and Muslim forces in Bosnia-Hercegovina also were guilty of forcibly displacing Serbs on territory under their control. Croatian forces destroyed homes and entire villages once occupied by Serbs to prevent their return. This destruction was most serious in Slavonia and Dalmatia. A campaign of intimidation was used against Serbs in Croatia and in Croatian- and Muslim-controlled territories of Bosnia-Hercegovina to displace Serbs from those regions. Muslim forces destroyed Serbian villages in the Konjic municipality in Bosnia-Hercegovina. Croatian forces destroyed Serbian villages in the Capljina municipality in western Hercegovina. Croatian and Muslim forces in Bosnia-Hercegovina have detained Serbian civilians as hostages for the purpose of negotiating prisoner exchanges.

Violations of Civil and Political Rights in Yugoslavia

Serbian forces-primarily paramilitary groups-also undertook a policy of "ethnic cleansing" in Yugoslavia, primarily in the republic of Serbia. Methods used included intimidation, harassment, discrimination and forced displacement against Muslims, Croats, Hungarians and Albanians. The Serbian government of President Slobodan Milo_evic was silent in the face of these abuses, which many believe it condoned.

In the province of Vojvodina, Serbian paramilitaries and local extremists, with the apparent blessing of local, provincial and republican governments, led the campaign to displace forcibly non-Serbs from the area. Croats, Hungarians and others were expelled by Serbian militants from the villages of Hrtkovci, Sid, Slankamen, Indjija, Beksa, Petrovaradin, Plavna, Golubinci and Kukujevci. Most Serbs who were permanent residents of these villages did not support the expulsion of their non-Serbian neighbors and often intervened on their behalf. But Serbian refugees from Croatia and Bosnia-Hercegovina, in conjunction with Serbian paramilitary groups and political extremists, terrorized, beat and harassed non-Serbs in Vojvodina, forcing them to flee Yugoslavia. Their homes later were occupied by Serbian refugees from Croatia and Bosnia-Hercegovina.

Similarly, in the region of Sandak, which straddles Serbia and Montenegro, violence by Serbian paramilitaries and local extremists forced Muslims to flee, particularly from the villages of Pljevlja, Priboj and Sjeverin. Some Sandzak Muslims have been murdered and disappeared by Serbian paramilitary forces. Helsinki Watch also received reports that Yugoslav military personnel, who were present in large numbers in Sandzak, were responsible for harassing and, in some cases, beating Muslims in Sandak and demanding that they leave Serbia. Muslim refugees who had fled or been displaced from eastern Bosnia initially sought refuge in predominantly Muslim enclaves of Sandak. Many have since left the region or are planning to leave because they feel threatened by the heavy military presence and paramilitary activity in the area, which reminds them of the persecution they had faced from those forces in Bosnia-Hercegovina.

Repression against the ethnic Albanian population in Kosovo continued in 1992. The Albanians, who comprise 90 percent of Kosovo's population, refused to recognize the Serbian government's abolition of autonomous status for the province and the establishment of direct rule from Belgrade. Instead, the Albanians formed their own parallel government and professional and civic institutions. Meetings of the underground Albanian government were banned, dispersed or obstructed by the Serbian police. Albanians continued to be arbitrarily detained, tortured and otherwise mistreated in detention. Dismissal of Albanians from their jobs on the basis of their ethnicity continued. Some Albanian workers were also illegally evicted from their homes. Albanianscontinued to be jailed for nonviolent political offenses, including possession of certain Albanian-language publications and participation in peaceful demonstrations. Most Albanians were sentenced to 30- to 60-day prison terms for such "offenses" and many served such prison terms multiple times. Freedom of the Albanian-language press remained restricted in Kosovo. The daily Albanian-language newspaper, Rilindja, remains banned. Articles and illustrations that were contrary to Serbian policy were banned, and journalists and editors were arrested and imprisoned. Serbs and Montenegrins were given preferential treatment before the law. A longstanding record of human rights abuses and discrimination against ethnic Albanians in Kosovo has socially and economically marginalized that population. Thousands of Albanians have fallen into poverty and been forced to emigrate. Conversely, Serbs and Montenegrins have been accorded economic and political incentives to settle in Kosovo.

In 1992, the federal Yugoslav government of Prime Minister Milan Panic took modest steps to improve ethnic relations in Yugoslavia. Members of the new Yugoslav government met with non-Serbs in Vojvodina, Sandak and Kosovo. The federal police were sent to the village of Pljevlja after paramilitary activity and violence increased in the town. The local paramilitary leader in Pljevlja was later arrested. Although such steps by the federal government were commendable, they were inadequate and had few results, as paramilitary activity, violence and harassment toward non-Serbs increased throughout Yugoslavia, with the apparent approval of the Serbian government of Slobodan Milo_evic. Members of the federal Yugoslav government claimed that the arrest of Serbian paramilitary leaders and their followers, who are responsible for much of the ethnic violence in Yugoslavia, lies within the jurisdiction of the Serbian and Montenegrin republican governments. But the federal government itself had a duty to arrest, prosecute and punish those responsible for violations of federal and international laws, including war crimes committed in Bosnia-Hercegovina.

The mainstream Serbian media continued to be controlled by the Serbian government, although Serbian journalists demanded more vocally than in prior years that professional and not political criteria define their work. The Politika publishing house and television station became more independent in 1992. The opposition media in Yugoslavia remains concentrated in the Belgrade area. The opposition station Radio B92 has long been denied access to frequencies that would enable it to broadcast into central Serbia, the bastion of Slobodan Milo_evic's support. An independent weekly, Vreme, continued to publish in Belgrade without any interference from the Serbian government.

Violations of Civil and Political Rights in Croatia

In addition to the violations of the rules of war noted above, most of the human rights violations in Croatia in 1992 involved discrimination against Serbs and restrictions on freedom of speech, association and the press. In Croatia, local government, police and military officials and individual extremists continued to perpetrate acts of violence against Serbs and to discriminate against and harass them, to force them to leave Croatia. Although many of these Serbs were law-abiding citizens of Croatia, some local Croatian extremists branded them supporters of, or collaborators with, the Serbian insurgents in Croatia and Bosnia-Hercegovina. The methods used to supplant Serbs from their homes in territory under Croatian control included dismissal from jobs, destruction of property, questioning by the police and general harassment by individual extremists. Although disappearances of Serbs decreased in 1992, Helsinki Watch received reports from family members of a Serb who had been abducted by unknown persons in the municipality of Djakovo and whose whereabouts remain unknown. Violence against Serbs and threats against peace activists in Osijek increased in the latter part of the year. Although most of the violence appeared to be organized and perpetrated locally, the republican government of President Franjo Tudjman did little, if anything, to punish and prevent such attacks. Although it promised to bring the perpetrators to justice, the Croatian government failed to arrest, prosecute or punish those responsible for the October 1991 massacre of at least 23 Serbs in Gospic. Nor did the Croatian government take steps in 1992 to punish and prevent mistreatment in detention of persons held by the Sisak police. The Croatian government also has failed to investigate thoroughly and to prosecute those responsible for abuses committed elsewhere in Croatia.

Throughout 1992, the Croatian government filed criminal charges againstthousands of Serbs believed to have participated in the Serbian insurrection or committed war crimes in Croatia. In most cases, these Serbs were indicted under the Croatian criminal code for having "participated in or organized an armed rebellion." Some Serbs were tried and sentenced in absentia because they remained in Serbian-controlled areas of Croatia and Bosnia-Hercegovina or in Yugoslavia. In certain cases, the charges brought against Serbs appeared justifiable but in many instances little evidence existed to support the indictments. Rather, thousands of persons were arbitrarily indicted on the basis of their ethnicity or political affiliation.

In October, the Croatian parliament adopted an amnesty law that exempted from prosecution all those who had fought on the side of Serbian forces in Croatia (i.e, between August 1990 and September 25, 1992). The law did not exempt from prosecution those believed to have committed grave breaches of international humanitarian law (i.e., war crimes). The criteria that will be used to determine who will be amnestied and who will be classified as a "war criminal" has not been fully explicated. Although Helsinki Watch welcomes the amnesty law, we believe that those who are guilty of war crimes as defined by international law should be brought to justice, including members of the Croatian army and police, as well as Serbian insurgents. Moreover, the criteria used to determine who is a war criminal must be objectively based upon credible evidence.

Freedom of speech, association and the press were restricted in Croatia in 1992. In May, the president of the Serbian Democratic Forum, Milorad Pupovac; the president of the Croatian Party of Rights, Dobroslav Paraga; Danas columnist Jelena Lovric; Globus columnist Tanja Torbarina; Globus editor-in-chief Denis Kulji_; and Slobodna Dalmacija journalists Viktor Ivancic, Predrag Lucic and Boris Deulovic were charged by organs of the Croatian government with slander, "spread[ing] false information" and "disturbing the public." All had criticized the Croatian government, President Tudjman or former government officials. Jelena Lovric was found guilty and sentenced to six months of probation. In other cases, charges were dropped or charges remain in effect but prosecution has not proceeded. The Croatian government has also repeatedly filed charges against members of the right-wing Croatian Party of Rights. While some of the charges appeared justifiable (e.g., illegal formation of paramilitary groups), others were based on the expression of the party's political view or its leadership's criticism of President Tudjman.

For almost two years, the Croatian government has tried to assume control over the independent daily newspaper Slobodna Dalmacija, which was privatized in 1990. In mid-1992, the Croatian government's Agency for Restructuring and Development once again refused to recognize the paper's privatization and claimed that it remained public property. Croatian courts have upheld the privatization of the paper, which does not espouse the views of the Croatian government or the ruling political party, the Croatian Democratic Union. The Croatian government has refused to accept the courts' rulings and in mid-1992 resumed efforts to bring Slobodna Dalmacija under its control. The government dismissed the paper's managing director and appointed a "managing committee" to oversee management of the paper. Helsinki Watch believes the Croatian government's long-term harassment of Slobodna Dalmacija violates freedom of the press in Croatia. In a similar case, prolonged harassment of the independent weeklies Danas and Novi Danas forced their closures in 1992.

The Croatian government also obstructed freedom of association and expression. On May 5, a founding meeting of the Social Democratic Union, a left-of-center political party, was banned by the Croatian police. Rather than protect the delegates from a crowd of protestors that had gathered outside the hall, the police cancelled the meeting for "security reasons." In early April, the Croatian police banned an International Peace Conference organized by the Croatian Anti-War Council on the island of Vis, where Yugoslav army personnel were stationed at the time. Again, the Croatian government cited "security reasons," on the grounds that Yugoslav forces could use the meeting as a pretext to repress the island's Croatian inhabitants. The Croatian government added that "any discussion [regarding] the future military status of this strategically important island can be organized only when the Republic of Croatia regain[s] its full sovereignty over the island."

Citizenship in Croatia has been arbitrarily granted over the past year. Many Serbs, Muslims, Albanians and some Croats who are otherwise residents ofCroatia have been denied citizenship because they were not born in the country. Helsinki Watch has received reports that several persons born in Croatia also were denied citizenship for reasons that remain unclear. The Croatian government formed a commission in late 1992 to investigate, and possibly revise, any discrepancies involving the granting of citizenship. In the interim, those who remain without proper documents have been denied pensions or social security benefits. Also, students who have not obtained proof of citizenship can only be admitted or continue their enrollment in a university if they pay a fee, whereas those who have obtained Croatian citizenship continue to attend classes free of charge.

Civil and Political Rights in Bosnia-Hercegovina, Macedonia and Slovenia

Almost all of the violations of civil and political rights in Bosnia-Hercegovina were connected to the war in that country. Serbian forces in Bosnia-Hercegovina abducted Vladimir Srebrov, a writer of Serbian ethnicity, when he traveled to the Ilida section of Sarajevo to negotiate with Serbian forces. His captors said that they would try Srebrov for "treason" because he had failed to align himself with Serbian forces fighting against the Bosnian government. Similarly, the Bosnian government issued warrants for the arrest of two Sarajevo-based correspondents for the Belgrade-based daily Borba. The Bosnian government has accused the two journalists of "spying" for Serbian forces and both remain in hiding in Sarajevo.

In Macedonia, ethnic Albanians (who comprise approximately 30 percent of the republic's population) sought greater autonomy, including the recognition of Albanian as an official language in civic and governmental institutions. Although the Macedonian government of Kiro Gligorov dealt judiciously with Albanian groups, tensions between Albanian and Macedonian communities persist. No serious abuses of civil or political rights were reported in Slovenia in 1992.

The Right to Monitor

Human rights monitoring in Bosnia-Hercegovina became increasingly difficult and dangerous in 1992. Indiscriminate shelling and bombing of civilian centers, land mines, road barricades, vigilante violence and indiscriminate shooting at civilian vehicles made travel and on-site investigation of abuses extremely difficult. Road barricades and increasing vigilante violence in Serbian-controlled areas of Croatia also impeded the ability to monitor in those regions. Human rights monitors, including U.N. Special Rapporteur Tadeusz Mazowiecki, were prevented from visiting detention centers in Serbian-controlled areas of Bosnia-Hercegovina. Local Croatian police and military officials at road barricades prevented inspection of certain areas in western Slavonia and Serbian police and military forces obstructed movement in Serbian-controlled areas of Croatia and Bosnia-Hercegovina. In Yugoslavia, the ability of monitors to take testimony also was impeded by the intimidating presence of the police in Kosovo and military and paramilitary forces in Sandak. Despite such impediments, a variety of governmental and nongovernmental groups have monitored violations of human rights and humanitarian law in Croatia, Bosnia-Hercegovina and Yugoslavia.

In Bosnia-Hercegovina, a government commission (comprised of Serbs, Muslims and Croats) has been documenting violations of the rules of war in that country. In Croatia, several fledgling peace groups and professional associations have begun monitoring violations of human rights in their country. The Serbian Democratic Forum continued to document violations of human rights against Serbs in Croatia. As noted, the Croatian government has filed criminal charges against the Forum's leader.

In Yugoslavia, Albanian, Muslim and Serbian groups monitored abuses against non-Serbs and violations of civil and political rights throughout Serbia. Some Croatian and Hungarian groups also documented abuses committed against their ethnic groups. The major human rights monitoring group in Kosovo, the Council for the Defense of Human Rights and Freedoms in Kosovo, continued to monitor abuses without direct interference by the Serbian government. However, several members of the Council were arrested for their participation in activities of the underground Albanian government in Kosovo. In 1992, the federal Yugoslav government established a Ministry for Human Rights, which is led by Momcilo Grubac. Grubac visited sites of ethnic violence and strife and met with non-Serbs who were victims of physical assault, discrimination and harassment.

Though not their primary responsibility, the European Community Monitoring Mission, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations Protection Force operating in Croatia and Bosnia-Hercegovina monitored violations of human rights and humanitarian law. In some cases, protests were issued to the authorities responsible for such abuses but in most cases violations documented were kept confidential.

The Role of the International Community

Efforts by the international community to bring peace to Bosnia-Hercegovina generally have failed. The United Nations, the European Community (ec) and the United States focused attention on adopting resolutions and negotiating and maintaining cease-fires, but failed to enforce or realize measures they had adopted. Although a series of trade and military sanctions against Serbia were belatedly applied, the international community did not find a way to stop or prevent egregious violations of the laws of war that continued to occur not only as a result of armed conflict but also in occupied areas where fighting had largely ceased.

The United Nations

In 1992, a United Nations Protection Force (unprofor) was sent to keep a tenuous peace between Serbs and Croats in Croatia. unprofor was later expanded and sent to war-torn Bosnia-Hercegovina. In both cases, U.N. efforts have had minimal success. In early and mid-1992, 14,000 U.N. troops were dispatched to Croatia in accordance with a peacekeeping plan for the region. According to the general provisions of the plan, United Nations Protection Areas (unpas) were formed in regions of Croatia where Serbs comprised a majority or substantial minority of the population. Three of the four unpas are controlled by Serbian forces (northern and southern Krajina and eastern Slavonia) and the fourth (western Slavonia) is controlled partly by Serbian and partly by Croatian forces.

U.N. forces were charged with demilitarizing the unpas by ensuring the withdrawal of the Yugoslav army and demobilizing all armed groups. The unprofor plan calls for maintaining the political status quo in the unpas, that is, the continued functioning, on an interim basis and under U.N. supervision, of the existing local authorities and police until an overall political solution is reached. Accordingly, the Serbian-controlled local governments in Krajina and eastern Slavonia continued to have jurisdiction over those areas, as did the Croatian-controlled local governments in parts of western Slavonia. Although the existing political authorities in each unpa remained, the plan required that the composition of the local police force reflect the ethnic composition of the community before hostilities commenced. U.N. forces were to monitor the work of the local police, and assist in repatriating all persons displaced from their homes in the unpas. U.N. troops were also responsible for securing the well-being of the population currently living in the unpas and those returning to their homes in those areas.

The unprofor mission in Croatia has been partially successful in that the presence of U.N. troops in the unpas prevented a renewed outbreak of fighting in the country in 1992. However, Serbian forces refused to disarm in areas under their control and the unprofor mission did little to force compliance with the disarmament plan. As a result, the rest of the U.N. peacekeeping plan could not be implemented. The police force in Serbian-controlled unpas remains Serbian, and non-Serbs expelled from their homes in those regions have not been allowed to return. (The exception is western Slavonia, where Croatian and Serbian forces have disarmed and steps toward repatriation of the displaced have slowly begun.) U.N. forces were unable to secure the well-being of the non-Serbian population in Serbian-controlled unpas, and forcible displacement, expulsions, killings, disappearances, physical abuse and harassment of the remaining non-Serbs continued in 1992. Moreover, moderate Serbs who opposed the extreme positions of the local authorities in Serbian-controlled unpas were murdered or disappeared. Despite its mandate, the U.N. peacekeeping force was unable to prevent or punish such actions in Serbian-controlled areas of Croatia.

With the outbreak of war in Bosnia-Hercegovina, the unprofor mission in Croatia was expanded into Bosnia. U.N. efforts in Bosnia-Hercegovina focused on peacekeeping, the delivery of humanitarian aid, and the imposition of sanctions against Yugoslavia. But the U.N. did little, if anything, to address thecommission of war crimes on a mass scale.

U.N. peacekeeping forces were dispatched to Bosnia-Hercegovina when there was no longer any peace to keep, and U.N. troops in the country operated without a clear mandate, their efforts marked by disorganization and political indecision. Disagreements among members of the Security Council and between the Security Council and the U.N. Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali impeded the ability of the U.N. to speak decisively and with one voice. U.N. member states expected much from U.N. efforts but were unwilling to commit the necessary financial resources to implement plans. Moreover, the parties to the conflict frequently did not negotiate in good faith, thereby hampering U.N. operations in the region. U.N. efforts to deliver humanitarian aid to besieged areas of Bosnia-Hercegovina were impeded by continued fighting. Although a resolution was passed to provide armed escorts and to use force to protect shipments of humanitarian aid, such a resolution was enforced only once-on November 19, when a French battalion fired on Serbian forces attacking a relief convoy in Bosanska Krupa. Attacks on convoys carrying humanitarian aid continued throughout 1992.

On May 15, the U.N. Security Council adopted Resolution 752, which called for an immediate cease-fire and an end to ethnic oppression in Bosnia-Hercegovina. It required Yugoslavia, particularly the republic of Serbia, to cease all interference in Bosnia-Hercegovina, and to use its influence to promote a cease-fire, oversee the disbanding and disarming of elements of the jna and irregular Serbian forces, and end efforts to create a purely Serbian enclave by driving out other ethnic groups.

On May 30, the Security Council approved a resolution that imposed economic and trade sanctions on the Belgrade government as a means of enforcing the earlier demands. The resolution cited Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, which requires compliance by all U.N. members with efforts to deal with "threats to international peace and security." The sanctions required all member states to cease trading in any commodity, including oil, with Yugoslavia and to freeze its foreign assets. All air traffic links with the country were suspended, and no one was allowed to repair, service, operate, insure or provide spare parts for aircraft registered in Serbia or Montenegro. The resolution banned Yugoslavia from participating in any international sporting event and required all countries to suspend cultural, scientific and technical contacts with Belgrade and to reduce the size of its diplomatic missions.

In October, the U.N. Security Council adopted a resolution that banned Serbian military flights over Bosnia-Hercegovina. However, the resolution did not provide for enforcement of the ban. Serbian forces later agreed to send their military aircraft to airfields under U.N. supervision so that they could not be used in further fighting. However, Serbian forces flew some missions in violation of the ban just after it was imposed and later violations also occurred. On November 16, the U.N. ordered a maritime blockade of Yugoslavia to enforce compliance with the sanctions. On November 18, the nato allies agreed to enforce the naval blockade through stop-and-search operations of vessels traveling along the Adriatic coast and the Danube river.

Helsinki Watch supports the imposition of U.N. sanctions against Yugoslavia. Indeed, we believe such sanctions were long overdue. Sanctions should have been imposed against Serbia and Yugoslavia much earlier for their suppression of rights in Kosovo and their violations of the laws of war in Croatia, particularly for the use of indiscriminate force, the summary executions of civilians and disarmed combatants, and the detention of thousands of civilians, especially after the city of Vukovar fell to Serbian and Yugoslav forces. Had sanctions been imposed against the Serbian government early in the Balkan conflict, Serbian and Yugoslav forces might have been discouraged from committing further atrocities in Bosnia-Hercegovina.

Moreover, enforcement of U.N. sanctions remained unbalanced. Armaments, fuel and other materials used by Serbian armed forces continued to enter Yugoslavia despite sanctions. On the other hand, the sanctions provided no exemptions for the independent press in Yugoslavia, thereby hampering the ability of independent forces from disseminating views opposed to Serbian policies in the former Yugoslavia. The sanctions also imposed unnecessarily complicated approval procedures which the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and relief organizations had to follow before humanitarian aid could be distributed in Yugoslavia. Helsinki Watch believes that sanctions should not restrict theprovision of aid or trade that is essential to meet basic needs for food, shelter, clothing, sanitation or medical care. Also, in general, we oppose sanctions that restrict the provision of aid, sales or exchanges for the purpose of disseminating information or ideas. Although Helsinki Watch supports sanctions against the government-controlled press of Serbia and Montenegro because it is used as part of the governments' war propaganda efforts, we believe that independent press in Yugoslavia should be exempted from U.N. sanctions.

The United Nations possessed information confirming the existence of so-called concentration camps in Serbian-controlled areas of Bosnia-Hercegovina since at least early July. U.N. personnel stationed in Serbian-controlled areas of Croatia repeatedly informed their superiors of the existence of such camps near Bihac, Cazin, Velika Kladu_a, Bosanska Dubica, Prijedor and Banja Luka. However, high-ranking U.N. officials withheld this information from the press and public and did little, if anything, to stop abuses in the camps. Only after the international press carried articles about the camps did the U.N. and the international community respond by demanding that the camps be opened to international inspection and that all civilians be released. Some detainees were released from the camps without international supervision, only to be summarily executed by their former Serbian captors. Others fled Serbian-controlled territory upon their releases only to find that Western countries refused to accept them for resettlement, leaving them to languish in Croatia and Bosnia-Hercegovina.

At a conference in London on the Yugoslav crisis in late August, a permanent body was established in Geneva to work full-time on the former Yugoslav republics. After the resignation of Lord Peter Carrington as chair of the conference, Lord David Owen, a former British Foreign Secretary, and Cyrus Vance, a former U.S. Secretary of State and Special Representative of the U.N. Secretary General, were assigned to coordinate efforts to negotiate peace in the former Yugoslavia, under the joint auspices of the U.N. and the European Community. Several working groups were formed to deal with various aspects of the problem, and Tadeusz Mazowiecki, the former Polish Prime Minister, was appointed as U.N. Special Rapporteur responsible for investigating human rights abuses in Bosnia-Hercegovina.

Despite all this activity, the U.N. failed to condemn publicly and vociferously major violations of the laws of war in the manner that allocated responsibility to the guilty parties. The failure to specify those responsible for particular abuses diminished the impact of the denunciations that were made. In a misconceived emphasis on neutrality, the U.N. was especially timid in its public condemnation of Serbian forces in Bosnia-Hercegovina. Although Bosnian and Croatian forces have committed egregious abuses of the laws of war, the vast majority and systematic implementation of such abuses have been committed by Serbian forces. Moreover, the U.N. did little, if anything, to stop, prevent and punish gross abuses of human rights and humanitarian law in Bosnia-Hercegovina.

On August 13, the U.N. Security Council called on states and international humanitarian organizations to submit information on human rights abuses in the former Yugoslavia. On October 6, the Security Council adopted a resolution calling for the creation of a commission of experts to examine and analyze evidence of grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions and other violations of humanitarian international law; five experts were later appointed. While Helsinki Watch welcomes the formation of the commission, we believe that its impact would be substantially greater if an international tribunal to try war criminals was promptly established.

In contrast to the unprofor mission in Croatia and Bosnia-Hercegovina, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (unhrc) and the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc) worked tirelessly to attend to the humanitarian needs of war victims and to document and protest, to the best of their abilities, violations of human rights and humanitarian law in Croatia and Bosnia-Hercegovina.

In late 1992, delegates from the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (csce) were dispatched to Yugoslavia. They are to monitor border points to ensure that sanctions against Yugoslavia are not violated and to monitor human rights in Vojvodina, Sandak and Kosovo. As of this writing, their efforts remain preparatory and it is too early to assess the results of their work.

The European Community

In contrast to its activist approach in 1991, the European Community was slow and divided in its response to the war in Bosnia-Hercegovina and the former Yugoslavia in 1992. Germany was the only ec country that consistently supported an active policy in the former Yugoslavia, but it too fell silent during the latter part of the year. France supplied much humanitarian aid to Bosnia-Hercegovina but was restrained in its criticism of Serbian forces in that country. Greece sought to deflect criticism of Serbia because it viewed that state as an ally in its efforts to deny international recognition to Macedonia. Britain was particularly ambivalent about criticizing human rights abuses in the former Yugoslavia and was the most reluctant of the ec countries to accept Bosnian refugees.

An ec monitoring mission that was launched in Croatia to monitor compliance with cease-fire agreements was gradually expanded to include parts of Bosnia-Hercegovina in 1992. However, when a member of the ec monitoring mission was killed near Mostar on May 2, the ec suspended its mission to Bosnia-Hercegovina the following day. On May 12, the last ec monitors withdrew from Sarajevo, declaring it too dangerous.

From the outbreak of war in Bosnia-Hercegovina, the ec sought to act as a broker of peace. However, after multiple rounds of unsuccessful talks, the ec deferred its efforts and let the U.N. take the lead in peace negotiations, under the auspices of an ongoing joint ec-U.N. effort.

ec negotiations were largely unsuccessful due to the lack of good faith by all parties, especially by Serbian forces, who continued to shell Sarajevo and other Bosnian cities despite assurances to the contrary. However, the failure of the ec conference also lies, in part, with the ec negotiators, who were more interested in reconciling the various parties than in ensuring that pledges were fulfilled and that gross abuses were denounced and punished.

Most ec countries have taken steps to implement U.N. sanctions against Yugoslavia. (However, petroleum and other aid frequently arrived to Serbia through Greece.) On July 10, European members of nato and the Western European Union sent frigates and destroyers to patrol Yugoslavia's coast in an effort to ensure enforcement of the U.N. sanctions. On July 20, the ec accepted the opinion of its legal experts that the state formed by Serbia and Montenegro could not be regarded as the successor state to the former Yugoslavia and thus must apply anew to the U.N. and more than 40 other international bodies.

U.S. Policy

The U.S. position toward the human rights situation in the former Yugoslav republics has been sluggish and inconsistent. The Bush administration initially misread the situation in the Balkans and then groped to define a policy that swung between complacency and active engagement. The lack of overall policy toward the former Yugoslav republics undercut the administration's ability to respond to grave human rights abuses.

In early 1992, the United States failed to exert its influence on Serbian authorities to end the forcible displacement of non-Serbs in Croatia. The U.S. rhetorically insisted on compliance with the U.N. peacekeeping plan but did little to force its enforcement. Only after full-scale war broke out in Bosnia-Hercegovina did the U.S. become involved. Tacitly acknowledging the ec's lack of success in the Yugoslav crisis, the U.S. tried to reestablish its waning credibility in Europe by taking the lead in responding to the Bosnian conflict. Starting in mid-April, the U.S. government issued numerous statements condemning the "ethnic cleansing" policies of Serbian forces in Bosnia-Hercegovina. On May 20, after Serbian authorities rebuffed U.S. appeals to permit safe passage of humanitarian aid into Bosnia-Hercegovina, the U.S. suspended permission for Yugoslavia's national airline to land in the U.S. The U.S. Ambassador to Yugoslavia, Warren Zimmermann, was recalled to Washington for consultations on May 16 and, on May 22, Secretary of State James Baker announced that Ambassador Zimmermann would not be returning to Yugoslavia. On May 22, the U.S. announced a series of diplomatic sanctions against Serbia, which included withdrawing military attaches and ordering the expulsion of their Yugoslav counterparts from the U.S., the closing of Yugoslav consulates in New York and San Francisco, and further reductions in the U.S. embassy staff in Belgrade. The U.S. also stated that it would withhold recognition of the Serbian-dominated government inBelgrade until Serbian forces were withdrawn from Bosnia-Hercegovina and peace was restored to the former Yugoslav republic.

On May 24 in Lisbon, Secretary Baker called for mandatory U.N. sanctions against Serbia. In his remarks, Secretary Baker prodded some European countries, particularly France and Greece, that were hesitant about imposing sanctions against Serbia. Also on May 24, Secretary Baker stated that the U.S. would not accept Serbia and Montenegro as the successor state to the former Yugoslavia in multilateral institutions.

The United States assumed an active role in initiating, drafting and implementing U.N. sanctions against the Serbian government. The U.S. moved quickly to implement the U.N. embargo against Yugoslavia and, on June 1, the U.S. Treasury Department announced that it was freezing the assets of the Yugoslav government and the republics of Serbia and Montenegro, including the state-owned airline and banks. On July 10, U.S. warships began to patrol the Yugoslav coast as part of a joint nato/Western European Union flotilla aimed at strengthening enforcement of U.N. sanctions. On November 18, the U.S. agreed to cooperate with nato enforcement of the naval blockade of Yugoslavia.

On June 23, while testifying before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Secretary Baker announced further U.S. sanctions against Yugoslavia. The sanctions, which were largely symbolic, entailed the closing of the last remaining Yugoslav consulate in the U.S., in Chicago. Secretary Baker also stated that the U.S. would more actively pursue efforts to suspend Yugoslavia from the U.N. and other international organizations. The sanctions also withdrew recognition from Belgrade's ambassador to the U.S.. On July 6, the U.S. placed further sanctions on Belgrade. The Treasury Department went beyond the U.N. embargo by extending it to all companies in Serbia and Montenegro. According to the Treasury Department, because the violence and rapid changes in the former Yugoslavia had made it difficult to identify ownership of entities subject to the economic embargo, the U.S. "was forced to regard all companies in Serbia and Montenegro and their foreign subsidiaries as either owned or controlled by the Yugoslav government." Violators of the embargo are subject to criminal fines of up to $250,000 for individuals and $500,000 for corporations, as well as imprisonment for up to ten years and civil penalties of up to $10,000 per violation.

Proposals for the use of force either to attack abusive Serbian forces or to protect humanitarian convoys carrying relief supplies were discussed and debated within the administration. On the one hand, the Defense Department strongly opposed any direct combat role for U.S. forces and the State Department was willing to use arms only in defense of relief missions. On the other hand, members of the U.S. Congress, particularly in the Senate, pressed the Bush administration to consider military intervention to halt the Serbian offensive in Sarajevo. Eventually, the administration adopted the position that it was prepared to send U.S. troops to Bosnia-Hercegovina but only to help supply and safeguard humanitarian aid and only after a durable cease-fire was negotiated. The use of force was discussed when the U.N. debated imposing a no-fly zone over Bosnia-Hercegovina in September and October. The U.S. supported the use of force to enforce the no-fly zone but yielded to French and British pressure to refrain from such action.

Once U.N. and U.S. sanctions against Yugoslavia were in place, the U.S. seemed to disengage from the Bosnian situation. When reports of detention camps in Bosnia-Hercegovina appeared in the press, the Bush administration first confirmed and then tried to minimize the severity of the abuses taking place there. Press reports and leaked U.N. documents indicated that the abuses in the camps were systematically perpetrated against persons solely on the basis of their ethnic or religious affiliation. Initial efforts by the Bush administration to minimize the severity of the abuses appeared aimed at deflecting public calls for the use of force in Bosnia-Hercegovina. Only after continuing pressure to respond to the atrocities did Acting Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger issue a public call on August 5 for a war crimes investigation. In late August, George Kenney, the Yugoslav desk officer at the State Department, resigned his position to protest the timidity and lack of resolve in U.S. policy toward Bosnia-Hercegovina.

Despite a lack of foresight, the Bush administration should be commended for vigorously mobilizing international support for the long-overdue step ofimposing U.N. sanctions against Yugoslavia. Helsinki Watch also welcomed President Bush's November proposal to create an international civilian force that could include Americans to monitor Serbian abuses in Kosovo. The U.S. embassy in Belgrade and the consulate in Zagreb have done a commendable job of documenting and protesting violations of human rights committed by all sides in the former Yugoslavia. However, U.S. protests concerning abuses against Serbs and suppression of freedom of the press in Croatia, while vociferous in early 1992, have been less frequent in the latter part of the year.

Helsinki Watch was pleased by the leadership role of the U.S. in urging a U.N. investigation of war crimes in the former Yugoslavia and by U.S. efforts to provide documentation to the commission. As a party to the 1951 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, the United States has committed that it will "undertake to prevent and punish this crime" (Article I). In addition, the Convention authorizes the United States to call upon the United Nations to take appropriate action under the U.N. Charter "for the prevention and suppression of acts of genocide." It is beyond the competence of Helsinki Watch to determine all the steps that may be required to prevent and suppress the crime of genocide-a matter that rests with the Security Council. However, Helsinki Watch believes that the United States should take the lead at the United Nations in seeking action that is "appropriate for the prevention and suppression of acts of genocide" as provided in Article VIII of the Genocide Convention.

The Work of Helsinki Watch

Helsinki Watch maintained one or more staff members in the former Yugoslavia throughout 1992. Staff representatives investigated human rights abuses and sustained contacts with human rights activists, government officials and members of the press in all of the former Yugoslav republics. Helsinki Watch also devoted time to helping fledgling human rights groups in Serbia and Croatia develop their methodology and organize their work to address the rights of all citizens in their republics, not just the rights of the ethnic group to which they happen to belong.

Helsinki Watch conducted several missions to the former Yugoslavia in 1992. An investigation in Croatia and Serbia examined violations of the rules of war in Croatia in December 1991 and January 1992. The mission also investigated the status of civil and political rights in Croatia and Serbia. In January, Helsinki Watch sent a lengthy letter to Serbian President Slobodan Milo_evic and then Acting Minister of Defense and Chief of Staff of the Yugoslav People's Army, Blagoje Adic. The letter detailed violations of the rules of war committed by Yugoslav and Serbian forces in Croatia and violations of civil and political rights in Serbia. Helsinki Watch representatives met with members of the Yugoslav People's Army and the Serbian government in January to discuss the letter. Similarly, a lengthy letter detailing abuses of the rules of war by Croatian armed forces and violations of civil and political rights in Croatia was sent to Croatian President Franjo Tudjman in February. Helsinki Watch representatives met with President Tudjman and members of the Croatian government in March to discuss that letter.

In April, May, June, September and October, Helsinki Watch sent missions to Bosnia-Hercegovina, Croatia, Slovenia and Yugoslavia to investigate rules of war violations in Bosnia-Hercegovina. Mission participants visited all of the aforementioned countries and interviewed victims and witnesses to abuses, refugees and displaced persons, local officials, combatants and U.N. personnel. Detention camps and prisons operated by Croatian, Muslim and Serbian forces were visited. A report documenting our findings and criticizing the work of the international community, War Crimes in Bosnia-Hercegovina, was released in August. An update on the human rights situation in Bosnia-Hercegovina will be released in mid-December.

In conjunction with the release of its August report, Helsinki Watch called on the U.N. Security Council to exercise its authority under the 1951 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide to prevent and suppress genocide in Bosnia-Hercegovina. Helsinki Watch also called on the Security Council to enforce the prohibition of "grave breaches" of the Geneva Conventions by establishing an international tribunal to investigate, prosecute, adjudicate and punish those responsible from all sides for war crimes on the territory of the former Yugoslavia. In its August report, Helsinki Watch named nine Serbianparamilitary leaders, Serbian political figures and Yugoslav army personnel against whom sufficient evidence is available to warrant an investigation to determine whether they had committed war crimes in the former Yugoslavia. Helsinki Watch also called for the investigation by the aforementioned tribunal of the murder by Croatian forces of at least 23 Serbs in the city of Gospic in late 1991.

On the basis of several missions in the past 18 months, Helsinki Watch released a report in October, Yugoslavia: Human Rights Abuses in Kosovo, 1990-1992. The report documented violations against Albanians in Kosovo, including mistreatment in detention, restrictions on freedom of association and the press, discrimination in employment and education, and the general social and economic marginalization of the Albanian population in the province. The report also described the manipulation of the legal system by Serbian authorities to discriminate against Albanians in Kosovo.

In February, Helsinki Watch sent a letter to Serbian President Slobodan Milo_evic and then Acting Minister of Defense and Chief of Staff of the Yugoslav People's Army Blagoje Adic expressing concern that prisoners captured after the fall of Vukovar were being executed in Bac, Vojvodina. In May, Helsinki Watch sent a letter to Croatian President Franjo Tudjman protesting efforts by the Croatian government to silence opposition journalists and political figures. On July 1, 1991, Helsinki Watch sent a letter to Dobrica Co_ic, the President of Yugoslavia, and several Yugoslav military officials expressing concern that Croats being tried for "war crimes" in Belgrade were denied due process, had been beaten in detention, and had been forced to confess to crimes under duress.

In 1992, Helsinki Watch testified before the U.S. Congress on three occasions regarding the former Yugoslavia. On February 5, Helsinki Watch testified at a hearing of the csce Commission on prospects for peace and human rights in the former Yugoslav republics. Helsinki Watch testified on human rights in the republic of Serbia on August 10 before the Trade Subcommittee of the House Ways and Means Committee. On September 16, in testimony regarding free trade and ideas before the Subcommittees on International Economic Policy and Trade and International Operations of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, Helsinki Watch noted that U.S. sanctions that ban cultural and informational exchanges with Yugoslavia wrongly include the independent press and other independent institutions in Yugoslavia.
MIDDLE EAST WATCH OVERVIEW

Human Rights Developments

The Middle East and North Africa remain plagued by severe human rights problems. The torture of political detainees is commonplace, and often routine. Extrajudicial executions and executions after trials lacking in due process take place with regularity in Iraq, Iran and, to a lesser extent, Saudi Arabia. In the past, the Syrian authorities have been guilty of this abuse as well. Arguably, the killing of suspected militants in Egypt and the Israeli-occupied territories, when arrests could have been effected-a feature of the civil strife plaguing both regions-also constitute extrajudicial executions by government agents. In counterpoint, armed underground groups often assassinate suspected opponents in these regions, as well as in Algeria.

The officially sanctioned persecution of religious or ethnic minorities, or the absence of government protection in the face of attacks by members of the majority community, is an endemic problem in parts of the Middle East. For instance, during 1992, Palestinians and Bedoon residents of Kuwait endured unrelenting pressures aimed at forcing them out of the country; Baha'is and evangelical Christians faced renewed persecution in Iran. The arbitrary detention of government opponents is also rampant throughout the region. From Morocco to Iran, tens of thousands are in jail on politically motivated grounds; even the Kurdish authorities, ruling over an autonomous enclave of some 3.5 million people in northern Iraq, resorted in late 1992 to the detention without charge of hundreds of sympathizers of militant parties.

The end of the Cold War and subsequent collapse of the Soviet Union transformed prospects for the promotion of human rights in the Middle East and North Africa (the Maghreb states). Without the superpower rivalries that produced competing patterns of client states, and allowed geopolitical considerations to override a client's domestic record, there is little excuse any longer to ignore rights abuses. Other considerations-the maintenance of the U.S.-led military alliance against Iraq, in 1990 and 1991, and the coaxing of Arab states into peace negotiations with Israel, later in 1991-have been used by U.S. officials to justify the overlooking, or subordination, of legitimate human rights concerns. In Middle East Watch's judgement, however, such arguments are short-sighted and fail to respond to the propitious climate in the regional countries themselves for a consistent policy based on universal principles.

Governments in the region are showing heightened, albeit usually grudging, recognition of the need to take human rights principles into account in dealing with their own people and with foreign powers. Although they remain banned in many parts, local monitoring groups have become increasingly vocal in countries as diverse as Egypt, Syria and Kuwait. The lead taken by the United Nations Security Council in the aftermath of the 1991 Gulf War strengthened this trend. By intervening to avert a human rights crisis in Iraqi Kurdistan, and then, in 1992, by treating Iraq's human rights record as a matter integral to the maintenance of peace and security, the Security Council imbued the principles of human rights with added importance.

In the context of the Arab-Israeli peace negotiations, which entered their second year in October 1992, there were indications that some regional parties to the talks saw human rights principles as a useful component of regional accords. In late summer, the Israeli and Palestinian delegations agreed to establish working groups on human rights matters in their bilateral discussions.

Filling a perceived spiritual and ideological vacuum in the region is the growth of groups seeking to establish theocratic states. The spread of political Islam has brought new threats to rights, particularly from violent fringe groups using the Islamic slogan to wage war against civil society and political establishments. The assassination in Egypt of an avowedly secular writer, Dr. Faraj Fouda, by the Jama'a al-Islamiyya (Islamic Group) was one such example.

The challenge of political Islam triggered a harsh response by several governments. Algeria and Tunisia provided dismal examples of governments that had previously encouraged freer expression and association, but in 1992 slid back into old repressive ways. In the course of suppressing their respectiveIslamist parties, the Islamic Salvation Front (fis) and al-Nahda, the Algerian and Tunisian regimes subverted normal legal processes, abused detainees and curbed press freedom. Egypt adopted a troublesome two-pronged response: seemingly tolerating some of the abuses being committed by Islamist militants against the Coptic Christian minority, while giving security forces virtually unrestrained license to torture and detain for lengthy periods suspected Islamic extremists.

Even those governments that avowedly base their legitimacy on religious grounds, such as Iran, or uphold strict interpretations of Islam, as in Saudi Arabia, faced internal challenges in 1992 from religious extremists. While their demands differed, they were openly hostile to core principles enunciated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.

Rights abuses committed, or condoned, by authorities often seemed to flow from these internal pressures. The enforcement of stricter standards in Iran with respect to women's public dress and appearance, already severely constrained by official guidelines, was one example. Another was the renewed persecution of Baha'is, always a convenient scapegoat. Or Saudi Arabia's increased zeal in the persecution, and in one case execution, of perceived heretics, or the virtual closure of its borders to any form of international scrutiny, whether by journalists or human rights organizations.

The Algerian coup of January 1992, aimed at preventing the fis from assuming power peacefully through the ballot box, was followed by the banning of the party, dissolution of fis-run municipal councils, and arbitrary detention of thousands of its suspected followers. As of the end of November, no new date had been set for a restoration of the democratic process that was so rudely interrupted by a political and military establishment that preferred the status quo to allowing a freely elected Islamist party to control parliament.

In the summer of 1992, Tunisia used the pretext of an alleged conspiracy in 1990-1991 by the Nahda party (to overthrow the government and assassinate the president) to put nearly 300 persons on trial before military courts. Government officials privately described the lengthy jail terms resulting from the mass trials as the effective end of an Islamist party that had long troubled the secular ruling establishment. In Middle East Watch's view, the defendants' claims that many confessions used as government evidence had been obtained under torture, as well as irregularities in court procedures, undermined the validity of the judgments.

In the Israeli-occupied territories, severe human rights abuses continued on a large scale during 1992, despite two far-reaching developments that might have been expected to improve the human rights situation: the pursuit of regional peace talks, and the ouster of Israel's Likud-led government by a center-left coalition dominated by the Labor Party. While there was a decline in abusive forms of administrative control and punishment, such as deportations, administrative detention, school closings, house demolitions and round-the-clock curfews, there was no let-up in the use of often unjustified lethal force against Palestinian activists and the use of torture against suspects in detention. Some extremist Palestinians continued to kill suspected collaborators with Israeli authorities, sometimes after torture.

Not all the developments during 1992, from a rights standpoint, were bleak. Two countries where the overall situation has improved and institutions of civil society have begun to develop are Jordan and Yemen.

Since the unification of North and South Yemen in 1990, over 40 political parties and scores of newspapers and magazines have sprung up, with opposition publications openly criticizing the government. Yemen's first parliamentary elections since unification, anticipated in November 1992, were delayed until April 1993 on administrative grounds. When it is held, the Yemeni poll will be the first legislative contest in the Arabian peninsula based on universal suffrage and competition between political parties. Politically motivated assassinations mar this otherwise promising prospect.

In Jordan, the new era of pluralism ushered in by the 1989 parliamentary election continued. In April 1992, King Hussein decreed the full repeal of much-criticized martial law, in force since 1967. Over 50 political groups nowoperate openly. A political parties law that would allow these groups to apply for formal legal status was passed by parliament, and came into effect in August. Political parties had been banned in Jordan since 1957.

Elections in Kuwait, in October 1992, were considered to be open and fairly contested; opposition candidates gained an unexpected plurality of elected seats in the restored National Assembly. But the poll was flawed by the exclusion of women and the narrowness of the electorate, restricted to some 11 percent of the native population.

Apparently in response to external pressures, a number of regional states have taken modest steps to improve their human rights records. In late 1991, Syria released several thousand political prisoners; starting in August 1992, hundreds of other long-term detainees, in some cases held without charges for over a decade, were put on trial before state security courts. Saudi Arabia, meanwhile, introduced a Basic Law, in its first move toward establishing the constitutionality of its government system.

Desirable though such measures may appear at first sight, they often failed to tackle underlying institutional flaws stemming from the intentions of rulers to preserve themselves in power. The changes in Syria coincided with President Hafez al-Asad's renewal of his own mandate for a fourth consecutive seven-year term, while the state security trials have been a charade in which many defendants were, in essence, prosecuted for their peaceful exercise of their rights to free expression and association. The Saudi reforms, far from introducing participatory democracy, had the effect of strengthening royal autocracy.

What characterized the behavior of both Iran and its neighbor Iraq was an evident determination on the part of ruling groups who originally came to power by force to maintain their grip at all costs. Faced with widespread economic discontent, especially in urban slum districts, and with persistent violence in ethnic minority regions of Iran, the Rafsanjani government resorted to summary justice and exemplary executions. It also arranged the outcome of elections to the Islamic Majlis, or parliament, in April and May, to give a clear majority to the president's supporters.

Its back to the wall, Saddam Hussein's regime lashed out against a variety of targets. In a climate of mounting terror, some 600 merchants accused of profiteering were believed to have been arrested. Forty-two were executed after travesties of legal proceedings or none at all. In the marshes region of southern Iraq, government forces indiscriminately attacked suspected rebel hideouts, reportedly causing hundreds of civilian casualties, in blatant violation of humanitarian law. An economic siege was imposed on much of the marshes, following similar measures initiated in late 1991 against Iraqi Kurdistan-actions which gradually cut off supplies of food, fuel and medicines to local inhabitants. By August 1992, the siege of the Kurdish region was near total, covering all goods and cash brought from government-controlled districts.

The risks to civilians of indiscriminate government abuse became so great that Max van der Stoel, the U.N. Special Rapporteur for Iraq, issued an unprecedented call for human rights monitors to be stationed in Iraq on behalf of the United Nations. If the proposal is approved by the Security Council, it will be the first time that U.N. human rights monitors have been dispatched to a country against the wishes of the government concerned. In late November, a draft resolution to this effect was on the verge of being debated by the Security Council.

The potential withdrawal from Turkey, at some date in 1993, of combat aircraft provided by Britain, France and the United States to protect northern Iraq from government forces could have grave consequences for the semi-independent Kurdish enclave. Although Middle East Watch, like other parts of Human Rights Watch, takes no position on the political issue of self-determination, it notes that elections for a regional parliament in Iraqi Kurdistan, carried out in May amid great popular enthusiasm, were regarded by international observers as broadly free and fair. The polling stood in striking contrast to the Ba'th party regime in Baghdad, which retains power largely through the public's fear of its ubiquitous security services.

The Right to Monitor

Few governments in the region covered by Middle East Watch acknowledge that their own citizens have a right, per se, to act as watchdogs against official abuses. The only states where indigenous human rights monitoring groups are both free to operate without constraint and legally recognized are Morocco, Algeria, Jordan, Yemen and Israel. The Tunisian Ligue, one of the oldest established human rights organizations in the Arab world, dissolved itself during 1992, rather than submit to a new law of associations. In Lebanon, Syrian hostility to rights monitoring makes the investigation, and publication, of violations almost impossible. In the Israeli-occupied territories, Palestinian organizations are permitted to function and publish, but face daily difficulties in carrying out their work.

In Iraqi Kurdistan, the elected local authorities proclaimed their respect for human rights; in this spirit, a Kurdish human rights organization has become the first such body to operate openly on Iraqi soil. However, this organization has so far preferred to concentrate on Iraqi government abuses rather than investigate the actions of its own authorities. Elsewhere in Iraq, monitoring by either local or foreign organizations is virtually out of the question.

In January 1992, the U.N. Special Rapporteur was able to travel to Iraq and gather information about current violations. But a series of strongly worded reports-one of which, in July 1992, described the regime as having the worst human rights record since the Nazi Holocaust-provoked a stream of official vituperation, and the withdrawal of even limited cooperation. Baghdad has permitted, even encouraged, humanitarian relief bodies from the West to investigate the dire effects of U.N. trade sanctions on the Iraqi populace. But it has never allowed a human rights organization such as Middle East Watch or Amnesty International to visit the country and conduct an independent investigation of alleged government abuses.

Egypt and Kuwait both permit independent rights organizations to operate, while withholding official recognition and refusing to respond to their enquiries. In effect, this compels local monitors to operate outside the law, giving officials the power to close their organizations. Despite the lack of formal legal status, rights organizations in both countries are vigorous and effective. Elsewhere in the Arabian Peninsula, the conservative hereditary rulers of Bahrain, Qatar, Oman and Saudi Arabia bar any form of rights monitoring, whether by local or foreign organizations. Exiled political groups attempt to gather and disseminate information about conditions in Bahrain and Saudi Arabia, but their reports, which concentrate on the treatment of their supporters, are sometimes difficult to verify independently.

Nor do the authoritarian regimes in Iran, Syria and Libya permit any form of independent human rights monitoring, from whatever quarter. The three-year-old Syrian organization known as the Committees for the Defense of Democratic Freedoms and Human Rights (cdf), a peaceful body that operates clandestinely inside Syria and openly abroad, was severely dealt with during 1992. After circulating pamphlets in December 1991 criticizing the manner in which President Asad was reelected and calling for greater respect for human rights, cdf members and sympathizers were arrested and tortured, before being put on trial before a state security court. Leading figures drew prison terms of up to ten years, with hard labor. Syrian authorities correspond, belatedly and very partially, with various U.N. human rights organs, but they have never acknowledged any communication from Middle East Watch, let alone permitted a visit to the country.

Local branches of Amnesty International are permitted to exist in Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Morocco, Tunisia and Yemen. The Cairo-based Arab Organization of Human Rights (aohr) similarly counts independent chapters in eight countries. Other encouraging signs of transnational and regional cooperation to promote human rights include meetings of Israeli and Palestinian rights organizations and of rights activists from Turkey, Israel and the Arab world. Thus, despite the many obstacles placed in their way by governments, the ability to monitor human rights conditions, if not the right, appears to be improving.

U.S. Policy

Many of the policy issues confronting the Bush administration in the MiddleEast during 1992 concerned Iraq. A second major preoccupation was the maintenance of the slow-paced Arab-Israeli peace negotiations. Third, the resurgent power of Iran, a state with an atrocious domestic record and proven willingness to use terrorism abroad, concerned U.S. officials. Similar considerations are expected to preoccupy the officials of the Clinton administration when they take office in January. In all three areas, human rights considerations loom large.

Perhaps the first challenge to confront the U.S. in 1993 will be the threat of a renewed onslaught by Iraqi government forces against that country's 3.5 million-strong Kurdish community. On the evidence gathered so far by Middle East Watch, past attacks, which reached a crescendo from 1987-1989, appear to have been genocidal in scale and character. Since then, there has been little to suggest that President Saddam Hussein has changed his intentions toward Iraq's main non-Arab minority. In an afp dispatch from government-controlled Kirkuk, the provincial governor, Yasir Hassan Sultan, was quoted as saying that the Kurds could not indefinitely defy Baghdad. "All those who oppose Iraq will regret it," the official added.

At the end of November 1992, the renewal by Turkey for a further six months of a military forces' basing agreement, providing an air shield over much of Iraqi Kurdistan, once more hung in the balance. In force since mid-1991, the agreement is due to expire on December 31, 1992-in the midst of a winter relief operation for the besieged region being carried out by the U.S. and United Nations. Middle East Watch urges that protection of the Kurds not be withdrawn in a fashion that would expose them to the dangers of enforced famine, arrest or other forms of reprisal by the Iraqi authorities. It also called for U.N. trade sanctions imposed on Iraq after the 1991 war to be lifted selectively, with respect to those regions of the country where the government has withdrawn its authority and imposed a siege.

While questioning its belated timing, Middle East Watch welcomed the aerial protection provided by the West in the latter months of 1992 to the neglected Shi'a of southern Iraq. Similar action taken in the spring of 1991 could have provided significant protection as government forces engaged in large-scale reprisals against Shi'a civilians and institutions. Commencing in August 1992, a "no-fly" zone was imposed by the U.S., together with Britain and France, over regions of Iraq south of the 32nd parallel-matching a similar ban on Iraqi aircraft entering territory north of the 36th parallel. Unlike the northern zone, renewed every six months by agreement with Turkey, the latter is open-ended. While this protective measure has been successful in halting flights by Iraqi combat aircraft and helicopters, previously used to bomb marsh villages suspected of housing rebel fighters, it has not stopped indiscriminate artillery shelling and other forms of repression.

In 1992, the Bush administration was supportive of efforts by Middle East Watch and the Senate Foreign Relations Committee to bring out of the Kurdish-controlled region of northern Iraq many tons of Iraqi secret police documents captured by Kurdish fighters during their abortive uprising in March 1991. These important documents may demonstrate that the 1988 Anfal campaign launched by Saddam Hussein against the Kurds was tantamount to genocide. They form an integral element in evidence being gathered for possible legal action against Iraq at the International Court of Justice (the World Court).

However, Middle East Watch deplores the administration's decision not to pursue evidence of war crimes committed by Iraqi forces in occupied Kuwait, during 1990 and 1991, as collected by U.S. investigators. The rationale for not seeking the prosecution of President Saddam Hussein, Defense Minister Ali Hassan al-Majid (the overlord of both Kurdistan during the Anfal campaign and occupied Kuwait) and other members of the Iraqi security apparatus was that such action would lessen the chances of an internal coup against the Iraqi ruler.

Middle East Watch calls on the new Clinton administration to discard the short-sighted, tactical considerations that guided its predecessor's actions toward Iraq. Instead, it should take a principled stand in the face of evidence of gross violations of human rights, such as those perpetrated in recent years by the Ba'th regime.

To Middle East Watch's regret, the Bush administration failed to take advantage of the historic opportunities present in the Middle East and NorthAfrica to press publicly for greater commitments to democracy and respect for human rights. Further, its failure to speak out where abuses were perpetrated by its close allies, notably Israel, Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait was shameful. Its argument that to do so might prejudice the Arab-Israeli peace talks seemed simplistic. Rather, as experience elsewhere in the world has shown, greater regional respect for human rights would facilitate the confidence needed to reach a peace agreement.

The outgoing administration's reluctance to condemn events such as the Algerian coup in January confirmed many Arabs in their suspicions that the U.S., and the West as a whole, took a selective approach to democracy. Where there was a potential political price to pay for speaking out about systematic abuses, the Bush administration usually remained silent. Its annual statement on human rights conditions around the world, the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1991, was largely accurate in its characterization of government abuses in the Middle East and North Africa. But with a few exceptions, the State Department failed to use its undoubted muscle to press for reforms or respect for human rights.

In Kuwait, where the U.S. holds a special advantage because of its decisive role in ending the Iraqi occupation and restoring the Sabah family to power, it soft-pedalled over continuing abuses by the authorities. In Israel, the administration remained silent about new evidence of torture and the unjustified killing of Palestinians, while praising public relations-minded gestures by the new Rabin government. In Saudi Arabia, President Bush himself praised new legislation as being a step toward greater democracy, against the evidence that it would have the reverse effect. In a case argued before the U.S. Supreme Court in November, the administration also opposed an attempt by a U.S. citizen to obtain compensation from the Saudi government for his arbitrary detention and torture by Saudi authorities. In Egypt, the administration stood four-square behind President Hosni Mubarak in his battle against militant Islamic fundamentalism, ignoring the gross abuses of torture and long term detention without charge committed by Egyptian authorities in the process.

The Clinton administration has an opportunity to start with a clean slate, as well as unprecedentedly favorable conditions for the exercise of U.S. influence in a manner more consistent with human rights norms. The President-elect's statement on the eve of his November 4 election victory, as published in the Washington magazine Middle East Insight, that a Clinton administration would seek to promote human rights in Saudi Arabia "and elsewhere in the Middle East" is welcome. The then presidential candidate told the magazine that the U.S. "must not ignore any country's human rights abuses." Clinton's apparent willingness to take on a key U.S. ally, Saudi Arabia, needs to be translated into an even-handed determination to address human rights abuses wherever they might be found. For example, while Israel itself may be a democracy, Palestinian residents of the occupied territories of the West Bank and Gaza Strip have no opportunity to exercise democratic rights, and many violations are committed by Israeli security forces.

Middle East Watch urges the new administration to give life to widely ignored provisions in the Foreign Assistance Act to link the provision of U.S. aid to a recipient's human rights record. Under Section 502B, for example, security assistance should be cut off to governments that are responsible for a consistent pattern of gross abuses of human rights, including extrajudicial execution, torture and prolonged arbitrary detention. On a strict application of these criteria, all of the leading recipients of U.S. aid in the region are vulnerable. In the case of Israel, for example, the Bush administration boldly insisted on linking Israel's request for $10 billion in loan guarantees to a halt in the construction of Jewish settlements in the occupied territories. The Clinton administration should attempt to use the same kind of leverage to curb torture and unjustified killings of Palestinians.

The Clinton administration should not follow its predecessors' policies of treating the Middle East as an exception to the rule that democracy and human rights deserve promotion on their own merits. In a region poised on the edge of change, a more consistent and forthright encouragement of human rights is imperative.

The Work of Middle East Watch

In 1992, Middle East Watch broadened its efforts of the previous three years to document the Iraqi government's Anfal campaign against the Kurds. With unimpeded access to much of northern Iraq possible for the first time, it sent researchers to the region for six months. They interviewed several hundred persons with first-hand accounts of mass deportations, village clearances, mass executions, the use of chemical weapons, and other gross abuses, committed between 1987 and 1989. Middle East Watch was able to establish that tens of thousands of persons disappeared, and are presumed dead, after being transported to various remote destinations in central and southern Iraq. Among those interviewed were seven persons who survived mass deportations and executions in 1988.

Evidence about the Iraqi government's crimes against the Kurds was also gathered in two other ways: from the exhumation of collective graves, and the analysis of captured Iraqi documents. Between December 1991 and June 1992, Middle East Watch and Physicians for Human Rights, the Boston-based organization, sent two teams of forensic anthropologists and archaeologists to northern Iraq.

Exhumations were carried out near the cities of Erbil and Suleimaniyya, and in the villages of Koreme and Birjini in Dohuk governorate. The results were published in an initial report entitled Unquiet Graves and in a report to be released in early 1993 on "a genocide-in-miniature": the circumstances surrounding the destruction of the village of Koreme in August 1988, the on-site killing of 27 of its men, the deportation of its women and children, and the disappearance of its other males after being seized by government troops. Taking part in the latter investigation, which lasted a month, was a team of Latin American human rights experts drawn from groups experienced in exhuming victims of government death squads.

Aside from its own reports, Middle East Watch publicized its findings about the Anfal campaign through a CBS TV "Sixty Minutes" program broadcast in February and through a long magazine article in The New Yorker magazine. Many other articles in the U.S. and European press made reference to Middle East Watch's pioneering fieldwork, building a potential case for genocide. In September, a consultant writer began work on the organization's first, full-length report on the Anfal campaign. The book is also scheduled for release in early 1993.

The most dramatic aspect of the evidence-gathering process involved the airlifting to safekeeping in the United States, in May, of 14 tons of Iraqi secret police documents captured by the Kurds themselves the previous year. Middle East Watch acted as the custodian of documents entrusted to its care, and to the U.S. Senate's Foreign Relations Committee, by the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (puk), one of two major Iraqi Kurdish parties. These documents were then stored in the U.S. National Archives, outside Washington, D.C. Work on the large task of classifying, translating and analyzing the millions of pages of documents began in October, under the direction of a newly created Middle East Watch team. Preliminary results of the research corroborate testimonial findings about the nature of government actions, in the process providing massive detail on the Iraqi bureaucracy of repression.

Middle East Watch was active in 1992 in pressing its concerns about Iraq at the U.S. Congress and State Department, as well as in various European foreign ministries. It also worked closely with the U.N. Special Rapporteur on Iraq, Max van der Stoel. The possibility of legal action against Iraq at the International Court of Justice was explored with several parties; during 1993, Middle East Watch anticipates that this aspect of its work, embracing the building of a legal brief, will be expanded. Efforts also continue to bring further caches of captured documents held by other Kurdish parties out of northern Iraq, for safekeeping and research.

Together with other branches of Human Rights Watch, Middle East Watch participated during 1992 in international efforts to tackle the problem of uncharted land mines that have a disastrous effect on civilian life. The indiscriminate strewing of millions of land mines was a side-effect of the Iraqi government's various military actions in the Kurdish region, including the Anfal. As a result, thousands of civilians, many of them children, were either killed or lost limbs in Iraqi Kurdistan between March 1991 and the endof 1992. A Middle East Watch report on the problem, Hidden Death, was published in November.

Based on a 1991 mission to Iran and continued monitoring of Iraq from abroad, Middle East Watch issued a lengthy report in April 1992 entitled Endless Torment on rights abuses committed by the Iraqi authorities during and after the suppression of the March 1991 uprising in both the mainly Kurdish north and Shi'a south of Iraq. Further close monitoring of the situation in the south, where allegations of many grave abuses were reported, proved difficult, because of Iraq's continued refusal to permit a Middle East Watch investigative mission and Iran's failure to approve visa requests until December. Saudi Arabia also failed to respond to requests to visit its border regions, to gather information about Iraqi human rights conditions. However, a Middle East Watch researcher was able to travel to Jordan and Syria during the summer, to interview exiled Iraqis. A press statement was issued in September about a massacre of hundreds of Shi'a transported from the marshes region south of Amara after fighting with rebels, based on information gathered by a Middle East Watch researcher in Iraqi Kurdistan.

In October, Middle East Watch denounced human rights and humanitarian law violations in the Kurdish enclave of northern Iraq, following a decision by the local authorities to remove mainly Turkish Kurdish Workers' Party (pkk) guerrillas from the Iraq-Turkey border zone. A mission to the region the following month concluded that both the Turkish authorities and the pkk had been guilty of abuses, and that the Kurdish government was holding many prisoners without charge, some of whom had been tortured.

As in 1991, Iraq dominated Middle East Watch's work during the year, taking up much of its time and resources. But the organization was nonetheless able to monitor ten other countries and regions: Egypt, Algeria, Tunisia, Yemen, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Syria, Lebanon, Iran and the Israeli-occupied territories. Formal missions were sent to Egypt, Algeria, Tunisia (together with the Washington-based International Human Rights Law Group), Kuwait (together with Human Rights Watch's Women's Rights Project) and the Israeli-occupied territories. Researchers also made two unpublicized trips to Jordan and Syria, to gather information about conditions in Iraq and Syria itself.

A month-long mission to Egypt, in January and February, to investigate persistent allegations of the torture of detainees by State Security Investigation officers and soldiers, produced a major report, Behind Closed Doors: Torture and Detention in Egypt. Mission participants met with senior Egyptian officials and were granted permission to inspect any prison they chose; in the time available, they visited six prisons, including two maximum-security facilities. The report was released at a press conference in Cairo in July, and received widespread media coverage. A second report, on prison conditions, is due for release in January 1993.

Middle East Watch and the Women's Rights Project continued to monitor legal developments following the Egyptian authorities' closure in 1991 of the Arab Women's Solidarity Organization, the leading women's organization in the Arab world. They also collaborated on research into the mistreatment of Asian domestic employees in Kuwait. A mission to Kuwait resulted in a report that condemned the Kuwaiti authorities for their failure to address the problem. Middle East Watch continued to monitor Kuwait's abuses against Palestinian and Bedoon (stateless) residents. It was also compelled to issue a detailed rebuttal of renewed claims by the Kuwaiti government and their U.S. supporters that wartime allegations of mass killings of babies in incubators were accurate, rather than the false propaganda they had been proven to be.

Following King Fahd's promulgation of new constitutional and legal decrees, Middle East Watch issued a detailed critique of these so-called democratic reforms. Entitled Empty Reforms, the report concluded that the measures served, in fact, to strengthen royal autocracy. Attempts by the organization to meet with senior Saudi officials and to visit the country, to pursue a dialogue on various human rights concerns, were greeted with silence. Based on continuing research into the torture of prisoners in Saudi jails, Middle East Watch presented an amicus curiae brief to the U.S. Supreme Court in support of a petition brought by a U.S. citizen, Scott Nelson, who was seeking monetary damages for his torture and arbitrary detention in Saudi Arabia.

Elsewhere on the Arabian Peninsula, Middle East Watch conducted its first research into human rights issues in Yemen. Two years after the unification of the former Yemen Arab Republic and the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen, human rights conditions have greatly improved, with a proliferation of political parties and news publications. A newsletter examined steps toward the building of civil society in Yemen ahead of general elections originally anticipated in November 1992.

In 1992, Middle East Watch resumed active work on Syria. Attention was directed initially at two issues: the persecution of the Syrian human rights monitoring group, cdf, and long-term prisoners remaining in the custody of the security services following mass releases in late 1991. The former issue was pursued through a newsletter published in March and a series of letters to Syrian authorities. The latter began with the collection of data from exile groups about prison numbers and the identity of prisoners, and it developed into a major report, Throwing Away the Key, that examined current interrogation and detention procedures against political prisoners.

In the Maghreb region, Middle East Watch focused during 1992 on two countries where the authorities battled with indigenous Islamist movements: Tunisia and Algeria. In Tunisia, it joined forces with the Washington-based International Human Rights Law Group to send an observer to the mass trial of Islamists, in July, before two military courts. Algeria posed a larger challenge, because of the crackdown that followed the January coup, which had blocked the Islamists from achieving power through the ballot box. Resolving that the coup was an unwarranted interruption of the democratic process, Middle East Watch issued a newsletter on abuses committed in the wake of the military intervention. It then sent a mission to Algeria in the summer, for three weeks, for a fuller investigation; a report on its findings was due for publication in early 1993.

In the Israeli-occupied territories, a report was issued in March on deaths in detention and the growing evidence that torture is used by investigators against Palestinian detainees. In the second half of the year, Middle East Watch undertook a lengthy research project on the recurrent killings of Palestinian activists by undercover Israeli squads. A report on the subject will be published in January 1993.

Although individual reports were not issued during the year on the countries concerned, researchers maintained a watching brief on Iran and Lebanon. As regards Iran, Middle East Watch paid particular attention to the manner in which popular unrest was put down by the authorities, and to the worsening climate for freedom of expression and women's rights. With Lebanon, curbs on media freedom were examined, along with politically motivated detention. Assessments of human rights conditions in these two countries are published separately in this report.

Middle East Watch was invited to testify before Congress on three occasions during 1992. In June, it presented testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on the Iraqi Anfal and on the significance of the captured Iraqi documents; it also testified the same month before the House Select Committee on Hunger, with respect to current conditions in Iraq. In September, Middle East Watch testified before a hearing of the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Europe and the Middle East devoted to the state of human rights in the Middle East.
ALGERIA

Human Rights Developments

Only three years ago a leader among democratizing countries in the region, Algeria hurtled in the opposite direction during 1992. In January, the government cancelled elections indefinitely. In February, it declared a state of emergency and banned the largest opposition party, the Islamic Salvation Front (fis). For the rest of the year, it held thousands of Islamists without charge in remote detention camps. The practice of torture became common again, after having been curtailed during the period of political liberalization that followed the riots of October 1988.

Political violence, much of it believed to be the work of Islamistextremists, reached a level unprecedented since the end of Algeria's war of independence in 1962. On June 29, 1992, acting President Mohamed Boudiaf was gunned down by a security officer who reportedly confessed to having acted on religious motives. Between January and mid-November, Islamists groups killed more than 200 security-force members, according to the government.

In response, the government targeted not only those suspected of armed attacks but also opponents of the regime with no links to violence. In an important sense, many of the abuses that occurred during 1992 stemmed from the government's cancellation in January of parliamentary elections after the fis won a near-landslide in the first round of balloting on December 26, 1991. The government's action violated the Algerian people's right freely to choose their representatives, as provided in Article 25 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.

The fis, in its ambiguous statements and actions, inspires genuine fear among many Algerians about its attitude toward nonviolence and political and cultural pluralism. In annulling the fis election victory, the government claimed that it was only "postponing" democracy in order to save it from a violent, extremist party seeking to establish a repressive theocracy. But the government's claims to hold the democratic high ground are hardly more credible. Since cancelling the elections, the government, which is dominated by many of the people who ran the country during three decades of one-party rule, has shown no inclination to refrain from serious human rights violations or to accept the wishes of the Algerian electorate.

The democratic process had been derailed once before since the era of political reform began in 1988. In June 1991, parliamentary elections were postponed after the government branded a campaign of fis strikes as an attempted insurrection and imposed a state of siege.

The elections were postponed until December. Despite the imprisonment since June 1991 of party chief Abbasi Madani and his deputy, Ali Belhadj, the fis captured 189 parliamentary seats in the first round of voting and seemed assured of capturing a majority of the 430 seats in the second round.

President Chadli Benjedid declared his readiness to cohabit with a fis-dominated parliament, drawing confidence from the powers given his office by the constitution to check the will of parliament. But a military-backed junta forced Benjedid's resignation and halted the elections. To justify its intervention, the regime claimed that ballot-tampering and intimidation of voters by fis supporters had marred the polling, a claim that was proven neither by the regime nor the Constitutional Council, the body authorized to investigate such allegations.

Algeria's new leaders announced the formation of a five-member High State Council, headed by Mohamed Boudiaf, to exercise presidential authority. The Council moved quickly to consolidate power and stifle protests by fis supporters who felt robbed of their victory. Army troops and tanks were sent into the streets, and demonstrations and gatherings were outlawed in several cities. After a month of rising tensions, when more than 50 civilians were killed by security force gunfire and nine policemen were slain, the government imposed a 12-month state of emergency, seized the fis headquarters and outlawed the party.

The February 9 state-of-emergency decree gave the Minister of Interior sweeping powers, including the authority to ban public gatherings, dissolve municipal governments, and detain for an unspecified period any adult "whose activity is shown to endanger the public order, public security, or the proper functioning of public services." Civilians charged with offenses against state security could be tried by military courts. In March, the government began dissolving many fis-controlled municipal councils and provincial assemblies, on the grounds that their operations had been impaired by "the calculated behavior of their members who seek to thwart the policies of the government."

As the violence persisted, the regime continued to grant itself new emergency powers. An August decree permitted the dissolution for up to six months of any entity that undermined "the public order, public security, the normal functioning of institutions or the larger interests of the country." A new "anti-terrorist" law decreed on October 3 lengthened the maximum period of incommunicado detention from two to 12 days for "terrorist" suspects. It established a new special court to try acts of terrorism or subversion, andprovided a minimum five-year sentence on conviction, without an opportunity to appeal. In the six weeks following the decree, authorities arrested several hundred persons, most of them suspected fis activists, in the biggest roundup since the spring.

Throughout the year, the most widely used emergency power was the broad authority to detain. By its own count, the government rounded up and dispatched some 9,000 suspected fis members to detention camps, mostly in the remote southern desert. The fis reported that the actual number of persons detained or arrested was far higher.

The detention process afforded almost no due-process rights. Detainees were not informed of the reasons for their detention, the length of the detention order, or the criteria for determining when they would be released.

While not exhaustive in scope-some known fis activists remained free-the round-ups were clearly arbitrary and indiscriminate actions, calculated to incapacitate the fis around the country, without regard to an individual's complicity in illegal acts. Many contended that their only offense was to have supported a political party that was legal until February.

Those detained ranged from prominent activists who had been elected to parliament or local government posts, to suspected sympathizers who were rounded up in the streets apparently on the basis of their appearance (many Islamists wear beards and loose-fitting white tunics). The vast majority had no prior police record and, following their detention, were never charged or brought to trial.

An appeals process, which began operating in June, allowed detainees to petition newly created government-appointed panels for their release. But the petitioners remained unaware of the specific accusations against them and the criteria employed by the panels. As of June 20, the Ministry of Interior stated, 1,024 of 2,563 petitions had been successful while 1,539 remained under study; however, it is not known what role, if any, the appeals were playing in decisions to release detainees.

Throughout the spring and summer, government officials declared their eagerness to close the camps, claiming that all detainees implicated in serious offenses would soon be brought to trial and the rest freed. However, only a tiny fraction were formally charged and brought to trial, and it was not until September and October that the bulk of the remainder was freed. As of late October, the number still in detention camps had declined to about 1,600.

Among the detainees' grievances, the material conditions in the camps were secondary to the fact that they were being held without charge, due process, or any idea of when they would be freed. Those interviewed by Middle East Watch described conditions that were austere and difficult but not deliberately harsh or humiliating. Most were housed in huge tent camps surrounded by barbed wire, within which they were allowed to do as they liked. Authorities provided minimally adequate food, clothing, bedding, and sanitary facilities, but did not furnish "nonessential" items such as reading and writing materials. They often released detainees by dumping them in a nearby town without money or a ticket for the long journey north.

The harsh weather and difficulty of family visits imposed great hardship on detainees housed in the southernmost camps. Promises by officials to move detainees north before the summer were only partially realized: Reggane, the largest camp, was not closed until August, while some of the other camps in the deep south remained open all summer, despite average daytime temperatures exceeding 110 degrees Fahrenheit (43 centigrade).

Although physical mistreatment by the guards was rare in these army-run camps, many Islamists were tortured or abused in the police stations to which they were first taken after their arrest. Middle East Watch gathered testimony from several Islamists who were arrested in February and March and tortured by interrogators in the basements of the Algiers central police station and the station on rue Cavaignac, and at the Cit 5 Juillet Gendarmerie (National Police station) in the Algiers suburb of Bab Ezzouar.

The suspects who were abused were commonly tied to a table or pillar and then beaten severely or made to choke when a wet cloth was placed tightly over their faces. During this abuse, interrogators demanded information from the suspects about arms caches and their contacts in the Islamist movement.

On November 4, the independent Algerian League for the Defense of Human Rights issued a communiqu charging that "torture has reappeared in Algeria." Referring to "consistent reports, documented and credible testimony," the League made clear the evidence "pointed not to isolated abuses but to a widespread and systematic practice."

The torture victims whom Middle East Watch interviewed had been released without charge after their interrogation. It was not possible to verify allegations that harsher abuse was being inflicted on Islamists detained in what were judged to be more serious cases. Those suspects were all still in prison and thus inaccessible at the time of Middle East Watch's visit in June. The government acknowledges that torture was practiced widely during the 1988 disturbances, but claims that it has since been eliminated. Then-Minister of Interior Larbi Belkheir told Middle East Watch on June 16 that no security officer had been punished for acts of torture during the year, because no complaints had been received.

While much government criticism is tolerated in the press and public fora, the parameters of free expression have narrowed since June 1991, both for Islamists and others. Scores of preachers have been tried and sentenced for delivering sermons deemed inciting or defamatory toward state institutions, and hundreds, if not thousands, of fis sympathizers have been convicted for attending "illegal" gatherings, or distributing or possessing "subversive" tracts. Simply characterizing the regime as a "junta" or as "illegitimate" has led to the prosecution of many preachers.

Since February, the government occasionally refused to permit two non-Islamist opposition parties, the Socialist Forces Front and the Workers Party (PT), to hold public meetings. It has also broken up some, but not all, of the small demonstrations staged by families of the men detained in the camps. One PT activist was jailed for three months for distributing anti-government leaflets, and in a highly unusual measure, another was banished indefinitely in May by administrative order from three provinces, including the one where he and his family resides.

Algeria's independent press, until 1991 the freest in North Africa, has lost much ground. With continued government control of the major printing presses, distribution networks, and advertising budgets, editors cannot afford to ignore repeated threats by ministers to punish newspapers that "destabilize" the country. The press has also been intimidated by the arrest of some 20 journalists during the year for reporting deemed objectionable, and the suspension since August of four national dailies and four weeklies. The dailies, none of which are Islamist organs, were permitted to resume publishing in October.

The common pretext for the suspensions and arrests is the publication of information that "defames state institutions," "undermines state security," or "undermines the stability of the state." Although most of the arrested journalists were released after one or two days, four-month prison sentences were handed to a columnist and an editor at ech-Chorouk al-Arabi in July for ridiculing the regime. They have appealed the sentence.

Meanwhile, the government-controlled broadcast media retreated from its relative openness toward opposition voices, prompting seven opposition parties to decry state "monopolization" of the media in June. Foreign correspondents came under growing pressure. On January 25, authorities expelled four reporters from Spain who were arrested while interviewing fis supporters in the street. In May, the Algiers-based correspondent of Le Monde was ordered to leave. Visiting correspondents often waited for months to obtain entry visas.

The quality of the justice system eroded during 1992. Islamists who should have been tried by ordinary courts, if at all, were judged by military tribunals that provide fewer safeguards for a fair trial. Unlike the ordinary courts, military tribunals have no members of the public sitting as the jury, and two of the three members of the panel are military personnel appointed by the minister of defense.

One example of a case that did not belong before a military court was that of journalist Djamel Fahassi. Fahassi had been arrested shortly after he published a scathing article in a fis newspaper about an army raid on a neighborhood in suburban Algiers. On January 1, 1992, after he had already spent five months in jail, the Blida military court handed Fahassi a one-yearsuspended sentence on charges emanating from the article.

Six months later, the same court convicted fis leaders Abbasi Madani and Ali Belhadj in the most closely watched trial in Algeria since the political opening of 1988-1989. The trial was marred by irregularities, including the decision to bar virtually all international observers and journalists from attending the proceedings. Their exclusion prompted a boycott by the defendants and their lawyers, who also objected to the trial of civilian defendants before a military court.

The trial proceeded in the absence of the defendants and their counsel and ended with the imposition of 12-year sentences on Madani and Belhadj for conspiring against state authority, harming the economy, and distributing seditious tracts. Five colleagues received shorter sentences. However, the court acquitted the defendants of all charges that linked them directly to acts of violence.

Violence took an enormous toll in Algeria throughout the year. During January and February, soldiers and policemen opened fire on pro-Islamist demonstrations, causing dozens of deaths that probably could have been avoided had they resorted to other means of dispersing crowds.

As the large-scale confrontations tapered off, there was a surge in attacks on police and acts of sabotage by armed cells. The government has attributed the violence to Islamist extremists.

In disarray from the banning of the party and the jailing or flight of its leadership, the fis has neither claimed responsibility for the attacks nor denounced them in unequivocal terms. It denied involvement in the assassination of President Boudiaf, as well as in the bomb explosion at the Algiers airport that killed nine on August 26. It continued to deny responsibility after the government presented four fis members on television who admitted to masterminding the attack, including a former top aide to Madani. These televised confessions were condemned by the Algerian League for the Defense of Human Rights as a violation of the rule of law.

The fis position on the use of political violence is nebulous but certainly not hostile. Underground publications close to the party, such as the Minbar al-Djoumoua, reported favorably on the attacks on security forces and the capture of weapons by Islamist groups. They also carried warnings to those who tried to suppress the movement. In August, Minbar al-Djoumoua cautioned a television journalist that her negative reporting on the Islamist rebels could put her in danger. Anonymous death threats were received by government appointees who had replaced the dissolved fis-controlled local governments, and at least two were assassinated by unknown assailants in separate incidents in August.

The Right to Monitor

Two general human rights groups and many women's rights groups operate openly in Algeria. The outspoken Algerian League for the Defense of Human Rights, with its scathing denunciations of Algeria's "concentration camps," torture and emergency laws, has been largely ignored by the government-influenced press, but has experienced little harassment.

In March, the government announced the creation of a nominally independent National Observatory for Human Rights,

charged with "sensitiz[ing] public opinion to the question of human rights and [undertaking] actions when abuses of these rights are reported or brought to its attention." Since then, the Observatory has urged the release of all administrative detainees and, in the meantime, improvements in their living conditions. However, the Observatory's tone has remained protective toward the government, sometimes embarrassingly so. When Amnesty International criticized human right abuses in Algeria, the president of the Observatory led the counterattack in the local press, endorsing the charge made by another Algerian that "Zionist pressure groups that are powerful in the [media] sector are free to orient the work of Amnesty to their liking."

During 1992 the government authorized missions by Middle East Watch and Amnesty International. But Middle East Watch's repeated requests to visit places of detention were denied by the government. Access was granted to the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc), but the icrc suspended its visits when the government did not meet the icrc's standard stipulation thatprison visits be repeated on a regular basis.

U.S. Policy

U.S.-Algerian relations have been thawing in recent years, due in part to Algeria's helpful role in regional diplomacy and its growing interest in economic investment from the West. However, U.S. aid to Algeria is limited to an annual $150,000 grant for military training.

When the fis was robbed of its election victory in January, the Bush administration quickly showed that it preferred the military-dominated junta that had seized power to a democratic process that would have yielded a parliamentary majority for the Islamist fis.

The State Department declined to criticize the cancellation of the elections. On January 13, spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler would only express hope that "a way can be found to resume progress [toward democracy] as soon as possible." She urged all parties "to find a peaceful resolution in accordance with the Algerian constitution," an allusion to the situation created by President Benjedid's resignation. Similarly bland comments were made on February 6 by Secretary of State James Baker before the House Foreign Affairs Committee; on February 10 and 14 by Department Spokesman Richard Boucher, following the imposition of the state of emergency; and by Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Edward Djerejian on June 30, following the assassination of acting President Boudiaf.

Tacit support for the regime's actions in January made the United States, along with France and other Western governments, appear less concerned with the implementation of democracy than with the preservation of pro-Western political elites. The Bush administration could have done much to refute this accusation had it shown concern over the regime's committing massive human rights abuses and its failure to present a new electoral timetable.

However, the U.S. administration appeared willing to remain silent on whatever the Algerian government did in the name of combatting Islamist terrorism. It has said nothing publicly about the internment of thousands of Islamists without charge, or about the increasingly draconian emergency laws.

However, when an underground Islamist publication called for armed struggle in April, State Department spokeswoman Tutwiler was quick to express disapproval. Such concern for Islamist violence is entirely appropriate, but it should be accompanied by criticism of abuses perpetrated by the government. The key to the U.S. reticence in this regard may have been revealed in a June 2 speech by Secretary Djerejian. Stating that the U.S. had no quarrel with political Islam per se, he warned:

    We are suspect of those who would use the democratic process to come to power, only to destroy that very process in order to retain power and political dominance. While we believe in the principle of 'one person, one vote,' we do not support 'one person, one vote, one time.'

Djerejian's phrasing and U.S. policy indicate that the fis is viewed in this light. Middle East Watch believes that concerns over the fis agenda should not be used to excuse the government's systematic violation of rights and its failure to provide a timetable for the resumption of the democratic process. After all, the Algerian government's 30-year record on elections is hardly any better than what is feared from the fis.

The Work of Middle East Watch

In February, Middle East Watch issued a report on human rights since the cancellation of the elections. The report criticized positions of the fis that suggested hostility toward the principles of multiparty democracy and equal rights for women. However, Middle East Watch argued that the available evidence that the seating of a fis parliamentary majority would entail grave human rights violations was not sufficient to justify such a massive assault on human rights as the cancellation of relatively free elections and all of the abuses that followed.

In June, Middle East Watch undertook a four-week mission to Algeria. The delegation met with dozens of Islamist and non-Islamist critics of the government. Some Islamists were too afraid to meet with delegation, and mostof those who did expressed fear of government retribution if their names were published.

Middle East Watch's fact-finding was impeded by the detention and interrogation of one of its researchers by agents of military security in Constantine, and by the temporary confiscation of his notes. In a meeting with the delegation two days later, the Minister of Interior apologized for the incident.

A report on human rights since the declaration of the state of emergency will be issued in late 1992. A second report, on gender discrimination in Algeria's Family Code, is being prepared jointly with the Women's Rights Project of Human Rights Watch.

In July, Middle East Watch sent a letter of condolence to the government after the assassination of acting President Mohamed Boudiaf.
EGYPT

Human Rights Developments

Egypt has been governed under emergency or exceptional law for most of the past 50 years and continuously since President Anwar Sadat's assassination in October 1981. In May 1991, emergency law was extended for three more years. One legacy of long-term exceptional law has been the institutionalization of the power of security forces to arrest and detain arbitrarily. Coupled with the longstanding practice of incommunicado detention, this situation has given rise to the systematic use of torture by security forces, often against blindfolded political suspects. The continued use of torture, including but not limited to electric shocks, and the refusal of the government of President Hosni Mubarak to acknowledge the problem, makes a mockery of the government's 1992 vow to the U.N. Human Rights Committee that "Egypt has been among the most active members of the international community diligently seeking to promote the principles of human rights and ensure that they are enjoyed by all the peoples of the world."

Nineteen ninety-two was the most violent year in Egypt since the 1981 assassination of President Anwar Sadat. Armed underground groups seeking to establish an Islamic state, most notably al-Jama`a al-Islamiya (the Islamic Group), have attacked tourists, killed policemen and security officials, gunned down Coptic Christians and, in June, assassinated a controversial Muslim writer who advocated secularism. The killings of 13 Christians in May in a village in Upper Egypt was the first sectarian massacre in Egypt since the turn of the century, according to the Cairo-based Egyptian Organization for Human Rights (eohr).

A September 1992 eohr report noted that since 1990 victims felled by radical Islamist groups' violence, including policemen and security officials, had increased dramatically. Between December 1991 and June 1992, 27 people were shot or stabbed to death by members of extremist groups. Of this total, 24 were killed by the Islamic Group, including 18 Christians.

In the same report, eohr noted that Egyptian security forces also use excessive force, and possibly summary executions, in confrontations with armed radical Islamists or suspected Islamists whom they seek to apprehend. In the early morning hours of December 25, 1991, three suspected members of the Islamic Group-Taha Lutfi al-Junaidi, Azz-al-Din al-Ashqar and Eid al-Shabrawi-were killed by security forces in a small apartment in Bassarta village, near Domyat on the Mediterranean coast. Prosecutors who investigated found that two of the men had been shot in the back, and the third was shot in the back and the front. Some considered the killings retaliation for the attempted assassination on December 19 of a security forces' officer by the Islamic Group.

The government's response to the upsurge in violence by Islamist groups was a huge deployment of security forces in areas of the country that are their strongholds, massive search and arrest operations, controversial new "anti-terrorism" legislation enacted in July, and a wave of human rights abuses affecting not only suspected Islamists but also ordinary citizens. eohr reported that from the last week of June through September, in the Dayrut area of Upper Egypt, "houses are being searched without a warrant from theprosecution, the doors and furniture of houses are being smashed, and their residents occasionally beaten."

Torture is systematically used during the interrogation of political suspects while they are held incommunicado in the custody of State Security Investigation (SSI), the Ministry of Interior's elite internal-security unit. Abuse occurred in SSI offices and, in the Assyut area of Upper Egypt, in military camps of the Central Security Forces. The overwhelming majority of victims in 1992 were alleged members or supporters of Islamist groups, and those believed to have information about the whereabouts of militants in hiding. Contrary to extensive, reliable evidence, the government continued to deny flatly that torture takes place on a systematic basis or that SSI holds detainees incommunicado.

The Interior Ministry also uses its broad powers under the emergency law to hold political suspects, mostly Islamists, in long-term detention without charge or trial, despite court-ordered releases. Some of these detainees have been held continuously since 1990, although courts have repeatedly overturned the Interior Ministry's detention orders. Among those detained are Palestinians at Abu Za`bal Liman prison, including residents of the Israeli-occupied territories who entered Egypt seeking asylum because their names were on Israeli security forces' "wanted" lists and they feared being killed in the course of their arrest (see chapter on Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza).

New "anti-terrorism" legislation enacted in July includes provisions that will only exacerbate these problems. It provides for incommunicado detention for up to 11 days without access to a lawyer or judicial supervision, and preventive detention for up to six months without any judicial review. Egyptian human rights advocates believe, and Middle East Watch concurs, that both measures legalize the continued use of past abusive practices. Human rights violations committed by the state are often cited by Islamist radicals in an attempt-however unjustified under domestic and international law-to defend their own violent activities and to garner public support. In June, the alleged commander of the military wing of the underground Jihad organization, Safwat Abdel Ghani, was asked by a reporter with the weekly al-Ahali whether he had threatened to assassinate President Mubarak, other senior government officials and Egyptian writers. He replied: "Yes. Because they torture and humiliate us in prison and the interior minister liquidates our organization's members. The ruler's violence is being reciprocated by `fiercer violence' on our part." In an interview the following month, a leader of the Islamic Group in Assyut said: "Terrorism is practiced by the state. It kills, incarcerates, raids mosques, and denies us jobs. What we are doing is reacting to the state's terrorism. Violence only breeds violence." Following an attack on a tourist bus near Assyut on October 21 in which a British woman was killed, an Islamic Group spokesman told a Cairo news agency that the organization claimed responsibility, noting: "These disturbances will not stop unless the regime stops repeated detentions, frees all detainees immediately, stops torture and allows the call to God to resume."

Middle East Watch condemns this violence by Islamic groups. Even in the situation of armed conflict, international humanitarian law makes clear that violations by one side cannot justify abuses by another. No lesser standard should apply in the situation of internal strife in Egypt. However, that radical Islamic groups are able to cite government abuses to provide a rhetorical veneer of legitimacy to their own violent attacks underscores the counterproductive nature of the government's response. Official efforts to restore the rule of law by systematically flouting it are bound to fail.

In an interview in May 1992, Egypt's Interior Minister, General Abdel Halim Moussa, declared: "We are a democratic state that believes in dialogue, opinion, and debate." Despite his affirmation, the government has curbed freedom of expression and association and reinforced both political and religious intolerance, often with deadly results.

Actions by various Egyptian government authorities have had the effect of legitimizing such intolerance by singling out secularists-particularly writers-for punitive action, restricting their activities, and making them easy targets for propagandistic and physical attack. A week before the June assassination of Dr. Faraj Fouda-the outspoken Muslim writer who championedsecularism and wrote scathing attacks against Islamist radicals-a seminar of Islamic scholars from Cairo's prestigious al-Azhar issued a statement describing him as the follower of a non-religious trend at odds with Islam. Al-Azhar is a 1,000-year-old religious, educational and research institution that is regulated and subsidized by the government. After Fouda was gunned down by assassins in Cairo on June 8, the Islamic Group claimed responsibility. Its militants shamelessly defended the killing with references to the Azhar scholars' statement about Fouda. An Islamic Group leader in Assyut stated in a July interview with the Beirut newspaper al-Safir that the group was committed to "popular Islamic revolution." He readily admitted that the organization used violence and was "responsible for the assassination of a number of policemen and state officials, foremost of whom was former People's Assembly speaker Rif'at al-Mahjoub," who was assassinated in October 1990. Justifying Fouda's murder, he said: "He was killed in accordance with the shari`a ruling against apostates. A group of Muslim ulema [scholars], including al-Azhar mosque scholars, ruled that he reneged on Islam....Killing Faraj Fouda was our Islamic duty."

This was the first time that an Egyptian writer had been killed by Islamist militants, and the incident sent shock waves through Egypt's intellectual community, some prominent members of which were put under around-the-clock armed guard by the Ministry of Interior. The assassination also had a chilling effect on public discourse, as some intellectuals avoided opportunities to discuss the Islamist challenge to secular society.

Through its Islamic Research Academy (ira), which has the legal right to review copies of the Holy Quran for the purpose of conformity to the authentic historic text, al-Azhar has acted against books not to its liking. On January 7, at the Cairo International Book Fair, a self-appointed committee from the ira confiscated five books by Judge Said al-Ashmawi, a prominent Islamic scholar and writer. Four days later, the committee confiscated two additional books by other authors. All seven books had been previously published in Egypt, and some of them had been reprinted several times.

The Arab Women's Solidarity Association (awsa), headed by writer and women's rights advocate Dr. Nawal el-Saadawi and legally registered with the government in 1985, was ordered dissolved in a decree dated June 15, 1991. In May 1992, Egypt's State Council Court upheld the order, ruling in part that awsa's activities "threatened the peace and political and social order of the state by spreading ideas and beliefs offensive to the rule of Islamic shari`a and the religion of Islam, a matter which forms a substantial violation of the law." El-Saadawi was one of the Egyptian intellectuals placed under armed guard by the government in the wake of the Fouda assassination.

Like el-Saadawi, novelist Alaa Hamed is under armed guard at his Cairo home to protect him against possible attack by Islamist extremists. In December 1991, Hamed was sentenced to an eight-year prison term by a state security court because his novel, A Distance in a Man's Mind, was found to have threatened "national unity" and "social peace" through the dissemination of "extremist ideas," including heresy and contempt of religion. Muhammed Madbouli, the publisher of the book, and Fathi Fadl, it printer, were similarly sentenced. All three men are awaiting ratification of the court's sentence by Egypt's prime minister.

Communal strife in 1992 often had a cyclical character, as abuse by one side triggered retaliatory abuse by the other. On June 19, in the town of Sanabu-located near Dayrut in Upper Egypt-two Islamists were killed in a shoot-out with the police. According to Agence France-Presse, the incident began when police "opened fire to disperse around 200 fundamentalists in Sanabu village...after the crowd tried to attack houses and shops belonging to Coptic Christians." The next day, the Islamists responded with four separate attacks that left four Christians and three policemen dead.

But there was also evidence to suggest that Islamists' violence against Christians was ignored by some local authorities. This passivity increased the sense of vulnerability and fear among Egypt's six to eight million-strong Christian minority. The events leading up to the May 4 massacre in the village of Manshiet Nasser, near Dayrut in Upper Egypt, are illustrative. As one villager told The New York Times after the massacre: "People are terrified. The Muslim militants do what they want in our villages and the Government doesnothing to stop them."

An investigation by eohr prior to the massacre documented a reign of terror in Manshiet Nasser carried out by The Islamic Group. All commercial transactions by Christians, including the sale of property, had to be approved by the organization, and Christians were forced to pay a tax (jizia) to the Group for each transaction. Christian residents were prohibited from public celebration of religious rituals and social events, such as weddings. They also were forbidden to play religious tapes in their homes if the sound carried outdoors. Repairs to the village church were not allowed to continue, and workers were attacked. Edicts of the Islamic Group were backed up by force; those who did not comply were punished with the breaking of their two legs and right arm.

A member of the Islamic Group was killed on March 9 in a dispute that reportedly escalated into exchanges of gunfire after a Christian farmer, who had refused to sell land to a member of the organization, was attacked with chains and clubs. Following the incident, which also took the lives of one Christian and a Muslim bystander, The Islamic Group named four Christians it would kill to avenge its member's death. The first person on the list, Badr Abdallah Massoud, was shot dead on April 14. The group also ordered that all Christian men in the village remain in their homes. The Christian residents appealed to the authorities for help in lifting this edict, sending telegrams and letters to the Interior Minister and the provincial governor as well as to local officials in nearby cities. eohr wrote three times to the authorities about the situation; a letter hand-delivered to the Ministry of the Interior on April 18 noted "the laxity of the local security bodies in performing their duty to protect citizens and forestall the possible eruption of new waves of sectarian violence." Nothing was done.

On the morning of May 4, members of the Islamic Group killed 12 Christians: ten farmers in their fields, a teacher in his classroom, and a doctor at his home. A Christian child injured by gunfire in the fields died the next day. One Muslim was also killed by a stray bullet.

The Egyptian authorities are accountable for their apparent lack of readiness to uphold the rule of law in an even-handed fashion to protect the lives of a beleaguered minority. But Interior Minister Moussa downplayed the massacre and ignored its context, including the security authorities' own complicity in permitting a pattern of illegal, often-violent actions to go unchecked. In an interview with al-Musawwar published on May 22, the Interior Minister described the events as "nothing more than a feud over a house between two families (one Muslim, the other Christian) that was exploited by known extremist elements belonging to the family that initiated the incident. Some extremist elements from one of the families tried to give the feud a sectarian dimension." Islamist militants characterized the rampage similarly. "We are not killing Christians," one Islamic Group leader told al-Safir. "Some Christians were killed by the public in vendetta actions, something that is a common practice in Upper Egypt."

The Right to Monitor

The Mubarak government's record toward local and international human rights groups was mixed in 1992. The independent eohr is permitted to operate freely from its Cairo office, but the group lacks official legal status because its request for registration with the Ministry of Social Affairs has been denied. This pretext is used effectively to bar eohr from developing a working relationship with the authorities, despite the organization's high profile with foreign diplomats and the international human rights community. eohr's numerous written complaints about specific human rights problems sent to Egyptian government officials are routinely ignored. Only in extremely rare cases has the Ministry of Interior or the Prosecutor General's office acknowledged an eohr letter.

The government does not interfere with the work of international human rights organizations who conduct fact-finding in Egypt, and high-ranking officials have met with these organizations' representatives. But, as in the case of eohr, Middle East Watch's letters to senior government officials about specific human rights cases are consistently ignored. In 1991, and again in 1992, Middle East Watch never received a reply to a letter concerning anindividual case.

In an important breakthrough, in February 1992 the government invited Middle East Watch to inspect Egyptian prisons of its choice, pursuant to a request first made in 1990. It provided full cooperation in facilitating visits to six prisons that month. However, local human rights monitors continue to be denied permission to inspect prisons. Middle East Watch's request to include Egyptian lawyers and human rights advocates in its prison visits was refused by the authorities.

U.S. Policy

The poor human rights record of Egypt, the closest U.S. regional ally after Israel, has persistently escaped close scrutiny by administration policymakers and members of Congress, despite the $2.26 billion in assistance annually given by the U.S. government and the December 1990 cancellation of $6.7 billion of Egypt's military debt. In remarks on June 24 before the House Subcommittee on Europe and the Middle East, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Edward Djerejian hailed the Mubarak government's "active role in the [Middle East] peace process" and its "vigorous and healthy" bilateral relationship with the United States, but made no mention of human rights abuses in Egypt. Continued public silence by senior administration officials is increasingly indefensible, particularly given the State Department's own frank and largely negative assessment of human rights practices in Egypt in its Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in 1991, issued in January 1992.

The Bush Administration's fiscal year 1993 request for aid to Egypt is at the same level as its fiscal year 1992 assistance: $1.3 billion from the Foreign Military Financing program; $1.8 million in International Military Education and Training program funds; $815 million in Economic Support Funds; and $150 million in food assistance. As in past years, no strings are attached to Egypt's receipt of security assistance, despite a proven pattern of torture and long-term detention without charge or trial: two gross human-rights violations that under U.S. law should trigger either a cutoff of aid or an explanation of the "extraordinary circumstances" that warrant its continuation.

The Work of Middle East Watch

In 1992, Middle East Watch's work on Egypt focused on the investigation of torture and long-term detention without charge or trial; prison conditions; and restrictions on freedom of association. In January and February, a Middle East Watch delegation visited Egypt to investigate torture and detention without charge, traveling to six cities around the country. Senior government officials-the Interior Minister, the Prosecutor General and the director of the Prisons Administration-met with members of the delegation in February. A 219-page report on the mission's findings, Behind Closed Doors: Torture and Detention in Egypt, was publicly released at a press conference in Cairo in July. The report provided detailed documentation of torture and long-term detention without charge, and identified systematic deficiencies in the authorities' investigation of torture complaints. It also provided specific recommendations for addressing the problem of torture, and for establishing mechanisms and procedures to ensure accountability in cases of abuse. The report received extensive press coverage.

In contrast to the cooperation received earlier, no senior official was available to meet with Middle East Watch representatives in Cairo to discuss the report's conclusions and recommendations. However, the delegation did meet with U.S. Ambassador Robert Pelletreau as well as diplomatic representatives from the European Community.

While the February mission was in progress, Egyptian government officials informed Middle East Watch that its representatives could visit any prison they wished. The delegation accepted the invitation and inspected six prisons that then housed over 27 percent of Egypt's prison population; these included two maximum-security prisons and two prisons that held 1,100 of the country's 1,441 women prisoners. A separate report on prison conditions in Egypt will be published in January 1993.

Middle East Watch also continued to monitor developments in an importantcase involving freedom of association in Egypt: the government's closure in 1991 of awsa, described above. Middle East Watch issued two newsletters about developments in the case, one in December 1991 and the other in June 1992, and joined with the Women's Rights Project of Human Rights Watch to publicize awsa's plight widely.

In September, Middle East Watch testified about human rights abuses in Egypt before the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Europe and the Middle East and the Subcommittee on International Organizations.
IRAN

Human Rights Developments

In 1992, Iran retained its unenviable reputation for having one of the worst human rights records in the region. Controls on freedom of expression and association, already tightly circumscribed, were further restricted. Politically motivated arrests and, in several recorded cases, executions continued. Discrimination against women, institutionalized in the fields of employment, education and travel and before the law, was sharpened with a resurgent harassment of women in public places on grounds of dress and appearance.

The first two years after Ayatollah Rouhollah Khomeini's death, in mid-1989, roughly coinciding with the presidency of Hojatulislam Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, were marked by the gradual liberalization of social and economic controls. Hopes grew of a more tolerant society, reflecting Iran's multi-ethnic populace and traditions of diversity. Statements by Ayatollah Mohammed Yazdi, head of the judiciary, and other judicial officials of the need to respect norms of fair trials, including the mandatory presence of defense lawyers, encouraged a sense that greater emphasis was being given to the rule of law.

These aspirations were encapsulated in a promise made by Ayatollah Yazdi in early 1992:

[I]n the Islamic Republic no one will be prosecuted because of his or her belief.... Courts of justice and judiciary branches have been notified that all press and political trials must be held in the presence of juries and attorneys. Otherwise, the verdicts will be nullified by the Supreme Court.

For many Iranians, hopes that living conditions would improve and arbitrary governmental interference with their lives would decrease were focused on elections to the Islamic Majlis, or parliament, planned for the spring of 1992. While the Majlis has been a lively debating forum, reflecting often sharply contrasting views among the clergy and their followers, it was a stronghold of the radical opposition to President Rafsanjani's more pragmatic policies, his quiet abandonment of revolutionary values and goals, and his gradual opening of Iran to the West. Rafsanjani's followers made clear in advance that they intended to engineer a majority in the 267-seat Majlis, by controlling the process of selecting candidates to compete in the elections. Hundreds of candidates were disqualified on political grounds disguised as their lack of suitable religious credentials.

A month-long campaign, involving over a thousand candidates enthusiastically competing for popular support, preceded two rounds of polling, in April and May. The results, as predicted, gave the president a two-thirds majority in parliament. The expectation, though, that Rafsanjani would use his new-found political strength to confront his domestic opponents in ways that would enhance respect for basic human rights norms were dashed. In the succeeding months, as economic unrest and discontent over high-handed government policies mounted, the rights climate worsened sharply.

Commencing in April, mass anti-government demonstrations swept numerous cities throughout Iran, including Tehran, Shiraz, Arak, Mashad and Bukan. Government buildings were set on fire; pictures of Khomeini, Rafsanjani and Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran's spiritual leader, were pulled down; copies of the Koran were reportedly destroyed; and stores were looted. The officialtally set the number executed in response to the unrest at eight, and the number arrested and sentenced to prison terms of up to ten years in the hundreds.

The Islamic government whose rise to power gained momentum from its pledge to protect the "dispossessed" of the Pahlavi monarchy is now beset by the discontent and unrest of the poor. In Shiraz, the demonstrations were triggered by 300 disabled veterans of the Iran-Iraq war protesting the mismanagement of funds by the state-run Foundation of the Oppressed and War Veterans, as well as high prices. In other cities, demonstrations crystallized in opposition to the government's systemic demolition of squatter dwellings built in violation of regulations. Illegal residential units have mushroomed in the outskirts of cities to meet the housing needs of an unprecedented mass movement to the cities. While most of the disturbances occurred spontaneously, there were hints of organized action in Mashad, site of the largest anti-government demonstration since the 1979 revolution.

In response to the unrest, the authorities took an unabashed hard line, reinstituting ad-hoc "revolutionary courts" that dispensed summary justice and revitalizing local komitehs, often self-appointed watchdogs of "revolutionary and Islamic values." Ayatollah Yazdi stated on June 1, 1992:

Any resort to sabotage-even if aimed at obtaining one's lawful rights-is tantamount to lawbreaking and confronting the sovereignty of the system. The Judiciary will deal with such actions quickly and decisively.

The government's campaign against "social vice," emphasized in speeches by Ayatollah Khamenei among others, once again found as its most natural target the Iranian woman and her wardrobe. The renewed concern and fervor surrounding the infiltration of Western values led to more stringent standards for hejab-the Islamic dress code. Women are required to cover every strand of hair, refrain from applying makeup, and wear loose, sober-colored garments that obscure the shape of the body.

Police vice units resumed their patrol of city streets in search of improper hejab, bringing an end to the relatively relaxed dress standards that began to take hold in 1991. The summer of 1992 brought news of the stopping and arrest of many hundreds of women for violating hejab in cities throughout Iran. In Tehran alone, hundreds were arrested. Violations can yield imprisonment, flogging or a heavy fine. Demonstrators objecting to the dress codes clashed with the Islamic security forces in Isfahan, Iran's second city, leading to numerous arrests. Isfahan had been the scene of similar clashes, and arrests, in 1991 as well.

The second prong of the government's campaign against "social vice" and Western-inspired thoughts was the mass media. In June, the Minister of Culture and Islamic Guidance, Mohammad Khatami, resigned under pressure from hardliners for his liberal policies on art and the press, and was replaced by Ali Larijani, a more religious official. Before and after Khatami's resignation, a number of newly established and popular independent publications were closed or destroyed, and their staff and contributors arrested. Among the magazines and newspapers banned in 1992 were Gardoon, Farad, Arman and Donyayeh Sokhan. Writers such as Said Sirjani, Shahnoush Parsipour and Taqi Moddaressi were also subject to government censorship and, in some instances, imprisonment. Salam Heidari, a reporter for the radical newspapers Salam and Abrar, was arrested in early July on charges of espionage and contact with a European embassy. Although his case was sent to a revolutionary court, the exact nature of the charges against him was not clear.

In October 1991, the government repealed a law requiring approval by the Guidance Ministry before any publication could be issued or work of art put on public display. However, excluded from the constitutional guarantee of free expression is any statement made against Islam, the political concept of velayat-e faqih (rule by the clergy) or public policy. These strictures have served as the means to enforce strict government control and censorship over the media.

After abating in 1990 and 1991, abusive policies were again on the rise.At home, the trend was reflected in the stricter enforcement of "revolutionary" values, as enunciated by the late Ayatollah Khomeini and maintained by some top officials, notably Ayatollah Khamenei. Abroad, the litmus tests of revolutionary zeal, as before, were the assassination of opponents and the defense of Khomeini's fatwa against Salman Rushdie.

The religious death sentence against the British writer, as well as others in the publishing industry worldwide associated with his book, Satanic Verses, was reconfirmed on several occasions during 1992, by different Iranian institutions. Religious leaders, the newly elected parliament, and the Fifteenth of Khordad Foundation, which had offered a $2 million bounty to Rushdie's would-be assassin, all stated that there was no change in the verdict delivered by Khomeini in 1989. Just before the U.S. presidential election, on November 2, the Foundation provocatively announced that the bounty had been raised further, by an unspecified sum. There was no attempt by the Rafsanjani government to denounce these moves, or even to distance itself from them.

Compared with the immediate post-revolutionary era, persecution of Baha'is, members of a religious sect regarded by mainstream Shi'a Muslims as an apostasy, has significantly abated. Nevertheless, it remains a constant in government policies. The largest religious minority group in Iran, numbering approximately 300,000, Baha'is are not afforded official recognition, and enjoy no constitutional rights. They are denied the right to organize, profess or practice their religion. Discrimination in the form of restricted access to exit visas, university education, pensions, employment, public services and business licenses is commonplace.

The vulnerability of the Baha'i community was underscored in 1992 as the specter rose of escalating persecution, as a means of placating fundamentalist factions within the government. Bahman Samandari, a well-known leader of the community, was summoned to Evin Prison, in Tehran, on March 17 on the pretext of signing certain documents. He was summarily executed the following day-the first Baha'i executed since 1988. No formal charges were brought against Samandari, nor was any public statement issued attesting to his execution.

In September 1992, the National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of the United States reported the eviction from their homes of 24 Baha'i families, and the confiscation of their property, by officials acting on orders of Islamic courts in Tehran, Yazd and Isfahan. The victims were not prominent community members.

The persecution of evangelical Christians, particularly those who proselytize or have themselves converted from Islam, showed no signs of abating in 1992. According to Iranian Christians International, a U.S.-based organization that monitors the treatment of Christians, ten of the 15 pastors of local churches affiliated to the Assemblies of God have been imprisoned at one time or another. The Reverend Mehdi Dibaj, himself a convert from Islam, remained in jail eight years after his arrest; he has reportedly suffered torture and inhumane prison conditions. In June 1992, the pastor of the Presbyterian church in Tabriz, jailed for nine months in 1990 and 1991, was refused permission to leave the country.

As successive reports to the U.N. Human Rights Commission have attested, Iran has one of the highest rates of judicial executions in the world. In 1991, 884 executions were reported in the local media. But the true figure is likely to have been much higher as many executions in remote parts of the country, particularly in Kurdistan and Baluchistan, go unreported. Middle East Watch is disturbed at the frequency with which the death penalty is applied, particularly since it is often for offenses that are not of the gravest nature and after trials that appear to lack due process and do not give meaningful opportunities for appeal to higher courts, all in violation of international standards.

No accurate figures are available on executions in 1992, in part because the U.N. Special Rapporteur on Iran, Reynaldo Galindo-Pohl, has not been permitted to visit the country. But Iranian press reports indicated that the death penalty continued to be applied at a large scale, especially to political prisoners and alleged drug-traffickers. Members of the Kurdistan Democratic Party of Iran (kdp-i) and the People's Mojahedin Organization of Iran (pmoi), two opposition parties based in Iraq, are often executed fortheir political activities. The response of the Iranian government to both the kdp-i and pmoi violence against the Islamic state has usually been wholly indiscriminate, arresting and executing suspected members or supporters who were merely exercising their rights of peaceful expression and association.

The Iranian government, or else factions such as the Revolutionary Guards, have long been accused of dispatching death squads to Turkey, Iraq and Europe to assassinate enemies of the regime. Among recent victims were believed to be the Shah's last Prime Minister, Shapour Bakhtiar, killed in Paris on August 6, 1991, and Dr. Sadiq Sharifkandeh, head of the kdp-i, and two of his colleagues, murdered in Berlin on September 17, 1992. The German police arrested two Lebanese citizens for the Sharifkandeh murder. But U.S. officials told Middle East Watch they believed that the two were acting on behalf of Iran. Dr. Sharifkandeh's predecessor, Ahmed Qassemlou, assassinated in Vienna in 1989 while meeting secretly with Iranian officials, was killed by Iranian agents, according to the Austrian police.

In an unprecedented acknowledgement of responsibility, on September 6, Hojatoleslam Ali Fallahian, head of the Iranian intelligence service, confirmed the role of Iranian agents in the assassination of opposition members abroad. He was reported in the Iranian media as also stating that the activities of Iranian opposition movements inside and outside the country were closely monitored by these agents.

A disturbing sign that membership in non-violent opposition parties may also be deemed a capital offense was the reported execution in early September of a member of the Iranian Nation Party, a long-established, but small, political grouping. Ali Mohammad Kalantar, a student at Tehran University, was arrested and taken to the Komiteh Moshtarak prison in central Tehran, run by the Intelligence Ministry. According to party colleagues abroad, after undergoing torture, he was transferred to Evin Prison, where he was believed to have been executed. Colleagues were told to collect his belongings on September 7, the customary indication of an execution. But there was no notification of his death, nor was his body returned to his relatives.

During negotiations in February and April 1992 between representatives of the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc), Iran and Iraq, the two governments agreed to fulfil their obligation to repatriate remaining prisoners-of-war, before exchanging lists of all servicemen who died or are missing in action. Despite these pledges, the repatriation of over 20,000 Iraqi POWs, some of them held for over a decade, remained stalled. Within weeks of the start of prison visits by the icrc in early 1992, its office in Tehran was closed. The icrc delegates were expelled in March, on charges of subversive activity.

The Right to Monitor

Monitoring of human rights conditions inside Iran is not permitted by the authorities. A government-backed organization describing itself as a human rights body is exclusively concerned with combatting the propaganda of the opposition pmoi. Attempts in 1990 by small groups associated with former Prime Minister Mehdi Bazargan to organize a civil liberties lobby, the Association for the Defense of the Freedom and Sovereignty of the Iranian Nation, were broken up by the authorities, who arrested most of its leading members. Although Bazargan's Liberation Movement of Iran, a banned party, continues to circulate clandestine letters of protest about the government's exercise of arbitrary authority, since 1990 the domestic monitoring of rights conditions has effectively ceased.

In February 1992, Iran failed to persuade the U.N. Human Rights Commission to lift the scrutiny of its human rights record by a Special Rapporteur, Reynaldo Galindo-Pohl. This was a considerable setback to a multi-year diplomatic drive by Iran to convince the international community that it had reformed its abusive practices. Perhaps in consequence, the Rafsanjani government hardened its previously more cooperative attitude to monitoring by external organizations. A request by the U.N. for Galindo-Pohl to make his annual visit to Iran was lodged in June 1992. As of late November, no response had been received from Tehran; it may be that, as in 1991, the government intended to give its assent at the last possible moment, effectively restricting the U.N. representative's scope of work. Following his last visit,in December 1991, Galindo-Pohl issued an unexpectedly harsh critique of human rights conditions in Iran.

In similar fashion, Middle East Watch's longstanding request to conduct an investigative human rights mission in Iran has yet to be granted. Although the principle of such a mission has been accepted by Foreign Ministry officials, visas have never been approved for such a visit. An August 1992 request to interview refugees about human rights conditions among the Shi'a of southern Iraq was granted in late November.

Foreign organizations have been able to visit refugees living in Iran, but even in this context, restrictions are sometimes imposed. The New York-based Lawyers Committee for Human Rights was given permission to meet Afghan refugees in Iran in 1992, but told that its representatives could not travel to southern Iran to meet Iraqi refugees.

U.S. Policy

Publicly, the Bush administration remained firm in its refusal to contemplate closer relations with the Iranian government until it ceased its practice of supporting terrorism abroad and improved its human rights record at home. The administration also expressed growing concern in 1992 about Iran's major rearmament drive, including the acquisition of three modern submarines from Russia and reported attempts to develop a nuclear weapons capacity with Chinese and North Korean assistance. Concerned about the quantity and sophistication of so-called "dual-use" technology reaching Iran, in October the U.S. government mounted an effort among its allies to curb the flow of militarily useful equipment to Iran.

Western press reports indicate that, despite its hostile public stance, the Bush administration privately sent signals to the Rafsanjani government that it was ready for better relations. Administration officials indicated that it was Iran, rather than the U.S., that was holding up the restoration of diplomatic ties, broken at the time of the seizure of the U.S. Embassy in Tehran, in November 1979.

Driving the unspoken desire for warmer relations appeared to be increasing competition among major Western countries for a share of the Iranian market, together with evidence that Iran was restoring its oil production to pre-revolution levels. According to The Washington Post of November 7, U.S. companies have stepped up their purchases of Iranian oil to an annual rate of some $3.5 billion, making the U.S. one of Iran's largest customers. In addition, U.S. firms are taking part in the reconstruction of Iran's oil industry. Without any announcement, the U.S. trade embargo on Iran thus appears to have been softened significantly.

The State Department's annual International Narcotics Control Strategy Report, issued in March 1992, devoted much attention to the related problems of narcotics addiction and trafficking in Iran. It noted that "Iran has long been a significant conduit for the transhipment of illicit opiates produced in Afghanistan and Pakistan." Iranian nationals were said to be involved in drug trafficking in Turkey, Europe and elsewhere in the Middle East. The report touched briefly on a key human rights issue in Iran-the execution every year of hundreds of alleged drug traffickers and users.

In early November, the State Department announced that a U.S. citizen, Milton Meier, who ran a well known travel agency in Iran, had been arrested. The arrest was understood to have taken place at least two months earlier. Iranian press reports suggested that Meier was being held on charges of business irregularities. But consular access by Swiss diplomats, representing the U.S. government, was denied, and there were fears that his arrest was politically motivated. All Westerners previously being held in prison in Iran had been released by 1991, during the phase of quiet rapprochement with the West.

The Work of Middle East Watch

Middle East Watch was not able to conduct a long-sought, on-site investigation in Iran, following the government's continuing refusal to grant visas for this purpose. Monitoring from abroad focused on changes in conditions affecting freedom of expression, for a forthcoming report.

On November 27, following a request first made in July, the ForeignMinistry approved a mission to interview Iraqi refugees in Iran about human rights conditions inside Iraq. The mission will take place in early 1993.
IRAQ

Human Rights Developments in Government-Controlled Iraq

About 20 percent of Iraq's 19 million people spent 1992 outside the control of the central government, in the Western-protected Kurdish enclave. An additional, indeterminate number lived in the southern marshes region contested by Shi'a rebels and government troops. The remainder, Sunni Arabs like President Saddam and most of his ruling circle, as well as members of the subject Shi'a population, remained under full government authority. Most of the abuses noted in this report concern the second and third category of persons; a portion examines the record of the Kurdish authorities in northern Iraq.

Subject to unrelenting international pressure, designed to dismantle its war machine and overthrow President Saddam Hussein, the Ba'th Party government in 1992 resorted to a blend of blandishments and repression to maintain itself in power. In the process, the full gamut of human rights abuses was recorded, from the indiscriminate bombing of rebel positions, resulting in hundreds of civilian casualties, to the arbitrary arrest and execution of accused profiteers. Large parts of the country were subjected to blockades that prevented food, fuel and medicines from reaching the besieged populations. The blockaded regions survived only through a mixture of international aid, smuggling, and the bribery of soldiers at checkpoints.

Reliable information about human rights issues in Iraq remained hard to obtain, largely because of close government controls on foreigners and a pervasive climate of fear. But a number of factors combined in 1992 to give researchers an unprecedented look inside a machinery of repression that has been in operation since 1968. These were: the existence of the semi-independent Kurdish region, in which some Arabs have also taken refuge; the number of Iraqis permitted to leave the country legally, or who managed to flee abroad; the work of the U.N. Special Rapporteur on Iraq; and the discovery of a vast trove of secret police documents captured by the Kurds during their March 1991 uprising.

Rebuilt after the setbacks during the uprisings that followed the Gulf War, Iraq's security agencies reestablished a strong grip on the country. As in the past, the General Security Directorate (usually referred to simply as the amn, meaning security) appeared to have carte blanche to arrest any suspected opponent of the regime. Other security forces, such as the Military Intelligence (Istikhbarat) and the Special Security Agency (Jihaz al-Amn al-Khaas) played a supporting role in the maintenance of Ba'th power.

Throughout 1992, there were reports of punitive military operations in the marshlands area of southern Iraq which is home to an indigenous Arab people and has been used as a shelter for Iraqi rebel forces and military deserters. The counterinsurgency campaign included indiscriminate attacks by artillery, helicopter gunships and fixed-wing aircraft on villages. The attacks were reportedly accompanied by the arrest and execution of civilians, including tribal leaders, the destruction of property and livestock, and the razing of entire villages.

In April, Gulf War Victims (gwv), a Tehran-based monitoring organization headed by a former Iraqi nuclear scientist and political prisoner, Dr. Hussein Shahristani, described the aftermath of one clash between the army and rebel forces in Hor al-Amara. According to gwv, whose accounts of events in the marshes were impressively detailed and appeared accurate, "the army arrested a large number of civilians of the area, including tribal chiefs, and shelled the area with heavy artillery....The fate of those arrested is unknown." Another report cited an attack by four helicopters on the village of al-Ager on July 17. After its 800 residents were ordered by loudspeaker to evacuate to a school, helicopters were said to have destroyed the village. By the summer, the repression in the marshlands south of Amara-a triangle about 150 kilometers long and 80 kilometers wide between the Euphrates and Tigris rivers-had reached its peak. An hour-long video clandestinely shot in lateJune showed traditional villages that had been destroyed by government shelling originating from the edges of the marshes. Destruction in some areas was extensive, and families were seen fleeing by boat. Although the video revealed that rebel fighters were mixed in with the civilian population-an apparent violation of the international prohibition against using civilians as shields-internationally recognized rules of war also forbid attacks on enemy positions when there is a likelihood of disproportionate civilian casualties.

In late July, after days of aerial strafing of villages south of Amara, especially near the town of Salaam, international observers reported that the main hospital in Amara was overflowing with "hundreds" of casualties. The heaviest attacks, which involved the use of highly destructive ordnance against villages, lasted from July 20 to 27. Pentagon spokesman Pete Williams confirmed that, for the first time since the Gulf War, Iraqi fixed-wing combat aircraft had been used to bomb areas of southern Iraq. Attacks were widespread and indiscriminate.

A week later, the three Western permanent members of the U.N. Security Council, the U.S., Britain and France, announced the establishment of Operation Southern Watch, imposing an indefinite "no-fly" zone south of the 32nd parallel. The ban on Iraqi aircraft was enforced by allied aircraft operating from aircraft carriers in the Persian Gulf and bases in neighboring Arab countries. In northern Iraq, allied aircraft continued similar patrols north of the 36th parallel, operating from Turkey under Operation Provide Comfort.

Western officials claimed that the air exclusion zone in the south significantly reduced Iraqi military activity. But information gathered by Middle East Watch and the U.N. Special Rapporteur suggests that civilians obtained only partial relief. In one incident during the first week of August, over 2,000 people from the Al-Keba'ish marsh, in Nasiriyya governorate, were reportedly rounded up and transported to an army camp at Manareh, just south of the Iraqi-Kurdish cease-fire line, near the city of Erbil, where they were confined to large poultry sheds. According to Muhammad Sayyah 'Omran, a survivor who managed to flee to Kurdish lines, on each of the three nights he was at the camp, about 100 detainees were executed. He was deputed to clearing up the blood the following day. Farmers working land nearby, as well as a Kurdish border guard interviewed by Middle East Watch, corroborated the main lines of his account.

'Omran told Kurdish interrogators that he was a fighter from the principal Iraqi Shi'a opposition group, the Tehran-based Supreme Assembly of the Islamic Revolution of Iraq (sairi). In early July, he and other fighters entered the eastern Hammar marshes region from Iran, to try and relieve another rebel unit being besieged by the Republican Guards' Sixth Brigade. After a battle from July 7 to 9 near Kermat Beni Sa'id, his contingent was forced to surrender. Together with an estimated 2,000 men and 500 women and children from the vicinity, the sairi prisoners were taken first to Baghdad and then transported further north to a depopulated district near the Kurdish lines. Told they would be permitted to farm there, they instead were systematically executed-in an operation that recalled the manner in which Kurds were deported and slaughtered in large numbers during 1988. Shi'a living in other sensitive regions away from the marshes are also believed to have been relocated during August and September. In late August, Shi'a living in the Kirkuk oil fields region were reportedly rounded up and taken away to unknown locations. A truck driver told an Associated Press reporter in northern Iraq, on August 29, that he had seen about 20 bus loads of people he believed to be Shi'a being taken to Makhmour, a town adjacent to the Manareh army camp. During the first week of September, convoys of Shi'a from Khanaqin, near the Iranian border, were reportedly taken to Manareh. Convoys were also seen heading for the military base at Topzawa, not far from Kirkuk. Middle East Watch had previously gathered much evidence as to the use of Topzawa as a transit point for Kurds deported during the Anfal campaign who were never seen again.

Representatives of the London-based Iraqi Civilian Aid (ica), a humanitarian organization that visited the marshes in early November, reported that the situation there was critical. The marshes were said to be totally blockaded by troops, preventing food and medicine from reaching civilians.Escape across the Iranian border was difficult because of stepped-up Iraqi patrols. Residents told ica that since August, when the "no-fly" zone was declared, the shelling of villages had tripled. ica saw houses in small villages that had been bombed and burned. Mines laid in waterways presented a constant danger, making movement by residents, in areas where there are no roads, dangerous. Several government water-diversion projects, coupled with the construction of embankments and barricades, appear designed-at least in part-to drain the marshes, facilitate the construction of roads for the movement of military vehicles into the interior, depopulate the area of civilians, and drive out the anti-regime forces located there. ica reported that the impact of these projects was quite visible. Large sections of marshland had dried up and water levels were low in other areas. The water color and quality had changed, according to one ica representative who has made many trips to the marshes. "The water was green in color and it tasted extremely bitter. This water was once drinkable. It smelled rotten," he wrote in a November report.

Repression was not confined to remote provincial districts. In late July, 42 prominent merchants were executed for alleged profiteering, either after summary trials or no trials whatsoever. Foreign Ministry officials confirmed that at least another 500 were arrested. One of the executed men was reported to be Ra`d Tabrah, a merchant from the prominent Mal-Allah family. Another was Saleem Hamra, former chair of the Iraqi Chamber of Commerce. To thwart possible public demonstrations, the government prohibited public mourning of the dead.

The government-controlled media made clear that the merchants were offered up as scapegoats to an increasingly impoverished public that was beleaguered by soaring prices of basic commodities. The daily al-Jumhuriyah editorialized at length on July 27 about "the greedy merchants," terming them "ungrateful infidels" who "eat of the people's flesh and drink from their blood." It noted that their "crimes are deemed, in view of the law and the special circumstances being experienced by our people, high treason, a crime punishable by death." A July 27 dispatch by the official Iraqi News Agency suggested that the merchants had been tried by a court, stating that "the measures taken by the competent authorities" were designed "to make others learn their lesson well, after the courts have handed down sentences to those who deserve them for having gone too far." Press reports said that some of those arrested were tied to telephone poles, to face public insults; their fate was unknown.

In 1991, the regime intensified its deliberate targeting of Shi'a cultural and other nonpolitical institutions, in an attempt to destroy the fabric of Shi'a society. (Shi'a Muslims represent approximately 55 percent of the Iraqi population.) The pattern continued in 1992, with reports that Shi'a mosques, schools and other institutions in Kerbala, Najaf, Baghdad, Basra and Samarra had been closed, confiscated or demolished. Entire areas of historic significance to Shi'a culture were destroyed by the authorities, including parts of the ancient Wadi al-Salaam cemetery in Najaf, revered by Shi'a worldwide.

Following the August 8 death of the Najaf-based Grand Ayatollah Sayyid Abul Qassem al-Khoei, a leading religious authority with followers among many of the world's 150 million Shi'a, the Iraqi government attempted forcibly to coopt his son, Sayyid Mohamed Taki. On September 23, Taki was detained in Najaf for several hours by government officials, who demanded that he publicly endorse the regime's candidate to succeed his father, visit Saddam Hussein, and condemn international protection efforts in southern Iraq. The regime also reportedly pressured the remaining non-Iraqi Shi'a religious community in Najaf, mostly Iranians and Pakistanis, to endorse the government candidate for Grand Ayatollah or face expulsion from the holy city. The entire community has dwindled to about 200 teachers and students, from a peak of over 10,000.

Iraq's refusal for nearly four months to renew a Memorandum of Understanding (mou) with the U.N, which expired at the end of June, had a severe effect on the ability of the international community to deliver relief supplies and monitor the government's compliance with various Security Council resolutions. The old agreement had enabled hundreds of foreign aid workers and 500 lightly armed U.N. guards to work in Iraq. However, Baghdad's refusal toissue new visas, coupled with increasingly violent harassment of foreigners, including car bomb attacks and mysterious shootings, sharply reduced these numbers. Between May and July 1992, the number of foreign relief workers in Iraq dropped from 169 to 29.

A new mou was finally signed on October 22, on terms more favorable to the government; it will remain in effect until March 31, 1993. The number of U.N. guards was reduced to 300, and they were confined to the Kurdish-controlled northern region. Up to 700 relief workers were also allowed to operate in Iraq. The government promised not to interfere with the delivery of aid to Kurds as the harsh winter months approached.

Such assurances were necessary. Private relief organizations and U.N. agencies encountered many obstacles during the summer and autumn when they attempted to send supplies to the north. The problems coincided with a tightening of the government's economic blockade of the northern region: by August, according to figures supplied by the Kurdish Democratic Party (KDP), shipments of rationed basic foodstuffs previously supplied by Baghdad were down by 60 to 100 percent. The last delivery of medical supplies from the Ministry of Health in Baghdad took place on August 9.

Deliveries of food and fuel being supplied under the emergency "winterization" programs of the U.N. and the U.S. government for the Iraqi Kurds began in the third week of November. Initial shipments, sent through Turkey and Baghdad, went smoothly, with no government interference.

Human Rights Developments in Iraqi Kurdistan

A large swathe of northern and northeastern Iraq remained outside central government control during 1992. The mountainous region is the homeland of about three quarters of Iraq's four million Kurds, a non-Arab minority which has long fought for greater autonomy and, at times, independence. Smaller minorities of Turkomen, Yezidis and Assyrian and Chaldean Christians live among the Kurds.

This semi-independent zone, under the authority of the principal Kurdish parties and the protection of the Western allies, was created in the summer of 1991. It came into existence by default: as some two million Kurds displaced by the abortive March 1991 uprising returned to their homes, government forces and Iraqi Arab officials withdrew behind a fortified line running diagonally across the country. Commencing in October 1991, Saddam imposed an increasingly tight economic embargo on the Kurdish region. But faced with ostentatious Western overflights north of the 36th parallel, the government made no further attempt to attack the rebels or restore government controls. The Kurds profited from the ensuing stalemate, busily rebuilding their shattered society and infrastructure and creating a self-governing political entity.

The paradox of the situation in which some Iraqi Kurds found themselves at the end of 1992 was that, four years after the Iraqi government had attempted to wipe them out as a people, they ironically were counting on the continuation of Saddam Hussein in power in Baghdad. As long as the regime remained, they reasoned, Western protection of their fragile enclave-an undeclared and unrecognized state-would continue. The logic depended on there being no change in Western determination to see the Iraqi leader replaced and, crucially, on the West's continued ability to protect the region through the use of Turkish military bases.

But as 1992 closed, there were increasing signs of hostility from all of the enclave's neighbors-Iran, Turkey, Syria, and the rump Iraqi state-to the de facto creation of a Kurdish state in their midst. The hostility was manifested through sabotage inside the region, credibly attributed to both Iran and Iraq, and through constant Turkish pressure on the Iraqi Kurdish authorities. Between June 25 and July 19 alone, 12 attacks on international agencies were recorded. Even after the new mou was signed in October, Western relief agencies were subjected to frequent assaults, involving car bombs, grenades and roadside shootings.

In November, some 20,000 Turkish troops backed by armor occupied parts of the enclave, following a joint operation with Iraqi Kurdish fighters to dislodge Turkey's separatist Kurdish Workers' Party (pkk) from positions near the frontier. Ankara's reluctance to renew for a further six months the agreement permitting the U.S., Britain and France to station combat aircraftin southeast Turkey in order to defend northern Iraq was evident. But given the Iraqi government's record in dealing with the Kurds, and its continued flagrant human rights abuses in other parts of the country, no other acceptable solution appeared to be in sight. Baghdad's continuing blockade of the Kurds, which created much hardship, and its sponsorship of sporadic terrorist attacks against foreign and Kurdish targets, only contributed to the deepening stalemate.

Prior to elections held in May, the governing authority in the region was the Iraqi Kurdistan Front, a coalition of seven parties formed in 1988 and dominated by the two largest parties, the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (puk), led by Jalal Talabani, and the Kurdistan Democratic Party, led by Massoud Barzani. Local authority was parceled out to representatives of the puk and KDP, depending on their regional strength. No attempt was made to alter the Iraqi administrative or legal structure.

After several postponements, elections were held amid great popular enthusiasm. All residents of the enclave, as well as Kurds living in government-controlled districts, above the age of 18 were eligible; the vast majority participated. Nominally called to select a legitimate government for the region, the vote was also, in effect, a referendum on the Iraqi Kurds' future: while Barzani had argued in favor of autonomy in Iraq, to be negotiated with Baghdad, Talabani had pressed for self-determination, leaving open the possibility of eventual independence. During the election campaign, minor parties complained of intimidation by officials from the KDP in Dohuk governorate. There were also complaints of other irregularities during the polling, but these were not substantiated by international observers.

The outcome was a virtual dead heat between the two major parties; all others failed to meet the 7 percent threshold required to gain representation in the Erbil-based assembly. A coalition government was formed by the puk and KDP, under Prime Minister Fuad Massoum of the puk. But real power continued to reside with the two party leaders, Barzani and Talabani, and their peshmergha militias.

A new security force, known as the asaysh (the Kurdish word for security), was created in September, commanded by former puk and KDP peshmergha leaders. The declared purpose of the asaysh was to counter Iraqi espionage and terrorism, but smaller parties complained that they were also being victimized. Members of the small Parti Azadi Kurdistan, an affiliate of the pkk, in particular were rounded up and held without charge. Middle East Watch was able to confirm that some of the prisoners in asaysh detention centers had been tortured by Iraqi Kurdistan Front officials. Others appeared to have been held for months without reasonable grounds. Due process was lacking, as judges complained on several occasions that the asaysh were ignoring their orders to free detainees.

The Right to Monitor

No independent, locally based human rights groups operate in government-controlled Iraq. Iraq also continued to be off-limits in 1992 to international human rights monitors, with one important exception: from January 3 to 9, U.N. Special Rapporteur on Iraq Max van der Stoel visited Iraq and met with six government ministers (although his request for meetings with the President and the Minister of Defense "remained unanswered"). He also traveled to Najaf and Karbala in the south and to Kurdistan in the north. While in Baghdad, van der Stoel spent one morning in the notorious Abu Graib prison west of the city, where he reviewed some records and spoke with a few prisoners.

From this visit and fact-finding elsewhere, the special rapporteur concluded at a March press conference that he found "no indication on the part of the Iraqi government that it was intending to change its ways," but "lots of evidence pointing to very grave and massive violations of human rights...continuing until this present day." He warned in his report to the U.N. Human Rights Commission that violations would continue "as long as the security forces have the power to decide over the freedom or imprisonment, or even life or death, of any Iraqi citizen." The access granted to the special rapporteur was extraordinary, and was not repeated. Following the release of his report, senior Iraqi officials criticized the U.N. representative in strong, personal terms.

Middle East Watch has received no positive response from the government to its numerous requests, dating back to 1989, to send a delegation to Iraq. Early in 1992, the Iraqi Red Crescent Society, a government-run humanitarian body, invited Middle East Watch to make a visit, but the invitation appeared linked to the regime's attempts to publicize the effects of U.N. sanctions on its own population, and eventually it was dropped.

While foreign humanitarian bodies and Western reporters were frequently permitted to tour government-controlled regions, access to ordinary citizens was inhibited by the constant presence of official escorts. When people dared to speak, the results were sometimes fatal; a member of the Kurdistan Socialist Party who met Van der Stoel in Abu Graib prison in January died shortly afterwards. When his father collected the body, in February, it showed signs of severe torture.

Given the unceasing nature of the regime's rights abuses and the lack of domestic monitors in government-controlled Iraq, Middle East Watch believes that the stationing of independent human rights observers inside Iraq, to conduct continuous on-site monitoring and investigation of abuses, would provide some measure of protection for the population at risk. Such a proposal was first made in March by the special rapporteur, who argued that the situation in Iraq was "exceptionally grave" and required "an exceptional response." He urged that "no effort be spared to ensure that the monitoring system comes into being as soon as possible." He found the basis for this monitoring system in U.N. Security Council Resolution 688 of April 1991, which called on Iraq to end "immediately" the repression of its population.

In August, following reports of grave violations in the southern marshes, the special rapporteur took the unusual step of issuing an interim version of his scheduled November report to the U.N. General Assembly, to highlight these dangers and renew his call for monitors to be stationed in Iraq. Van der Stoel was twice invited by the U.N. Security Council to discuss his concerns, in August and November. The international community was initially lukewarm to the monitors proposal. But at the end of November, its debate by the U.N. Security Council appeared imminent. If implemented, it would be the first time that the U.N. had dispatched human rights monitors to a member country without the approval of the host government.

U.S. Policy

In June, Middle East Watch called on the U.S. government to take a leading role in marshaling world support for a human rights monitoring system in Iraq, as recommended by the U.N. special rapporteur. The Bush administration indicated its support for the proposal, but declined to bring it to an early vote at the United Nations, citing more pressing considerations with respect to Iraq, the reluctance of other Western nations, and the cost of implementing the plan. The reluctance of the U.N. Secretariat and Security Council to act on the Van der Stoel proposal faded later in the year, although fears remained that China might exercise its right of veto if the plan were brought to a vote.

It was clear that in President Bush's own view such a monitoring operation would not be inconsistent with U.N. Security Council Resolution 688. In a July 16 letter to the Speaker of the House of Representatives, President Bush cited Resolution 688 and its finding "that Iraq's repression of its civilian population threatens international peace and security in the region." He pledged that the U.S. would "continue to monitor carefully the treatment of Iraq's citizens in concert with our Coalition partners, and together we remain prepared to take appropriate steps if the situation requires."

The U.S. was consistently aggressive during 1992 in pursuing whatever means were available, covert and overt, of keeping the government of Saddam Hussein under pressure. Together with Britain and France, it refused to consider any easing of trade sanctions and took the lead in efforts to seize Iraqi assets abroad. On October 2, the U.N. Security Council gave its assent to the assets seizure, which U.S. Ambassador Edward Perkins estimated could yield $500 million. U.S. officials told Middle East Watch that the seized assets would be used for three purposes: paying for the U.N.'s own operations in Iraq, especially the special disarmament commission working to eliminate all weapons of mass destruction; compensation for victims of Iraqi aggression,notably in Kuwait; and humanitarian assistance to Iraqi civilians.

Despite commendable actions that had the effect of furthering human rights concerns over Iraq, the Bush administration apparently was not motivated primarily by concern for victims of the regime or by the need to uphold international law. Evidence gathered by a special Defense Department legal team of possible Iraqi war crimes in Kuwait was not pursued; nor was the administration enthusiastic about a possible Genocide Convention action against Iraq at the International Court of Justice, based on the government's 1988 Anfal campaign.

Where human rights issues suited the administration's overall strategy of toppling Saddam Hussein, they were adopted; where they ran counter to the strategy, they were subordinated or dropped. In a revealing moment, National Security Advisor Brent Scowcroft said on August 23 on CBS TV, "Saddam right now is a peril only to his own people, and the whole purpose of this U.N. inspection regime is to keep it that way."

The Work of Middle East Watch

In June, Middle East Watch published Endless Torment: The 1991 Uprising in Iraq and Its Aftermath, a report based on interviews with Iraqi refugees in Iran, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and London, and with Iraqis in rebel-controlled Iraq. The report documented atrocities on a massive scale committed by Iraqi government forces as they retook the cities from south to north that had erupted in March 1991 in an unprecedented challenge to Saddam Hussein's rule. The abuses included indiscriminate attacks on residential areas, attacks by helicopter gunships on fleeing unarmed civilians, summary executions, and mass arrests. The report also included information about gross abuses committed by rebel forces, including summary executions of suspected members of the security forces.

In July and August, Middle East Watch interviewed Sunni and Shi'a Iraqis living in exile in Syria and Jordan. The majority left Iraq in 1991, the first time they had been outside their country, and thus the first time they felt free to speak. These exiles, who either themselves suffered rights abuses or who provided testimony about victimized family members, stressed the need for Saddam Hussein and his ruling clique to be held accountable for past abuses throughout Iraq, not only in the Kurdish north-a view with which Middle East Watch concurs. The exiles' accounts, to be published in a newsletter, provided detailed information about the process of interrogation by the security forces, including torture methods; conditions of detention; the conduct of summary political trials, which often resulted in sentences of execution or life imprisonment; deaths in detention; and the summary executions of military officers.

In Syria, Middle East Watch also gathered testimony about the Iraqi Shi'a families-Arabs and Kurds alike-who were forcibly deported to Iran in two little-noticed and largely forgotten episodes, the first in the early 1970s and the second in the early 1980s. By some counts, as many as 200,000 people may have been expelled. These mass deportations were carried out without due process, as entire families were rounded up. Birth certificates and passports verifying that the targeted Shi'a were native-born Iraqis carried no weight; these documents typically were confiscated by security forces.

The deportees were forced to sign statements renouncing any future claim to businesses, homes, bank accounts and other property in Iraq. Families were loaded into vehicles and driven to the Iraqi frontier. In a November 1992 article published in Middle East International, the London-based biweekly magazine, Middle East Watch sought to respond to the deportees' pleas that attention be focused on their plight. The deportees call for the right of return without the threat of retaliation from the authorities, the return of personal property and compensation for confiscated assets, and the release-or an accounting-of their male family members who disappeared inside Iraq.

In 1992, Middle East Watch broadened its efforts of the previous three years to document the Iraqi government's Anfal campaign against the Kurds. With unimpeded access to much of northern Iraq possible for the first time, it sent researchers to the region for six months. These field researchers interviewed several hundred people with first-hand accounts of mass deportations, village clearances, mass executions, the use of chemicalweapons, and other gross abuses committed between 1987 and 1989. Middle East Watch was able to establish that tens of thousands of persons disappeared, and are presumed dead, after being transported to various remote destinations in central and southern Iraq. Among those interviewed were seven people who survived mass deportations and executions in 1988.

Evidence about the Iraqi government's crimes against the Kurds was also gathered in two other ways: from the exhumation of collective graves, and the analysis of captured Iraqi documents. Between December 1991 and June 1992, Middle East Watch and Physicians for Human Rights, the Boston-based organization, sent two teams of forensic anthropologists and archaeologists to northern Iraq. In February, Dr. Clyde Snow, scientific leader of the teams, made a third visit, together with a Middle East Watch representative and a team from the CBS "Sixty Minutes" program.

Exhumations were carried out near the cities of Erbil and Suleimaniyya, and in the village of Koreme and Birjini in Dohuk governorate. The results were published in an initial report entitled Unquiet Graves and in a separate forthcoming report on "a genocide-in-miniature": the circumstances surrounding the destruction of the villages of Koreme in August 1988, the on-site killing of 27 of its men, the deportation of its women and children, and the disappearance of its other males after being seized by government troops. Taking part in the latter investigation, which lasted a month, was a team of Latin American human rights experts drawn from groups experienced in exhuming victims of government death squads.

Aside from its own reports, Middle East Watch publicized its findings about the Anfal campaign through a CBS TV "Sixty Minutes" program broadcast in February and through a long magazine article in The New Yorker magazine. Many other articles in the U.S. and European press made reference to Middle East Watch's pioneering fieldwork building a potential case for genocide. In September, a consultant writer began work on the organization's first, full-length report on the Anfal campaign. The book is scheduled for release in early 1993.

In parallel with the written accounts, Middle East Watch also pursued the visual documentation of atrocities committed against the Iraqi Kurds, in recent times and in the past. A video and photographic record of the field research was compiled, and the possibility of a documentary film was explored. The most dramatic aspect of the evidence-gathering process involved the airlifting to safekeeping in the United States, in May, of 14 tons of Iraqi secret police documents captured by the Kurds themselves the previous year. Middle East Watch acted as the custodian of documents entrusted to its care, and to the U.S. Senate's Foreign Relations Committee, by the puk. These documents were then stored in the U.S. National Archives, outside Washington. Work on the large task of classifying, translating and analyzing the millions of pages of documents began in October, under the direction of a newly created Middle East Watch team. Preliminary results of the research corroborate testimonial findings about the nature of government atrocities, in the process providing massive detail on the Iraqi bureaucracy of repression.

Middle East Watch was active during 1992 in pressing its concerns about Iraq at the U.S. Congress and State Department, as well as in various European foreign ministries. It also worked closely with the U.N. Special Rapporteur on Iraq. The possibility of legal action against Iraq at the International Court of Justice was explored with several parties; during 1993, Middle East Watch anticipates that this aspect of its work, embracing the building of a legal brief, will be expanded. Efforts also continue to bring further caches of captured documents held by other Kurdish parties out of northern Iraq, for safekeeping and research.

Together with other branches of Human Rights Watch, Middle East Watch participated during 1992 in international efforts to tackle the problem of uncharted land mines that have a disastrous effect on civilian life. The indiscriminate strewing of millions of land mines was a side-effect of the Iraqi government's various military actions in the Kurdish region, including the Anfal. As a result, thousands of civilians, many of them children, were either killed or lost limbs in Iraqi Kurdistan between March 1991 and the end of 1992. A Middle East Watch report on the problem, Hidden Death, was published in November.

ISRAELI-OCCUPIED WEST BANK AND GAZA STRIP

Human Rights Developments

The most severe human rights abuses continued on a large scale in the occupied territories in 1992 despite two dramatic developments that might have been expected to improve the human rights situation: the pursuit of regional peace talks and the ouster in June elections of Israel's Likud-led government by a coalition dominated by the more moderate Labor party. There was no let-up in the use of torture against suspects under interrogation, and in the use of often-unjustified lethal force against Palestinian activists, only a minority of whom were engaged in violent resistance when shot.

At the same time, there was a decrease in the imposition of abusive forms of administrative control and punishment, such as deportations, administrative detention, school closings, house demolitions and round-the-clock curfews.

These divergent trends may be explained by the shifting character of the Palestinian intifada. The decline in abusive administrative measures accompanied a drop-off in the overall level of confrontation with Israeli authorities. However, the persistence of more violent abuses accompanied a rise in attacks by armed Palestinians, many of them thought to belong to groups opposed to the peace talks. These attacks, which represent an increase in the use of firearms by Palestinian activists, were responsible for an increase over previous years in the killing of Israeli soldiers and civilians, and Palestinians said to be suspected of collaborating with Israeli authorities.

Thus, as the intifada of mass resistance subsided, the Israeli Defense Force (idf) has intensified its battle against what it calls "hard-core" activists. It employs special forces, who often disregard international and Israeli standards on the use of lethal force, and behave at times as if they have shoot-to-kill orders. And Israel relies heavily on coercive methods of interrogation to gather intelligence-perhaps more heavily than ever since its network of covert collaborators is under constant assault by Palestinian activists.

The advent of Yitzhak Rabin as prime minister has not changed this general picture. However, his administration made a number of encouraging gestures during its first weeks in office. These included cancelling deportation orders against 11 Palestinian activists and negotiating a peaceful resolution to an army siege of al-Najah University, in the West Bank. In October, his government brought a hunger strike by Palestinian security prisoners to an end by admitting that conditions were poor and promising to respond to a number of the strikers' demands.

The most pervasive system of control in the day-to-day lives of Palestinians-the permit system for entering Israel and annexed East Jerusalem, the de facto capital of the West Bank-was also eased marginally when the government exempted men over 50 from the requirement that they obtain both special identity cards and a short-term permit to enter these areas, to work, seek medical care, visit friends, or pursue any other activity. The authorities routinely deny such permits, for several months or even indefinitely, without explanation.

Palestinian residents of the occupied territories have long been victimized by such institutionalized Israeli government practices as the arbitrary confiscation of land; a judicial system that is lenient toward settler violence against Palestinians; the discriminatory allocation of resources and services; and a planning process that encourages the expansion of settlements while preventing development by Palestinians. Prime Minister Rabin's promise to reduce the construction of Jewish settlements could thus be beneficial from a human rights standpoint, although its practical consequences in these areas remain to be seen.

Despite these positive signs from the new government, the underlying human rights problems remained unaltered. According to the Israeli human rights organization B'Tselem, security forces shot dead 108 Palestinians between January and November, well above the figure for the same period in 1991.

The figures included many avoidable casualties that are the foreseeable result of Israeli policies. These policies include open-fire orders that do not conform to internationally accepted principles of permitting the use of lethal force only to counter a mortal threat and only when no lesser means are available. In the fifth year of the intifada, the idf continued to resort readily to live ammunition in riot-control situations, instead of relying on conventional riot gear such as protective shields and nonlethal means of quelling unrest. Large numbers of Palestinians sustained bullet wounds in the upper parts of their bodies despite open-fire orders requiring soldiers to aim at the legs. Moreover, a continuing laxness in investigating and disciplining soldiers encouraged them to believe that they were unlikely to face meaningful punishment if they exceeded their orders.

Undercover units of the idf and the paramilitary Border Police were responsible for about one third of the killings by security forces during the first ten months of 1992. According to the army, these units are an essential tool in the pursuit of armed and dangerous activists. The idf claims that these units are bound by the army's open-fire orders, which permit gunfire only to counter a life-threatening situation or when a person suspected of a serious crime refuses orders to halt. (The definition of a life-threatening situation was liberalized in February, to permit soldiers to shoot without warning at any Palestinian carrying a gun-a liberalization that violates international standards and Israeli law.)

However, several human rights groups, after interviewing eyewitnesses to many of the killings, assert that special forces have shot many of their victims at close quarters, in circumstances in which the wanted person could have been apprehended without endangering the lives of others. Based on ongoing research, Middle East Watch is strongly inclined to agree with this assertion. Many of the victims were hit without warning by multiple rounds of automatic fire, suggesting that the purpose was to kill rather than effect an arrest. In only a minority of cases did the army claim that the victim was armed and had made an attempt to attack the soldiers.

Some of the victims of the special forces were not on wanted lists. Rather, they were young activists who were ambushed because they were wearing masks over their faces and were spotted writing political graffiti on walls, manning roadblocks, or publicly ordering others to obey political strikes. Soldiers are permitted by their written orders to open fire in the context of the procedures for apprehending a suspect if they encounter a person who is masked and behaving "suspiciously."

Evidence of unacknowledged idf shoot-to-kill orders surfaced during the court-martial on manslaughter charges of a lieutenant colonel who had commanded an undercover unit in Gaza-the only criminal trial to date of a member of an undercover unit in connection with a shooting death. Soldiers testified that the officer had ordered them to shoot at "the center of the mass" of fleeing suspects, exceeding the official idf instructions to fire at the legs only when pursuing fleeing suspects. The lieutenant colonel was convicted of negligence in July 1992 and given a suspended one-month sentence. In light of the exposure that the trial gave to the trigger-happy conduct of the special forces, the lenient sentence was a disgrace, effectively condoning their illegal actions.

More encouraging was the order of an Israeli civil court judge in November that the state pay damages to a West Bank Palestinian who was wounded and to the family of another who was killed during an undercover operation in 1988. The judge ruled the state had not proven that the two were in fact "suspects" against whom it was permitted to open fire to stop them from fleeing. The court couched its finding of state liability in an explicit determination that the applicable norms were those of law enforcement rather than of war.

At various moments in 1992, senior Israeli officials incited civilians to use excessive force in response to violent Palestinian attacks on Israelis. Their comments ignored Israeli law, which prohibits the use of lethal force except when necessary to prevent a threat to life or of serious physical injury. After an Israeli girl was slain near Tel Aviv in May, then-Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir was quoted on the state radio as saying that the assailant, who was arrested, should have been shot, and that it was a pitythat the persons who fired at him had missed. Prime Minister Rabin sounded a similar note in July when, after a Palestinian fatally stabbed a policeman in Jerusalem, he declared, "The perpetrator was shot and killed and that's what has to be done to anyone who tries to attack a policeman or a soldier."

The deaths while under interrogation of four Palestinians in 1992 indicated no softening of interrogation methods by the General Security Service (gss, or Shin Bet). At least two of them died as a result of the conditions of their interrogation, according to American pathologists who attended the autopsies on behalf of the victims' families.

Evidence continued to accumulate that the mistreatment of Palestinian security suspects under interrogation was systematic. In a rare public statement in May, the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc) urged Israel to end techniques of physical and psychological pressure "that constitute a violation of the [Fourth Geneva] Convention." The icrc is particularly well-informed about interrogation techniques because it is permitted by the Israeli government to meet with all detainees after fourteen days of custody.

Interrogation methods include beating, hooding, tying up for long hours in painful positions, sleep deprivation, confinement in closet-like cells, threats, and enforced exercise. In a March 1992 sequel to its March 1991 report on interrogation methods, B'Tselem charged that "out of about 20,000 total arrested [during the past year], we estimate that at least 5,000 detainees were interrogated by some combination of these methods."

The state's endorsement of the gss's abusive methods was exhibited by the official response to the death of 35-year-old Mustafa Akawi in February. In the ensuing investigation, the victim's interrogators freely admitted to having subjected him to beatings, sleep deprivation, prolonged hooding and extreme cold. An independent pathologist concluded that his death was caused by the effect of these conditions on an undetected heart condition. Israeli authorities responded by blaming the undetected malady and clearing the interrogators of wrongdoing. The government thereby confirmed that the methods employed on Akawi fell within the range of "moderate physical pressure" permitted by the gss's secret internal guidelines. Those guidelines were the subject of a Supreme Court challenge filed in June 1991 by human rights lawyer Avigdor Feldman, who claimed they violate the prohibition of torture in Israeli law. The case is still pending before the court.

Indefinite deportations of Palestinians from their homeland have ceased since January 1991, although neither the Shamir nor the Rabin government publicly renounced this controversial measure. Instead, both governments have imposed on a limited number of suspected activists a form of deportation that is less severe but no more legal in terms of international law. This milder form of deportation carries a finite term, usually three years, during which the deportee is not permitted to return. Like indefinite deportations, this measure is handed out without charge or trial, and violates the absolute prohibition of deportations found in the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.

About 240 Palestinians from the West Bank and Gaza Strip were being held in administrative detention at the beginning of October 1992, well below the 1,500-plus Palestinians who were jailed without trial during much of 1988 and 1989. However, some of the remaining detainees are now in their second or third year of continuous or near-continuous detention without charge. The longest-serving detainee is Sami Abu Samhadana, currently in Ketsiot detention camp, who has been held without charge almost continuously since 1985. A military order of December 1991 reduced the maximum length of an administrative detention order to six months from 12. However, the orders can be renewed indefinitely, and avenues of appeal are inadequate.

The demolition or sealing of the homes of Palestinians suspected of serious security offenses decreased in 1992, as they had in 1991. According to B'Tselem, eight homes were demolished and 15 sealed between January and October 13, 1992, compared with 82 demolished and 87 sealed during the corresponding period of 1990.

In April, authorities gave the green light to the reopening of Bir Zeit University. For the first time since 1988, all six Palestinian universities were permitted to function.

The trend toward reducing administrative sanctions was interrupted bysporadic flare-ups. After sniper fire killed a Jewish settler in the West Bank city of el-Bireh on December 1, 1991, all Palestinian inhabitants of the Ramallah-El-Bireh area were subject to a round-the-clock curfew for two weeks, followed by a dusk-to-dawn curfew that lasted two months. During the initial curfew, schools, health clinics, and other institutions were closed, while soldiers conducted extensive house-to-house searches and arrested scores of young men. The idf commander for the West Bank said on December 15, 1991 that the curfew was for "purely intelligence and operational reasons," but in the view of Middle East Watch its severity and scope made it an act of collective punishment, in violation of international human rights and humanitarian law. The same judgment applies to the nightly 9:00 p.m.-to-4:00 a.m. curfew continuously imposed for the past four years on all 750,000 Palestinians in the Gaza Strip.

In 1992, the leadership of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) and prominent pro-PLO figures in the occupied territories made serious attempts to stop the slaying of Palestinians said to be suspected of collaborating with Israel. In the Jerusalem-based Palestinian press and in public fora, they condemned the practice in far stronger terms than in previous years, and urged its end. However, the fear that their calls would only expose their lack of authority in this regard proved well-founded. According to the Associated Press, between January and November, 197 Palestinians were killed by other Palestinians on the apparent grounds of their suspected collaboration, compared to 154 in all of 1991.

The perpetrators generally appear to be members of Islamist groups and of nationalist groups that do not heed orders from the traditional PLO leadership. Middle East Watch condemns these extrajudicial executions, as well as the frequent use of torture during prior interrogations. Neither can be excused by the impossibility of establishing a formal Palestinian judicial system under Israeli occupation.

The Right to Monitor

Human rights work is permitted under certain constraints, which are far less onerous for Israeli and foreign monitors than they are for Palestinians. Foreign and Israeli journalists generally need no special permission to enter the occupied territories. However, on many occasions, their access to events or places is restricted by military authorities, often when their presence as witnesses would be most critical.

Palestinian human rights workers and journalists are at greater risk of harassment by soldiers at checkpoints and at the scene of disturbances or arrests. They have also been subject to arrests and restrictions on their movement. Israeli authorities deny that any Palestinian is restricted because of human rights or journalistic activities, but generally refuse to disclose the precise "security" reasons for restrictions.

In March, authorities issued a restrictive (green) identity card to Musa Bakri, a field worker for the Jerusalem-based Palestine Human Rights Information Center (phric) who co-authored a report on the use of electric-shock torture in a detention center in Hebron. Because holders of green identity cards may not enter Israel and annexed East Jerusalem, Bakri was prohibited from reaching the phric office. This restriction was renewed for another six-month period in September.

As of early November, no field workers with the Ramallah-based human rights organization al-Haq possessed green identity cards, following the return earlier in the year of an ordinary card to Zahi Jaradat, a field worker in the Hebron area. However, Gaza Strip staff of al-Haq were impeded in their work by the requirement that they seek one-day exit permits from the Civil Administration each time they wish to cross Israel to reach the West Bank-ordinarily a weekly occurrence to attend staff meetings in Ramallah.

Only one al-Haq staff member spent time in detention in 1992, the same figure as 1991 and well below that of the first three years of the intifada. In June, Hebron-area field worker Sha'wan Jabarin was arrested and held for 17 days before being released without charge. In an August 7 letter to Middle East Watch, the idf claimed that Jabarin, winner of the 1990 Reebok Foundation's human rights award, was "involved in the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine terrorist organization" and "is party to breaches ofhuman rights he is supposed to protect." Despite the idf claim that Jabarin belonged to a "terrorist organization," he was never charged or tried during these this or two previous periods of detention.

U.S. Policy

The Bush administration was actively engaged during 1992 in promoting peace talks between Israel and its neighbors. Regrettably, it dispensed public criticism of ongoing human rights violations with an eyedropper, arguing that such criticism would derail the fragile peace process. Since the process picked up speed in July with the appointment of the Rabin government, the U.S. administration has been virtually silent on continuing violations. In the view of Middle East Watch, this silence is both wrong because serious violations are not mitigated by the possibility of future peace, and short-sighted because the persistent abuses tend to undermine the confidence needed to build peace.

Israel received more than $3 billion in U.S. economic and military aid in 1992, far more than any other country. Congress approved an administration request for the same amount for 1993. In addition, favorable terms for delivering the aid and other programs push the value of the package well above $3 billion.

As in previous years, the administration never indicated publicly that the massive aid should be linked to greater respect for the human rights of the Palestinians living under occupation. However, aid and Israeli policies in the territories were explicitly linked over the issue of Jewish settlements.

In 1991, Israel requested U.S. government guarantees for $10 billion in commercial loans to build housing for new immigrants. President Bush insisted on conditioning the guarantees on a commitment from Israel to limit new settlements. Secretary of State James Baker adamantly justified the linkage, telling the House Appropriations Committee on February 24, "Our opposition to settlements has been there since 1967....Nobody else is asking us for $10 billion in additional assistance over and above the $3 to $4 billion that we give every year with no strings attached."

The grounds for the Bush administration's objection to settlements were that they impeded the peace process, not that they were illegal under international law-as the Carter administration had maintained-or that they created a blatantly discriminatory dual society within the occupied territories.

The administration's conditions on loan guarantees were rejected by then-Prime Minister Shamir. It was not until his successor, Yitzhak Rabin, pledged to curtail settlements that an accord on the loans was reached.

The chapter on the Israeli-occupied territories in the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in 1991, issued in January 1992, provided a reasonable survey of the range of abuses, but often failed to present findings in the State Department's own voice. The chapter frequently repeated official Israeli justifications without presenting its own findings about how those assertions held up in reality. For example, it stated that "[p]olitical and extrajudicial killing are not condoned by Israel." Such a bald assertion cried out for comment in light of the continuing furor over unjustified killings by idf undercover units.

Deportation was one issue that continued to provoke U.S. ire. On January 6, the administration backed U.N. Security Council Resolution 726, which "strongly condemns" the deportation orders issued against 12 Palestinians. However, in fixed-term deportations (see above), Israel found a deportation technique that has escaped, at least thus far, public criticism from the U.S.

The administration remained hesitant to weigh in on the issue of mistreatment under interrogation. The Country Reports called "credible" the reports of torture published by various human rights groups, but declined to speak in its own voice. Following the death of detainee Mustafa Akawi in February, State Department spokesman Richard Boucher twice expressed concern about reports of Akawi's mistreatment, and said that the case had been raised with the Israeli authorities. But the Department would not press the issue any further in public. Asked to comment in April on a new B'Tselem report on torture, spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler said only, "Our 1991 human rights report noted that a number of Israeli and Palestinian and international humanrights organizations have issued reports on Israeli mistreatment of Palestinians during interrogation, and thus I would refer you to that report." While the U.S. is not obliged to make a statement merely because a human rights organization issues a report, Washington's reticence on the issue of mistreatment of detainees put it in the anomalous position of having said less about this issue than the ordinarily close-mouthed International Committee of the Red Cross.

The U.S. position on the use of lethal force by Israel was also a combination of bland comments and claims that the issue was being examined. Asked about the idf's relaxation of open-fire orders, spokeswoman Tutwiler stated on May 7, in the Department's only public comment: "I don't have a specific reaction for you. As you know, we can condemn the violence-any violence that is there, not this specifically-and that we have looked into it, is basically where we are."

In the one instance when the Bush administration made waves on a human rights issue in the occupied territories, it quickly retreated. On May 12, as a multilateral session of the peace talks devoted to refugees was getting under way, despite an Israeli boycott, State Department spokeswoman Tutwiler restated U.S. support for U.N. General Assembly resolution 194 (1948), which affirms the right of Palestinians displaced by the 1948 war to return to their former homes or receive compensation. The following day, Tutwiler again called attention to the plight of refugees by saying that the issue of their return should be addressed by direct negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians.

The comments provoked a storm of protest in Israel and on May 18 Tutwiler backed down, saying that the resolution was no longer relevant to American policy in the Middle East or to the ongoing peace talks.

The U.S. was right to raise the issue and should support the discussion in the peace talks of the rights of Palestinian refugees. The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights states that "[n]o one shall be arbitrarily deprived of the right to enter his own country." For Palestinians who fled or were forced to flee the area of Palestine that became Israel in 1948, their "country" is Israel, just as Israel has become the country of citizenship to the many Palestinians who remained within its boundaries. This clear right needs to be addressed, however complex the issues surrounding its implementation may be.

Following the change of governments, Israel ended its boycott of the multilateral talks on refugees and attended the November round in Canada.

Encouraged by Prime Minister Rabin's more accommodating position on peace talks and new settlements, the Bush administration in the second half of the year refrained from commenting on continuing human rights abuses. On the eve of her first trip to Israel in October, the new Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Patricia Diaz Dennis, told Middle East Watch that she was under instructions not to say or do anything during her trip that would complicate the peace talks.

The Work of Middle East Watch

In 1992, Middle East Watch's work on the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip focused on two persistent violent forms of abuse: the often-unjustified killings of Palestinian activists by undercover units of the idf and the Border Police, and the use of torture during interrogation.

Middle East Watch issued a report in March on the death in detention of Mustafa Akawi and other developments related to the abuse of Palestinians under interrogation. It also sent a number of letters to Israeli authorities during the year, expressing concern about particular individuals undergoing interrogation.

In July, Middle East Watch embarked on four months of research into the killing of wanted and masked Palestinians by undercover units. A major report will be issued in early 1993.
KUWAIT

Human Rights Developments

Close to two years after Kuwait's liberation from the seven months of Iraqi occupation, on February 26, 1991, the Kuwaiti government is still pursuing its long-term strategy of restructuring its population in a fashion that violates human rights. Entire communities whose loyalty is in doubt are being expelled, including Palestinians, Iraqis and Bedoons, the long-term stateless residents of Kuwait. Other groups of foreign residents also suffered discrimination during 1992. While arrest and detention conditions showed marked improvement during the year compared to 1991, arbitrary arrest and detention are still prevalent. Torture remains common. Pre-publication censorship was lifted in early 1992 but other restrictions on press freedom continued. Parliamentary elections were finally held in 1992 but no changes were made to broaden the highly restricted electorate: only 11 percent of the native population was eligible to vote.

Soon after the end of the Gulf War, Kuwaiti authorities and allied militias engaged in a campaign of vengeance against disfavored groups. Scores were killed, many disappeared and thousands were detained without due process and tortured. Despite repeated requests from families and human rights organizations, only a handful of those disappearances and killings have been investigated. Mass graves of unidentified bodies buried after the war-apparent victims of Kuwaiti forces-have not been exhumed. None of those implicated in the killing and torture of prisoners has been brought to justice. In September 1992, Kuwaiti officials told Middle East Watch that they had no plans to launch such investigations.

The violent manifestations of the anti-Bedoon and anti-Palestinian policy have dissipated considerably, largely due to the departure of most of the targeted groups. But the policy itself continues by other means, including arbitrary arrest and detention, heavy fines, the denial of employment and threats of imprisonment.

Most of the Palestinians who remain in Kuwait-fewer than 50,000, down from a prewar high of over 350,000-are stateless refugees who came originally from the Israeli-occupied Gaza Strip but have not been allowed by Israel to return. They carry travel documents issued by Egypt which refuses to allow them to reside in its territory. Although these refugees have no place to go, Kuwaiti authorities have denied them the right to remain in Kuwait until they find another country that would accept them. They have been harassed, threatened with imprisonment, denied employment, and subjected to heavy fines for every day they stay in Kuwait.

Most Bedoons are long-term stateless residents of Kuwait who were born there and have lived in Kuwait all their lives, but are not officially deemed to qualify for Kuwaiti citizenship. In Middle East Watch's judgment, Kuwaiti authorities have never given Bedoons a reasonable opportunity to prove their claims to Kuwaiti citizenship. Instead, shortly before the Iraqi invasion, the Kuwaiti government introduced measures to pressure Bedoons to leave the country. Bedoons were dismissed in large numbers from their civilian government jobs and their membership in professional organizations was banned. By law, Bedoons' driver licenses were withdrawn and their laissez passers were restricted.

After liberation, anti-Bedoon policies took a violent turn. Accused en masse of aiding the Iraqi occupying forces, the Bedoons were singled out for retribution, even though many of them had been killed for resisting the Iraqi occupation. Since liberation, some Bedoons faced summary execution, disappearance or torture, while all Bedoon government employees were dismissed from their jobs, lost the ability to send their children to school, and were threatened with expulsion from the only country they have ever known. The military and the police, which before the invasion were largely composed of Bedoons, rehired only a small fraction of their prewar employees-depriving the community of its chief source of income. The prewar community of 250,000 is down to fewer than 200,000.

The Kuwaiti government has ignored appeals by families and human rights organizations to retry the 118 sentenced by the martial-law tribunals set up in May and June 1991. In those show trials, most defendants were convicted and sentenced-sometimes to death-on the basis of confessions extracted through torture. The Crown Prince, Shaikh Sa`ad al-Abdalla, in his capacity as martial-law governor, commuted all death sentences to life imprisonment. ButKuwaiti authorities have rejected demands to set aside harsh jail sentences and either grant the accused new trials or give them the right to a judicial appeal of their verdicts.

Another vulnerable group of foreign residents subjected to violent mistreatment is Asian maids. Expressly excluded from the protection of labor legislation, these workers are left at the mercy of their private employers. Their legal recourse severely limited, hundreds of abused Asian expatriates sought refuge in their respective embassies, charging their employers with rape, physical assault or withholding wages. Fourteen-hundred Filipina maids fled to their embassy in the year between April 1991 and April 1992. In 60 cases of abuse of Asian maids investigated by Human Rights Watch, one third involved rape or sexual assault. However, charges were laid by the police in only a minority of cases, and there is no evidence that one employer accused of rape or assault has been successfully prosecuted in the postwar period. Far from addressing the problem of the victims, police sometimes pressed charges of visa violations against maids who had run away from their abusive employers.

Other than adopting regulations aimed at streamlining employment agencies, the Kuwaiti government has failed to address adequately the prevalent abuse of female domestics. Despite the lack of shelters for runaway abused maids, the Kuwaiti government has instructed foreign embassies not to house these women in their facilities, claiming that such action is an abuse of diplomatic privileges. Following adverse publicity, the Kuwaiti government agreed to repatriate most of them in the spring and summer of 1992, but made no move to prosecute their abusive employers.

On instructions from the Kuwaiti Ministry of Foreign Affairs, most Asian embassies turned away runaway maids seeking refuge. But the flow continued to those embassies still accepting fleeing workers. During the summer, the Philippine embassy, working with the Kuwaiti government, repatriated most of those remaining in its shelter. But the flood of runaways persisted. By the first week of September, over 200 maids who had fled their employers were crowded in the embassy's shelter. In response, the Kuwaiti Foreign Ministry again asked the Philippine embassy to refrain from sheltering fleeing maids. The victims were left stranded while their employers continued to face no legal consequences for their abuse.

Other foreign nationalities were also subjected to varying degrees of repression. Among them were citizens of Sudan, Somalia and Yemen-countries considered to have condoned Iraq's occupation of Kuwait. For example, Ahmad Mubarak, a Sudanese, was arrested in January 1992 and accused of collaboration with the Iraqi occupying authorities. During his 24 days of detention, he was "subjected to various forms of torture and his health deteriorated rapidly," according to an unpublished report by the Kuwaiti Association to Defend War Victims (kadwv), a local human rights group. Despite a lack of evidence of his collaboration, an order to deport him was issued. It was not carried out after the Association appealed to senior officials on his behalf. From various reports received by Middle East Watch, it appeared that merely belonging to a nationality that is considered suspect is enough to trigger arrest and mistreatment. For example, following the deterioration in 1992 in relations between Kuwait and Bahrain-a fellow member of the Gulf Cooperation Council, the military and political alliance that also includes Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates-two Bahraini citizens were arrested on suspicion of having knowledge of the whereabouts of other Bahrainis wanted for security offenses. They were both subjected to torture, including sexual abuse in one case, before being released for insufficient evidence of any criminal wrongdoing.

In January 1992, the Kuwaiti government lifted pre-publication censorship, in place since the dissolution of the National Assembly in July 1986. Despite this positive development, other restrictions on the press remained in place. The Publications Law of 1961 places severe restrictions on the press, especially after it was substantially amended in 1976 and 1986, each time, not coincidentally, in a year when the Emir of Kuwait dissolved the National Assembly.

During 1992, several reporters were charged with violating the press law. On March 3, Ahmed al-Jabr, a writer for al-Watan (The Nation), anindependent daily, was charged with "harming Kuwaiti foreign relations" for writing a column ridiculing the Egyptian government's handling of a reported Israeli spy ring. The Kuwaiti action came after the Egyptian ambassador to Kuwait protested to the Kuwaiti Minister of Information. This incident led to a heated exchange between the government on the one hand and the press and political opposition on the other. On March 14, the Crown Prince warned reporters against "taking any position that weakens the home front in the name of press freedom," and hinted that the government might re-introduce pre-publication censorship. This warning prompted seven opposition groups to issue a joint statement on March 20 registering their "disappointment" in the Crown Prince's comments and calling for tolerance of dissident opinions.

On April 28, Khdair al-Anezy, a reporter for the independent daily al-Qabas (The Spark), and Muhammed Jassem al-Saqr, the paper's editor-in-chief, were arrested and charged with violating secrecy laws for writing a story commenting on the restructuring of the Kuwaiti Minister of Defense. They were released on a KD1,000 (US$3,450) bail the same day. Al-Saqr was arrested again on October 11 for approving a series of articles critical of the Ministry of Information. He was released the same day after posting bail. Abdel-Latif al-De`aij, the writer of the articles, was detained for three days and also released on bail. All four cases, against al-Saqr and the two reporters, are still pending.

On May 20, Fouad al-Hashem, a reporter for Sawt al-Kuwait (Voice of Kuwait), was sentenced to a three-year suspended sentence and fined KD500 (US$1700) for writing an article considered by the government as "an affront to Islamic and public morals," a crime under the restrictive press code. On May 31, Diana Abdalla, Reuter's correspondent in Kuwait, was expelled from the country after she filed a report on the Chamber of Commerce elections emphasizing the close relationship between the Emir and a candidate who lost despite the government's support.

Two years after the Emir promised from his place of exile in Saudi Arabia to hold elections as soon as Kuwait was liberated, Kuwaitis went to the polls. On October 5, elections for the National Assembly were held for the first time since the Assembly was dissolved by the Emir in July 1986. Only 81,400 first-class male citizens over the age of 21 were eligible to vote, accounting for less than 11 percent of the native population. Opposition campaigns were limited by the press restrictions and a ban on public assembly. When opposition groups attempted to meet in Kuwait with representatives of the Washington-based National Republican Institute for International Affairs, the Ministry of Interior prevented the meeting from taking place because it violated the ban. Meetings in candidates' diwaniyyas, the traditional Kuwaiti living rooms, were not disrupted, thus reversing a policy adopted by the government in 1989 and 1990 of forcibly dispersing meetings in opposition supporters' diwaniyyas.

Kuwaiti authorities went to great lengths to limit the opposition's ability to campaign freely. When U.S. Ambassador Edward Gnehm met with opposition leaders, government-sponsored media criticized the meeting as meddling in the internal affairs of Kuwait. Echoing the same sentiment, Abdel-Aziz al-Mesa`id, the Speaker of the government-appointed National Council, criticized the U.S. ambassador for visiting opposition diwaniyyas and speaking about democracy.

Despite the government's attempt to limit the opposition's ability to campaign successfully, pro-government candidates secured only 18 out of the Assembly's 50 contested seats. The remaining 32 seats went to opposition and independent candidates. Opposition groups included: the Kuwaiti Democratic Forum, the only publicly announced political party; the Deputies Bloc, composed of members of the National Assembly dissolved in 1986; the Islamic Constitutional Movement, an Islamist group affiliated with the Muslim Brotherhood movement; the Popular Islamic Coalition, another Sunni Islamist group; and the National Islamic Alliance, a Shi`a Islamist group. In addition to the 12 seats that religious groups secured in the election, they enjoy the support of six other independent and tribal candidates, making the religious bloc the largest in the Assembly. A number of the recently elected Islamist members voiced their intention to bring Kuwaiti laws closer to the Islamic law of Shari`a.

Although the opposition and independent candidates gained a majority of the 50 contested seats, the majority's power was significantly curtailed when the Emir once again asked the Crown Prince to form a new government. Under Kuwaiti law and practice, appointed cabinet members are ex officio members of the National Assembly, provided that they do not exceed one third of the membership. The new cabinet, announced on October 14, was composed of five members of the Sabah family, five other government figures, and six others who were either independent or opposition members of the newly elected National Assembly. The Sabahs retained the sensitive posts of prime minister and first deputy prime minister, as well as the key portfolios of foreign affairs, defense, information and interior (in charge of internal security). Although obviously skewed in favor of the ruling family, the composition of the cabinet was nevertheless significant because it was the first time in Kuwait's recent history that such a significant proportion of the cabinet was assigned to the opposition and independent members of the Assembly. In the past, only one or two independent representatives were included.

The Right to Monitor

Established immediately after the Gulf War, the Kuwaiti Association to Defend War Victims has been the only independent local organization in Kuwait devoted exclusively to monitoring human rights. The Kuwaiti government, which has not formally recognized the organization's legal existence, has asked it to vacate the public school building it has occupied since its inception in March 1991. kadwv nevertheless continues its work, sometimes in coordination with government agencies, and participates in conferences and national committees alongside government representatives, indicating at least a tacit official recognition.

As in its first year, a focal point for kadwv in 1992 was the fate of over 900 Kuwaitis and others who are missing, have disappeared or are believed held by Iraq. The organization also followed the fate of those who disappeared or went missing after liberation, mainly Palestinians and Bedoons. During 1992, kadwv continued to provide aid to prisoners and their families. It also gave food and financial support to Bedoon families, many of whom have been reduced to destitution by official anti-Bedoon policies.

On July 7, over 50 Kuwaiti professionals announced the formation of the Kuwait Pro-Democracy Committee to "act as a public advocacy and information group on all issues relating to democracy, human rights and basic freedoms in Kuwait," according to a statement issued by the Committee on July 20. In November, the Committee issued a detailed evaluation of the October 5 elections. It called for enfranchising women and naturalized citizens.

In 1992, the Kuwaiti government allowed visits by several international human rights organizations, including Human Rights Watch, but significant delays in granting approval were reported. Although Kuwaiti officials were generally accessible to representatives of these organizations, information on human rights issues was rarely provided, even after repeated requests.

U.S. Policy

Since the end of the Gulf War, the U.S. has been the main force protecting Kuwait from the possibility of renewed Iraqi attack and rebuilding its economic and military infrastructure after the devastating Iraqi occupation.

A ten-year military agreement signed in September 1991 regulates the U.S.-Kuwaiti defense alliance. Under this agreement, the stationing of large numbers of land-based troops was eschewed in favor of maintaining a substantial naval presence nearby and holding frequent U.S.-Kuwaiti maneuvers. These exercises amount to a semi-permanent presence in light of their frequency, their duration and the large number of troops involved. Three major joint maneuvers-code-named Native Fury, Eager Mace and Intrinsic Action-were undertaken after August 2, 1992, the second anniversary of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. According to U.S. Defense Department officials, these exercises and the September 1991 agreement itself were intended as both a signal to Iraq and a demonstration of U.S. commitment to the security of Kuwait and stability of the Gulf.

The extensive U.S. military presence elsewhere in the Gulf has been coordinated through a number of similar, long-term military agreements thatthe U.S. has signed with the other members of the Gulf Cooperation Council (gcc). According to The Washington Post of September 5, Rear Admiral Raynor A. K. Taylor, who heads the 26-vessel U.S. task force in the region, said: "We've got ships going into ports left and right. We've got ships and airplanes doing bilateral exercises left and right."

The U.S. military also has been closely involved in training Kuwaiti forces and making Kuwaiti military facilities "inter-operational" with their U.S. counterparts to ensure early access in the case of renewed military operations. Many Kuwaitis believe that another Iraqi invasion is likely in the near future-a belief strengthened by continued references in the official Iraqi press to Kuwait as being part of Iraq.

Indeed, the defense of Kuwait has become an important component of U.S. policy doctrine in the Middle East. On September 11, Edward Djerejian, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, told the National Association of Arab Americans: "America has two key sets of policy goals in the Near East. The first has to do with a lasting and comprehensive peace between Israel and her Arab neighbors; the second-the creation of viable security arrangements for our friends and allies on the Arabian peninsula." Secretary Djerejian added that during a visit to the region, he "assured the gcc leaders that the United States will cooperate closely with them to meet legitimate defense needs. This includes both the sales of weapons...and bilateral security arrangements such as the periodic conduct of joint military exercises, the maintenance of an enhanced naval presence in the Gulf, and arrangements for the access and prepositioning of critical military materiel and equipment."

In October 1 testimony before the House Subcommittee on Europe and the Middle East, Secretary Djerejian praised the elevated level of military cooperation, noting that "[t]he establishment of Operation Southern Watch [code name for U.S. enforcement of a ban on Iraqi military flights in the southern part of Iraq] is a good example of a level of cooperation well beyond what existed two years ago, prior to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait." The Secretary added: "It is important to understand that the purposes of both arms sales and collective security measures are to deter threats to our shared interests, and to raise the threshold of future requirements for direct U.S. military action." Apparently as part of this project, in mid-October the Administration announced plans to sell 236 M1-Abrams tanks to Kuwait.

The need to put an end to human rights violations committed by Iraq in Kuwait was one of the stated reasons that the U.S. administration went to war against Iraq. However, since the liberation of Kuwait, U.S. senior officials have shied away from publicly criticizing the serious human rights violations committed by Kuwaiti authorities against foreign and Bedoon residents. This reticence comes despite what most Kuwaitis acknowledge to be their near-complete reliance on the U.S. to protect them from external threats. Little should have stood in the way of more forceful advocacy on human rights by the Bush administration, apart from an apparent desire to avoid political embarrassment by highlighting the human rights violations of a government restored largely by U.S. forces.

On most occasions in 1992 in which U.S. officials publicly addressed human rights issues, they emphasized perceived positive aspects or explained away violations. Commenting on the October 5 general elections, U.S. Ambassador Gnehm said that the elections had been "extremely good at establishing at a grassroots level the idea of democracy." A more qualified endorsement was issued on October 7 by Richard Boucher, a State Department spokesman. He said that the U.S. would encourage the Kuwaiti government to "move in the direction of expanding political participation, and in that regard, we welcome the statement by the Crown Prince on October 3 in support of granting women the right to vote." This comment was a considerable revision of an earlier State Department position that appeared to apologize for the limited franchise in Kuwait. On October 1, Lawrence Eagleburger, Acting Secretary of State, said that the U.S. had communicated its view on democracy to "all and sundry" and that he was "disappointed that the Kuwaitis have a different view on the subject. On the other hand while I don't defend it, they do come from a different culture and their views are obviously different than ours."

There were other times in 1992 when U.S. officials sought to deflect criticism of human rights abuses in Kuwait. In February, despite ample coverage in the media of the plight of hundreds of Asian maids who sought shelter in their embassies in Kuwait, spokesman Boucher claimed to be unaware of such cases. According to State Department officials, Ambassador Gnehm frequently took up the issue of the abused domestic workers with senior Kuwaiti officials, but Middle East Watch saw little evidence of follow-up to ensure that the problems were addressed or reforms implemented. In particular, in August, while failing to provide alternative shelters for abused maids, the Kuwaiti Foreign Ministry renewed its earlier order for foreign embassies to refrain from sheltering runaways.

The Work of Middle East Watch

Middle East Watch continued in 1992 to investigate post-liberation human rights abuses in Kuwait. It provided information to U.S. congressional staff, U.N. agencies and other groups investigating various aspects of the human rights situation in Kuwait. It briefed U.S., Canadian and Danish immigration officials and refugee aid groups to help them deal with a flood of refugees from Kuwait who had been pressured to leave or banned from returning.

To help especially vulnerable stateless refugees stranded outside Kuwait, Middle East Watch filed a substantial number of affidavits and appeals to immigration officials and judges in Canada, Cyprus, Denmark, Germany, Switzerland and the United States to help individual families in their quest for asylum. In February, in response to resurrected claims by the Kuwaiti and U.S. governments that the Iraqi occupying forces had killed scores or hundreds of babies by taking them out of incubators, Middle East Watch issued a 24-page report, "Kuwait's `Stolen' Incubators: the Widespread Repercussions of a Murky Incident," in which it published the contrary results of its exhaustive research on the subject. In May, Middle East Watch filed a brief with the Frankfurt District Court in support of a German television network being sued by Hill and Knowlton, the public relations firm engaged by the exiled Kuwaiti government, over its conclusions regarding the incubator allegation.

In August, Middle East Watch and the Human Rights Watch Women's Rights Project issued a joint 44-page report entitled Punishing the Victim: Rape and Mistreatment of Asian Maids in Kuwait. The report documented the physical and sexual abuse of foreign household workers in Kuwait.

In September, Middle East Watch briefed members of the U.S. Congress about human rights violations in Kuwait, in testimony before a joint session of the House Middle East and International Organizations subcommittees.
LEBANON

Human Rights Developments

Three years after the signing of the Taif Accord officially ended the civil war, human rights violations continue in Lebanon on a regular basis. Under President Elias el-Hrawi, the government has not moved forcefully to curb the increasingly serious abuses committed by its security forces and by organized militia. Meanwhile, the government instituted a number of severe restriction on the free exercise of civil and political rights by Lebanese citizens and long-time residents.

Scores were arbitrarily arrested in 1992 during sweeps targeting suspected opposition sympathizers. Many of those detained were known supporters of ousted former Prime Minister General Michel Aoun, who has been in exile in Marseilles, France since August 1991. Others were suspected of opposition either to the Hrawi government or to the Syrian presence in Lebanon. Middle East Watch learned from relatives of prisoners and from Lebanese human rights monitors of numerous cases of torture during interrogation by Lebanese security forces aided by Syrian intelligence officers. Most detainees were held incommunicado for long periods, denied access to family and legal counsel. None of those suspected of political and security offenses has been tried before regularly constituted courts; a small number were reportedly tried secretly before military tribunals.

Politically motivated abductions of opposition figures apparentlyresumed in Lebanon in 1992. On August 1, Nasri al-Khouri Sader, a lawyer affiliated with the opposition, was kidnapped with a number of companions by unknown assailants. Sader's abduction prompted a lengthy strike by the members of the Lebanese Lawyers Union. In a statement issued on September 10, the lawyers union protested the lack of progress in finding Sader and his companions. It said the abduction came "within a series of attacks against a large number of lawyers, the arrest, without due process of law, of tens of Lebanese citizens and their incommunicado detention." On September 15, Butrus Khawand, a member of the Political Bureau of the Lebanese Phalanges Party (al-Katayeb), was abducted by armed men near his home in Beirut. By the end of November, Sader and Khawand were still missing.

Resumption of kidnapping for political reasons was alarming to the Lebanese, since thousands disappeared or were taken hostage during the 15-year civil war. In March, the Lebanese government published its estimates of the war casualties: 144,240 killed; 197,506 wounded, including 13,455 who were left with permanent handicaps; and 17,415 missing, among whom 13,968 were classified as "kidnapped and presumed dead."

The Hrawi government has imposed restrictions on the press, radio and television. In September 1991, the Ministry of Justice served notice to Lebanese journalists that they should abide by 1977 press regulations banning criticism of the president and foreign heads of states, as well as publication of material that may adversely affect Lebanon's foreign relations. In April 1992, a sweeping new regulation banned the broadcast of material that disturbs public order, incites sectarian animosity, harms Lebanon's relations with other countries or disparages leaders of friendly nations.

Several newspapers and magazines were temporarily banned under these regulations in 1992. In February, two dailies, al-Nahar (The Day) and al-Diyar (The Homeland) were banned for publishing excerpts from a book by General Michel Aoun. In addition, a number of reporters were prosecuted for publishing articles critical of President Hrawi, his family or foreign leaders. In September, following a complaint by the Kuwaiti charg d'affairs in Lebanon, legal proceedings were opened against the Beirut daily al-Safir (The Ambassador) for publishing an article considered defamatory of Kuwaiti senior officials. On September 23, a reporter and three photographers were beaten by the police after they persisted in trying to cover a political meeting of the opposition.

The Lebanese government also tried to revive the near monopoly over radio and television that it enjoyed prior to the start of the civil war in 1975. It announced plans to close all private stations that were established during the 15-year war. Special "media prosecutors" were to be installed in the offices of the Chief Public Prosecutor to ensure compliance with the new policy.

The Hrawi government has gone to great lengths to stifle criticism of its policies both inside and outside Lebanon. In December 1991, its embassy in Paris was able to obtain a list of 85 individuals, most of them Lebanese, who demonstrated in Paris against President Hrawi during an official visit to France. Brigadier General Sami al-Khatib, the Lebanese Interior Minister, later said that the authorities intended to arrest the Lebanese citizens on the list if they returned to Lebanon; the foreigners would be barred from entering Lebanon. Similarly, in May 1992, the Chief Public Prosecutor, Judge Maurice Khawwam, started criminal proceedings against Najah Wakim, a member of the Chamber of Deputies who denounced corruption in the government. The proceedings were effectively suspended when the Chamber refused the government's demand to strip Wakim of his parliamentary immunity.

Freedom of association has likewise come under severe attack by the Hrawi government. During 1992, the government banned 138 private associations, including political organizations, claiming that they were illegal for having been formed during the civil war without proper licenses. In fact, a number of these groups, such as the pro-Iraq Ba`th Party and the Republican Party, predated the civil war. The ban limited the ability of opposition groups to prepare for the national elections held in August and September. On October 26, the main headquarters of the Lebanese Phalanges Party, in al-Ashrafiyya, were raided by Lebanese Army forces. They arrested the guards and confiscated all documents and other property. The party, one of the main Christianpolitical groups, had boycotted the elections.

In its zeal to hold parliamentary elections, the first since 1972, despite opposition by a majority of Lebanese, the Hrawi government rushed through preparations. It apparently was eager to complete the elections before the start of the Syrian force redeployment stipulated in the Taif Accord.

In the election process the Lebanese government violated both the spirit and letter of the Taif agreement, and circumvented a number of long-established electoral laws. More than one-third of potential voters were disenfranchised by a decision to abolish absentee ballots: the 933,000 persons who left Lebanon during the civil war were not allowed to vote unless they returned to cast their ballots in the electoral districts in which they were registered in the 1972 elections, while the 750,000 internally displaced Lebanese were not allowed to vote outside their original places of residence.

The election regulations passed during the year were fraught with provisions that served to strengthen government powers. For example, in certain provinces, district-level elections were introduced, apparently to improve election prospects for government candidates. In an attempt to lessen sectarian divisions, the Taif Accord had stipulated that elections be held at the provincial level, in the place of district-level contests that were common in the prewar period.

It was in this charged atmosphere that the elections were held between August 23 and September 6. Fearing retribution from Syrian forces and the Hrawi government, opposition groups did not feel free to campaign vigorously against either. Many potential opposition candidates, including members of parliament, boycotted the elections out of concern for their own safety. A number of senior government officials, including Fares Bouez, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and son-in-law of President Hrawi, tendered their resignations in protest of the timing of the elections. The boycott was extensive in most Christian areas, and in the Kesrouan district, it was nearly total; a by-election had to be held on October 11 to fill the district's five seats. In the Jubail district, a candidate won with only 41 votes cast. With most of the Christian opposition and significant segments of the Muslim opposition having boycotted the contest, the new 128-member Chamber of Deputies is largely made up of Hrawi government loyalists and pro-Syrian figures, as well as fundamentalist Shi`a and Sunni representatives.

The pervasive Syrian influence in Lebanon in 1992 supported the repressive measures of the Lebanese government. Taking advantage of Syria's September 1991 agreement with Lebanon, agents of Syrian Military Intelligence were active in the Beirut International Airport and other ports of entry into Lebanon, to prevent Syrian government opponents from entering or leaving the country without being interrogated or detained. One detainee was Dr. Akram Salim Ishty, a Lebanese physician and a professor at the American University of Beirut. He was arrested by Syrian forces based in Lebanon and taken to jail in Syria, apparently to induce the surrender of his brother, a dissident Ba`th Party member.

The 35,000 Syrian troops that are still deployed in most of Lebanon are an effective deterrent to the voicing of any criticism of Syria. Contrary to earlier hints that Syrian troops may soon be redeployed outside Greater Beirut to the eastern Beqa`, Abdel-Halim Khaddam, Syria's Vice President, said in early November that such redeployment would take place only after the constitutional changes stipulated in the Taif Accord were adopted.

Israel and the Israeli-sponsored South Lebanon Army (sla) have been responsible for serious human rights violations in Lebanon. Shelling and air raids by Israel and its allies on the civilian areas of Lebanon's southern towns and villages, while ostensibly directed against guerilla bases, produced a heavy toll of civilian casualties. The sla also engaged in the indiscriminate shelling of adjacent villages, the forced conscription of young men, and a policy of arbitrary arrest, lengthy incommunicado detention and torture of suspected opponents held in its notorious Khiam prison. An estimated 200 detainees are still being held in Khiam without charge or trial and without access to family or independent outsiders.

The Iranian-supported Hezbollah is the only other major militia that has not been disarmed by the Lebanese government. It, too, has been implicated in a significant number of human rights violations. In December 1991, MustafaJeha, a Lebanese Shi`a writer who had been a critic of the fundamentalist group, was assassinated. On June 3, 1992, an unarmed doctor was killed by Hezbollah partisans in Tyre after he had voiced criticism of the party. These abuses were all the more alarming after Hezbollah's victories in the second and third rounds of parliamentary election. Now that Hezbollah controls a significant bloc of votes in the new Chamber of Deputies, the government may be less inclined to curb human rights abuses by Hezbollah loyalists.

Ostensibly aiming to pressure Israel to abandon the Lebanese border area it controls, Hezbollah has engaged in indiscriminate shelling of northern Israel, causing civilian casualties. Hezbollah's attacks on areas under sla control have also caused extensive damage and casualties among noncombatants.

The Right to Monitor

Although there is no explicit prohibition against human rights work in Lebanon, human rights groups and individual activists report that various extralegal methods are used to restrict their activity. Lebanese and Syrian security forces, as well as the militias allied with them or with Iran and Israel, have employed violent tactics aimed at stifling human rights reporting, including assassinations, kidnapping, torture and death threats.

While a number of groups operate openly, but cautiously, others function only clandestinely or abroad. Among the established groups are the Committee for the Defense of Democratic Freedoms in Lebanon, the Lebanese Association for Human Rights and the Lebanese Lawyers Association, all based in Beirut. Outside Lebanon, the Lebanese League for Human Rights is especially active in France and Belgium.

Humanitarian organizations report regularly on human rights developments in Lebanon. Among the Beirut-based groups are the Lebanese ngo Forum and the Movement of the Handicapped & Youth for Human Rights and Peace. The Centre for Lebanese Studies, of Oxford, and the London-based Lebanon Information Processing Services, affiliated with the British Refugee Council, publish regular bulletins on human rights in Lebanon. The Lebanon Report, published monthly by the Lebanese Center for Policy Studies, a research institution in Beirut, regularly contains articles related to human rights.

Because of the dangers human rights monitors face, they have avoided issuing public reports about specific abuses. Only organizations functioning abroad or underground have gathered and disseminated such information publicly.

U.S. Policy

U.S. policy toward Lebanon has been guided by three overriding concerns: restoring the authority of the Lebanese government, ensuring the continued participation of Lebanon in the Arab-Israeli peace talks, and improving U.S. relations with Syria. Unfortunately, in pursuing these goals the Bush administration appears to have subordinated human rights concerns. During 1992, U.S. officials avoided voicing public criticism of human rights violations committed by Lebanese, Syrian or Israeli government forces or their allies in Lebanon.

Nor, until after the polling had taken place, did the U.S. government voice public criticism of the unfair manner in which elections were being prepared, against the wishes of most Lebanese. Indeed, the Lebanese government fixed the date for these controversial elections only two days after Secretary Baker met with President Hrawi in Lebanon, indicating that the Lebanese government was not sufficiently apprised of U.S. concerns about the elections.

Once the elections were completed, U.S. officials voiced some criticism. On September 8, for the first time expressing public disappointment at the election results, State Department spokesman Richard Boucher said:

The United States is clearly disappointed that the elections were not prepared and not carried out in a manner to ensure the broadest national consensus. The turnout of eligible voters in some locations was extremely low. There were also widespread reports of irregularities which might have been obviated had there been foreign observers. As a consequence the results don't reflect the full spectrum of the body politic in Lebanon.

Boucher noted balloting irregularities. However, he failed to register any protest over the arrests of scores of government opponents during the election period, one action among many taken by the Lebanese government to limit the ability of the opposition to run an effective campaign.

U.S. criticism came only after it became clear that fundamentalist groups and their supporters had secured over 30 seats in the 128-seat parliament-the largest bloc in the new assembly. It appeared as if the administration refrained from criticizing the elections so long as loyalists of the Hrawi government and Syria were expected to prevail.

On October 1, Edward Djerejian, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, repeated before a House subcommittee the remarks made earlier by spokesman Boucher. Testifying before the House Subcommittee on Europe and the Middle East, Secretary Djerejian announced that the administration was considering providing assistance to the Lebanese military. He sought congressional support for the resumption of training in the United States for Lebanese officers and enlisted persons. The administration also wanted to provide Lebanon with "non-lethal excess defense articles that would enhance the Lebanese Army's mobility and range of operation," the Secretary added. The U.S. provided Lebanon with $6.8 million in fiscal year 1991 for military training and supplementary support, and an estimated $4.1 in fiscal year 1992. For fiscal year 1993, the administration requested $5.4 million for the two purposes.

Despite the relatively low level of aid to Lebanon, the U.S. government maintains profound influence in the country. Lebanese of all factions look to the United States to provide help in restoring normalcy, including respect for civil and political rights. They feel that, as the U.S. helped broker the Taif Accord, so it should continue its efforts and help the Lebanese conclude a social contract based on respect for human rights. Their hope has not been fulfilled.

The Work of Middle East Watch

In 1992, Middle East Watch monitored events in Lebanon affecting human rights, including actions taken by the Lebanese, Syrian and Israeli governments, as well as by pro-Iranian Hezbollah and the Israeli-supported South Lebanon Army. On September 15, Middle East Watch testified about conditions in Lebanon before a joint session of the Europe and Middle East and the International Organizations House subcommittees. During the year, Middle East Watch wrote to President Hrawi voicing its concern over the waves of arrests of political opponents, but has received no response to its letters.
SAUDI ARABIA

Human Rights Developments

The single major development in 1992 was King Fahd's adoption on March 1 of the Basic Law of Government, the Law of the Consultative Council and the Law of Provinces. In addition to its poor human rights practices, Saudi Arabia had no legal regime to protect human rights against arbitrary arrest, lengthy pretrial detention or physical abuse. Nor has the Kingdom acceded to most international human rights agreements, including the International Covenant for Civil and Political Rights. Because of this legal vacuum, human rights monitors were hoping that the long-promised constitutional reforms would address this void by providing an adequate formal mechanism to protect human rights.

Issued amid great fanfare, the Basic Law of Government-the closest that Saudi Arabia has ever come to adopting a constitution-was a disappointment. Article 26 provides that "the state shall protect human rights according to Shari`a," or Islamic law; this provision marked the first time in recent history that the government formally acknowledged the concept of citizens' rights vis-a-vis the state. However, in the few instances in which the new law refers to specific civil and political rights, the protection afforded is highly qualified or made conditional to the precepts of the Shari`a, which in Saudi Arabia is not codified in written statutes. The final nominal authority for the interpretation of the Shari`a is the Council of Senior Scholars.Composed of 18 clergymen appointed by the King, the Council has traditionally deferred to the King's interpretation in political matters, including those affecting human rights. Thus, under the Basic Law, the Saudi government still retains near complete discretion to define the content and scope of the rights it will respect.

The Saudi legal system is notorious for its due process deficiencies. Arrest and detention procedures are governed by Imprisonment and Detention Law No. 31 of 1978 and its 1982 bylaws issued by the Minister of Interior, Prince Nayef ibn Abdel Aziz. With few restrictions on the grounds or duration of pretrial detention, they allow detainees to be held indefinitely without trial or judicial review. Nor is there a requirement that family members be notified of an arrest. Although in recent years a family is often able to find out if one of its members is detained, formal notification is rare. This problem applies equally to Americans and other foreigners arrested in Saudi Arabia.

It is equally rare for a detainee to be informed of the charges against him or her. Saudi law permits interrogation of detainees without the benefit of counsel and contains no explicit ban on torture or cruel and inhuman punishment. Indeed, the use of force to elicit confessions is commonplace in the Saudi security system. This may be in part because of the Saudi legal system's over-reliance on confessions. By law, flogging, indefinite solitary confinement, and deprivation of family visits are explicitly sanctioned as methods of disciplining prisoners.

The Saudi government continues to detain without trial scores of alleged political and security offenders, many of whom have languished in prison for over four years. Over 40 of these prisoners are Shi`a Saudis who were accused of voicing critical views of the government's anti-Shi`a policies or belonging to banned political organizations. At least nine members of the Murra tribe have been in prison since October 1991 for their peaceful opposition to a government-ordered resettlement of residents of al-Sauda, a small hamlet populated entirely by members of the Murra tribe and located on the road to Qatar. Families of the detainees believe that most of them have been beaten and that two-Hamad Muhammed al-Qab`an and `Obaid ibn Qab`an-risk being executed. Such fears were heightened by recent border tensions-including a military skirmish in October-between Saudi Arabia and Qatar, where the tribe exercises considerable influence.

Prolonged detention without trial was also reported of scores involved in commercial disputes or business failures, some of in prison for as long as 13 years. Hundreds of foreigners accused of violating the stringent visa regulations, by overstaying their residency permits or changing their employers, are also held in crowded, substandard deportation facilities throughout the Kingdom.

Despite occasional royal orders instructing detention authorities not to torture prisoners-usually issued after the death of a detainee due to torture-there have been numerous reports of torture in Saudi detention facilities. For example, in the chapter on Saudi Arabia in the Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in 1991, issued in January 1992, the U.S. State Department described "credible reports of injuries and the deaths of at least two, and possibly more, persons caused by beating or the use of excessive force while being held in official custody. In addition, there was a credible report of the torture of several foreigners in Saudi military custody."

During 1992, Middle East Watch has received a number of reports of torture in custody, some of which led to death. On March 28 in Riyadh, Muhammed Fahad al-Mutairi, a Saudi bank employee, was arrested by the authorities on suspicion of embezzlement. Four days later, he died in custody after being severely beaten. On April 2 in Jiddah, Abdullahi Abbas, a Ghanaian citizen, was arrested for overstaying his visa. He died in custody on April 16. Witnesses reported to Middle East Watch that he too had been severely beaten during his imprisonment.

Middle East Watch knows of no case in which an officer accused of torture has been prosecuted or tried, an official inaction that effectively condones further abuse. Saudi authorities have stymied efforts to document mistreatment of prisoners by keeping its investigations secret and by declining to respond to inquiries by families or human rights groups. In addition, the Saudi government has almost never allowed independent observersto visit its detention facilities. The only exception was during the Desert Storm military campaign in January 1991, when after months of refusal, it allowed the International Committee of the Red Cross to visit Iraqi prisoners of war.

Flogging, amputations and beheading are also used by the Saudi legal system for the punishment of a variety of crimes, including the expression of critical views of the government or the making of controversial statements on religious matters. On September 3, Sadeq Abdel-Karim Mal-Allah, a Saudi Shi`a, was beheaded in public in the Eastern town of al-Qatif. He had been arrested in 1988, at the age of 17, and accused of "slandering God, His Prophet and the Holy Qur'an." According to a statement issued by the Ministry of Interior, a royal order was issued ratifying the decision of Shari`a courts ordering Mal-Allah's execution based on his alleged slanderous statements.

Following the execution of Mal-Allah, the family of Abdel-Khaleq Abdel-Jalil al-Janbi, a Shi`a student, learned that he, too, had been accused of blasphemy and threatened with execution. In January, al-Janbi and another Shi`a student, Turki Muhammed al-Turki, had been arrested by the Directorate of General Investigations after a debate at King Abdel-Aziz University in Jiddah in which they disputed Wahhabi views regarding the Shi`a faith. Wahhabism, the Saudi official dogma, holds as heretical most Shi`a interpretations of Islam.

During October, three Shi`a Saudis-Muhammed al-Shabib, Abdel-Wahed Ahmed Hussein al-Shaikh and Hmaide al-`Aisan-were arrested and accused of propagating religious views contrary to the received dogma. While al-Shabib was released, the other two remained in prison through November.

A number of Shi`a religious students and teachers, apprehended in previous years, remained in prison in 1992, having been accused of voicing disagreement with Wahhabism. Those still in prison include Ali Abu-Ouais, arrested in November 1990, and Sayyed Yaseen al-Sayigh, in detention since October 1989. Hamza al-Mosawi, arrested in October 1991 for his religious views, was released in September 1992.

Corporal punishment continued to be applied by Shari`a courts in 1992. In June, Yousef Khouri, a 63-year-old Lebanese citizen, was sentenced to 18 months in prison and 500 lashes. He was accused of possessing of 12 bottles of whisky. The sentence was passed in a summary proceeding in a Shari`a court without the benefit of legal counsel.

Saudi Arabia also continued its policy of executing drug traffickers, after proceedings that fall far short of international standards on fair trials. On October 4, General Mohammed al-Maleki, a drug enforcement official, stated that, "more than 38 people of different nationalities have been executed since the death penalty was enforced against drug smugglers" in 1987. Most were convicted without the benefit of legal counsel.

Human rights abuses are facilitated in Saudi Arabia by the absence of an independent judiciary and the lack of scrutiny by a representative body or a free press. Although the March 1992 Basic Law of Government formally recognizes, for the first time, the principle of an independent judiciary, Middle East Watch continued to receive reports from within the judiciary that judges periodically come under pressure from senior members of the royal family and other government officials. Not surprisingly, they remain afraid to check official abuse of power. Moreover, under the Saudi government's interpretation of the Shari`a, the King is the spiritual as well as temporal head of the community (waliyy al-amr). He thus has broad discretion to overrule judicial decisions. Provincial governors in Saudi Arabia also have the authority to review court decisions.

Because of the blurred distinction between civil and criminal law in Saudi Arabia, detention and torture are common even in cases of commercial and labor disputes. This is compounded by the royal family's deep involvement in many business enterprises as well as its control of all senior governmental posts. The prime minister, his two deputies and the ministers of interior, defense, foreign affairs and their deputies are all members of the royal family. All the provincial governors of Saudi Arabia are members of the royal family or of the Sudairi family, maternal relatives of King Fahd.

The royal family's dominance of the legislative and executive branches of government, its significant influence on the judiciary and its commandingposition in the business community have led to a concentration of power that has few parallels in the world-a state of affairs that has been immunized from criticism by the absence of a free press or parliament. This monopoly of power has left government officials and other prominent citizens, primarily members of the royal family and their associates, free to abuse their positions.

The March 1992 laws codifying the largely unwritten legal system, including the Basic Law of Government and the Consultative Council Law, have not significantly changed the lack of legal protection of human rights. In fact, far from adhering to international standards on civil and political rights, these new laws do little more than codify royal authoritarianism, and deprive Saudi citizens of even the modest electoral rights they already had.

By virtue of the new laws, Saudi citizens today have fewer civil and political rights than they had in 1926. Their right to vote for national and provincial councils is eliminated; the Consultative Council is stripped of the little power it had left; rights of women and minorities are totally ignored; existing severe restrictions on thought, religion, speech, assembly and association have been maintained; and no ban is articulated on extrajudicial killings, torture or cruel or inhuman punishment. The new laws expand King Fahd's near absolute authority over both legislative and executive matters. They were drafted by an ad hoc committee headed by Prince Nayef, the King's brother who also heads the Interior Ministry, the government agency identified with most violations of human rights in Saudi Arabia.

The Law of the Consultative Council replaces the existing Consultative Council, established in 1926, with a new advisory group by the same name that was to be appointed by King Fahd by the beginning of September. By the end of November, only the president of the new Council had been appointed: Shaikh Muhammed ibn Jubair, who is a former minister of justice, a Shari`a judge and a long-time associate of King Fahd.

The King will have the right to dismiss any or all of the new council's 61 members. The Consultative Council is allowed to discuss and interpret laws, but has no power to legislate. The government is not required to submit its budget to the Council or consult it on important decisions. Its powers, such as they are, remain subordinated to those of the Council of Ministers, which is chaired by the King in his role as Prime Minister.

The new laws do not ban discrimination on the basis of gender or religious beliefs. Nor is there any remedy in the new laws for the notorious due process deficiencies of the Saudi penal system. Based on Shari'a as interpreted by government-appointed clergy, the unwritten criminal code does not permit defendants to have legal representation in the courtroom, even when facing the death penalty.

Comments by Saudi leaders indicate that the new statutes are not the beginning of a gradual process of democratization. Rather, they appear to be the maximum concessions that the ruling family is willing to grant in response to internal demands and external pressures.

In 1992, Saudi Arabia continued to stifle the expression of views critical of its own on matters both secular and religious. During late 1991 and early 1992, scores of Islamist opponents were rounded up by the secret police after they criticized the government in mosque sermons, secret leaflets and clandestinely distributed audiocassettes. A number of Islamist leaders who publicly criticized the government were dismissed from their government jobs and banned from travel or from public speaking.

In July, a 47-page Memorandum of Advice signed by 109 Islamist intellectuals was distributed in the Kingdom, calling for reform of the public administration and increased accountability of government officials. The signers also sought greater autonomy for Islamic preachers, including freedom of expression, as well as an end to torture and arbitrary arrests and searches. Saudi authorities questioned and threatened a number of the signatories and attacked the banned memorandum in the official media. King Fahd also convened the Council of Senior Scholars which subsequently issued a strong condemnation of the memorandum. The Council, in turn, was criticized by a number of the Kingdom's more independent clergy. Following the distribution of the Memorandum of Advice, more Islamists were formally banned from publicly speaking against the government and a number of them were suspended from their government jobs.

The government owns and operates all radio and television stations in the Kingdom, and it keeps the privately owned local press on a very short leash, not allowing it to publish any critical views of government policies. A number of foreign publications were barred from the country in 1992 for publishing such views. In September, Khalil al-Fezai`, editor-in-chief of al-Yaum (Today), was dismissed by the Minister of Information, who is authorized under the press code to take such action without the necessity of a hearing. It was widely believed that his dismissal was prompted by his approval of articles perceived as critical of policies of Prince Muhammed ibn Fahd, the King's son, who is also the governor of the Eastern Province, where the newspaper is based.

During 1992, the royal family and its close associates expanded their influence over major regional and international news organizations. For example, the new owner of the international news agency United Press International is a brother-in-law of King Fahd, who also owns MBC, a London-based, worldwide satellite radio and television network. Such control, in addition to majority or controlling ownership in major dailies in the region, strengthens considerably the Saudi government's near monopoly over news reaching Saudi Arabia about the country and other subjects of interest to its rulers.

The long-standing Saudi policy of severely restricting access by foreign reporters to the Kingdom was reinstated during 1992 after a brief interlude before and after the Gulf War. Most applications by journalists from major U.S. and British television, radio and newspaper outlets were turned down. It thus remains difficult to follow events in Saudi Arabia except through government channels.

The Right to Monitor

Since monitoring human rights violations is defined by the government as political activity, Saudi Arabian law and practice strictly prohibit such an undertaking. Saudi opposition political groups have had to work clandestinely inside the country or operate outside the Kingdom. A few affiliated human rights committees operate from Damascus, London, Tehran and the United States. Among these groups is the London-based International Committee for Human Rights in the Gulf and Arabian Peninsula. The Committee publishes occasional reports as well as Arabia Monitor, an English monthly started in 1992 and issued from Washington. Another affiliated magazine, Al-Jazeera al-Arabia (The Arabian Peninsula), an Arabic monthly issued in London, regularly publishes articles on human rights violations, especially those related to the Shi`a minority.

Following reports of the forced repatriation of close to 300 Iraqi refugees in December 1991, as well as violent clashes at the Rafha refugee camp in which a number of refugees were killed, Saudi Arabia permitted international organizations to expand their activities in the camps for Iraqi refugees. Since early 1992, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the International Committee of the Red Cross have made regular visits to both the Rafha and al-Artawiyya camps and have been closely involved in resettling refugees. The United States, Iran, Sweden and Finland have agreed to accept several thousand refugees from these camps in 1992 and 1993. The United States has set a quota of 3,500 refugees for the two years.

Requests by Middle East Watch to visit Saudi Arabia, to interview refugees about conditions in Iraq and to take up issues on Saudi human rights practices with local authorities, went unanswered in 1992. Similarly, Saudi authorities have failed to respond to the numerous inquiries that Middle East Watch made during the year on specific incidents of human rights violations.

U.S. Policy

The United States, by virtue of a long and intimate relationship with Saudi Arabia spanning over 50 years, has been in a position to help effect an improvement in the dismal human rights record. But the U.S. government has rarely criticized Saudi violations. Human rights principles appear to have been subordinated to strategic and economic interests, in the mistaken belief that promotion of human rights and participatory democracy in the Kingdom would have a deleterious effect on those interests.

The broad range of cooperation between the two countries is premised on a U.S. commitment to the defense of Saudi Arabia, a commitment demonstrated by the military campaign to reverse the Iraqi invasion of neighboring Kuwait. President Bush's original justification for dispatching U.S. troops to Saudi Arabia, in August 1990, was the perceived threat of an Iraqi invasion of the Kingdom. Post-war cooperation has involved extensive contacts between the two countries on future security arrangements in the Gulf, Saudi defense plans, the fate of the Iraqi government of Saddam Hussein, the Arab-Israeli peace process, and economic aid to the Commonwealth of Independent States.

The Bush administration has identified defense of the Arabian Peninsula a key determinant of U.S. policy in the Middle East. On September 11, Edward Djerejian, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, told the National Association of Arab Americans:

America has two key sets of policy goals in the Near East. The first has to do with a lasting and comprehensive peace between Israel and her Arab neighbors; the second-the creation of viable security arrangements for our friends and allies on the Arabian Peninsula.

On October 1, in testimony before the U.S. House of Representatives, Secretary Djerejian explained further the purpose of these close ties. After outlining levels of cooperation with the six members of the Gulf Cooperation Council (gcc), which he praised as much closer than before the Gulf War, Secretary Djerejian said, "We have now concluded or renewed agreements with four of the gcc states and have excellent working arrangements with all of them....It is important to understand that the purpose of both arms sales and collective security measures are to deter threats to our shared interests, and to raise the threshold of future requirements for direct U.S. military actions."

Cooperation between the two governments has included bilateral security arrangements and the provision of advanced U.S. weapons in a package totaling $14 billion for 1992-93. The U.S. military holds periodic joint exercises with Saudi forces, maintains an enhanced naval presence in the Persian Gulf, prepositions substantial materiel in the country, and has unrestricted access to Saudi facilities.

This close cooperation and the military alliance that is projected to last long into the future, was underscored by U.S. Rear Admiral Raynor A. K. Taylor, who told The Washington Post in September: "We've got ships going into ports left and right. We've got ships and airplanes doing bilateral exercises left and right....Having to have a 90-day advance notice to go into Jiddah or Dammam, that doesn't exist anymore....The rapport and working relationships are a lot healthier."

On September 11, as part of this long-standing armament program, President Bush announced the sale of 72 F-15 fighter planes to Saudi Arabia. The $9 billion deal, which includes 48 modified F-15E Strike Eagles-planes that have never before been exported-came despite the President's 1991 initiative promising to curb the flow of arms to the Middle East.

Considering this special relationship between the two countries and the enormous goodwill the Saudi government has towards the United States, it is remarkable that the Bush administration did not utilize its leverage to bring about a significant change in the Saudi human rights record. A sustained engagement with the Saudi government aimed at improving this record would enhance the U.S. position in the country, especially among members of the nascent reform movement. In Middle East Watch's judgement, such engagement would probably strengthen, rather than weaken, the special relationship between the two countries, particularly in the long run.

As in previous years, U.S. officials refrained in 1992 from voicing public criticism of Saudi human rights violations, some of which were catalogued, in some detail, in the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1991. Even when victims of abuse are American citizens, U.S. officials have shied away from publicly criticizing Saudi human rights practices.

The U.S. embassy has complained occasionally that Saudi authoritiesrarely notify it of the arrest of American citizens. According to State Department officials interviewed by Middle East Watch in September 1992, Saudi Arabia still declines to sign a standard bilateral consular agreement to allow for immediate access to American detainees, even though U.S. regulations provide Saudi consular officers with immediate access to Saudi detainees in U.S. jails.

During 1992, the Bush Administration continued its efforts to prevent Scott Nelson, an American safety engineer who had worked at a Saudi government-owned hospital, from obtaining civil damages in U.S. courts for unlawful detention and torture he suffered while in Saudi Arabia. Following a call for help contained in a letter from Prince Bandar ibn Sultan, the Bush administration filed an amicus curiae brief with the U.S. Supreme Court supporting the Saudi position that U.S. courts have no jurisdiction in the case under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976 (fsia). Despite the duty under international law to provide remedies to torture victims, the administration adopted a cramped reading of the fsia provisions that a lower appellate court had found allowed Nelson's suit.

The Administration also lobbied members of the House Judiciary Committee to stymie efforts to amend the fsia. In May 1991, an amendment to the law was introduced in the House of Representatives that would have made explicitly clear that American victims of torture and the family of victims of extrajudicial killings abroad are entitled to a civil remedy in U.S. courts. Despite the administration's opposition, the amendment was adopted by the House Judiciary Committee on September 23, 1992, although it ultimately never reached the House floor.

U.S. officials went out of their way to praise the establishment of an appointed Consultative Council and the adoption of the Basic Law of Government-actions that merely expanded royal authority, and outlawed democracy and elections as Western imports not suitable for Saudi citizens. Secretary Djerejian told a House subcommittee in March that, following the adoption of the laws, President Bush wrote to King Fahd "to commend his initiative." Secretary Djerejian also described the laws as "a very important statement on expanding the participation of the citizens in the Saudi governmental structure and processes." The U.S. government, the Secretary added, had welcomed "King Fahd's decision to establish a consultative council...and his reaffirmation of limits on governmental interference in citizens' private lives, in accordance with Saudi religion and tradition." He also asserted that "rights of Saudi citizens are enumerated" in the new laws.

This praise was jarring in light of the statement by King Fahd that: "The democratic system that is predominant in the world is not a suitable system for the peoples of our region. Our peoples' makeup and unique qualities are different from those of the rest of the world....The system of free elections is not suitable to our country....In may view, Western democracies may be suitable in their own countries but they do not suit other countries." Secretary Djerejian, while noting without criticizing that the Consultative Council would not be an elected body, suggested in congressional testimony that in evaluating the Saudi laws "you have to remember the environment in the Arab world" and "Saudi religion and tradition." This relativism stood in sharp contrast to U.S. claims of support elsewhere of "genuine periodic elections."

The Work of Middle East Watch

In 1992, Middle East Watch continued its close monitoring of human rights developments in the Kingdom. It also continued its attempts to engage the government formally in a dialogue on human rights matters. On a number of occasions during the year, Middle East Watch communicated with both the Saudi and U.S. governments over a number of developments, seeking clarifications or providing criticisms. Middle East Watch's requests to send a mission to the Kingdom have yet to be answered.

In May, Middle East Watch issued Empty Reforms: Saudi Arabia's New Basic Laws, a 65-page report on the constitutional changes announced by King Fahd on March 1. The report demonstrated that the laws introduced by Saudi Arabia do not provide recognition or protection of human rights. The report also pointed out that in some key areas, such as elections and the mandate of the Consultative Council, the announced changes were a step backwards.

In September, Human Rights Watch filed a brief with the U.S. Supreme Court as amicus curiae in support of Scott Nelson, an American worker who is suing the government of Saudi Arabia for torture and arbitrary arrest during his employment with a Saudi government agency. The Bush administration filed a brief with the court supporting the Saudi government's contention that U.S. courts lack jurisdiction under the 1976 Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act (fsia). In 1991, Nelson had won an appeals court ruling that U.S. courts have jurisdiction under the "commercial activities" exception to fsia. Human Rights Watch argued that the appeal court judgement was correct because torture and arbitrary detention are routinely used in Saudi Arabia to resolve commercial disputes involving Saudi government interests.

Also in September, in testimony before the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Europe and the Middle East and the Subcommittee on International Organizations, Middle East Watch briefed the two subcommittees on conditions in Saudi Arabia. It urged the U.S. government to use its good offices to improve Saudi Arabia's observance of internationally recognized human rights.

SAUDI ARABIA

Human Rights Developments

The single major development in 1992 was King Fahd's adoption on March 1 of the Basic Law of Government, the Law of the Consultative Council and the Law of Provinces. In addition to its poor human rights practices, Saudi Arabia had no legal regime to protect human rights against arbitrary arrest, lengthy pretrial detention or physical abuse. Nor has the Kingdom acceded to most international human rights agreements, including the International Covenant for Civil and Political Rights. Because of this legal vacuum, human rights monitors were hoping that the long-promised constitutional reforms would address this void by providing an adequate formal mechanism to protect human rights.

Issued amid great fanfare, the Basic Law of Government-the closest that Saudi Arabia has ever come to adopting a constitution-was a disappointment. Article 26 provides that "the state shall protect human rights according to Shari`a," or Islamic law; this provision marked the first time in recent history that the government formally acknowledged the concept of citizens' rights vis-a-vis the state. However, in the few instances in which the new law refers to specific civil and political rights, the protection afforded is highly qualified or made conditional to the precepts of the Shari`a, which in Saudi Arabia is not codified in written statutes. The final nominal authority for the interpretation of the Shari`a is the Council of Senior Scholars.Composed of 18 clergymen appointed by the King, the Council has traditionally deferred to the King's interpretation in political matters, including those affecting human rights. Thus, under the Basic Law, the Saudi government still retains near complete discretion to define the content and scope of the rights it will respect.

The Saudi legal system is notorious for its due process deficiencies. Arrest and detention procedures are governed by Imprisonment and Detention Law No. 31 of 1978 and its 1982 bylaws issued by the Minister of Interior, Prince Nayef ibn Abdel Aziz. With few restrictions on the grounds or duration of pretrial detention, they allow detainees to be held indefinitely without trial or judicial review. Nor is there a requirement that family members be notified of an arrest. Although in recent years a family is often able to find out if one of its members is detained, formal notification is rare. This problem applies equally to Americans and other foreigners arrested in Saudi Arabia.

It is equally rare for a detainee to be informed of the charges against him or her. Saudi law permits interrogation of detainees without the benefit of counsel and contains no explicit ban on torture or cruel and inhuman punishment. Indeed, the use of force to elicit confessions is commonplace in the Saudi security system. This may be in part because of the Saudi legal system's over-reliance on confessions. By law, flogging, indefinite solitary confinement, and deprivation of family visits are explicitly sanctioned as methods of disciplining prisoners.

The Saudi government continues to detain without trial scores of alleged political and security offenders, many of whom have languished in prison for over four years. Over 40 of these prisoners are Shi`a Saudis who were accused of voicing critical views of the government's anti-Shi`a policies or belonging to banned political organizations. At least nine members of the Murra tribe have been in prison since October 1991 for their peaceful opposition to a government-ordered resettlement of residents of al-Sauda, a small hamlet populated entirely by members of the Murra tribe and located on the road to Qatar. Families of the detainees believe that most of them have been beaten and that two-Hamad Muhammed al-Qab`an and `Obaid ibn Qab`an-risk being executed. Such fears were heightened by recent border tensions-including a military skirmish in October-between Saudi Arabia and Qatar, where the tribe exercises considerable influence.

Prolonged detention without trial was also reported of scores involved in commercial disputes or business failures, some of in prison for as long as 13 years. Hundreds of foreigners accused of violating the stringent visa regulations, by overstaying their residency permits or changing their employers, are also held in crowded, substandard deportation facilities throughout the Kingdom.

Despite occasional royal orders instructing detention authorities not to torture prisoners-usually issued after the death of a detainee due to torture-there have been numerous reports of torture in Saudi detention facilities. For example, in the chapter on Saudi Arabia in the Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in 1991, issued in January 1992, the U.S. State Department described "credible reports of injuries and the deaths of at least two, and possibly more, persons caused by beating or the use of excessive force while being held in official custody. In addition, there was a credible report of the torture of several foreigners in Saudi military custody."

During 1992, Middle East Watch has received a number of reports of torture in custody, some of which led to death. On March 28 in Riyadh, Muhammed Fahad al-Mutairi, a Saudi bank employee, was arrested by the authorities on suspicion of embezzlement. Four days later, he died in custody after being severely beaten. On April 2 in Jiddah, Abdullahi Abbas, a Ghanaian citizen, was arrested for overstaying his visa. He died in custody on April 16. Witnesses reported to Middle East Watch that he too had been severely beaten during his imprisonment.

Middle East Watch knows of no case in which an officer accused of torture has been prosecuted or tried, an official inaction that effectively condones further abuse. Saudi authorities have stymied efforts to document mistreatment of prisoners by keeping its investigations secret and by declining to respond to inquiries by families or human rights groups. In addition, the Saudi government has almost never allowed independent observersto visit its detention facilities. The only exception was during the Desert Storm military campaign in January 1991, when after months of refusal, it allowed the International Committee of the Red Cross to visit Iraqi prisoners of war.

Flogging, amputations and beheading are also used by the Saudi legal system for the punishment of a variety of crimes, including the expression of critical views of the government or the making of controversial statements on religious matters. On September 3, Sadeq Abdel-Karim Mal-Allah, a Saudi Shi`a, was beheaded in public in the Eastern town of al-Qatif. He had been arrested in 1988, at the age of 17, and accused of "slandering God, His Prophet and the Holy Qur'an." According to a statement issued by the Ministry of Interior, a royal order was issued ratifying the decision of Shari`a courts ordering Mal-Allah's execution based on his alleged slanderous statements.

Following the execution of Mal-Allah, the family of Abdel-Khaleq Abdel-Jalil al-Janbi, a Shi`a student, learned that he, too, had been accused of blasphemy and threatened with execution. In January, al-Janbi and another Shi`a student, Turki Muhammed al-Turki, had been arrested by the Directorate of General Investigations after a debate at King Abdel-Aziz University in Jiddah in which they disputed Wahhabi views regarding the Shi`a faith. Wahhabism, the Saudi official dogma, holds as heretical most Shi`a interpretations of Islam.

During October, three Shi`a Saudis-Muhammed al-Shabib, Abdel-Wahed Ahmed Hussein al-Shaikh and Hmaide al-`Aisan-were arrested and accused of propagating religious views contrary to the received dogma. While al-Shabib was released, the other two remained in prison through November.

A number of Shi`a religious students and teachers, apprehended in previous years, remained in prison in 1992, having been accused of voicing disagreement with Wahhabism. Those still in prison include Ali Abu-Ouais, arrested in November 1990, and Sayyed Yaseen al-Sayigh, in detention since October 1989. Hamza al-Mosawi, arrested in October 1991 for his religious views, was released in September 1992.

Corporal punishment continued to be applied by Shari`a courts in 1992. In June, Yousef Khouri, a 63-year-old Lebanese citizen, was sentenced to 18 months in prison and 500 lashes. He was accused of possessing of 12 bottles of whisky. The sentence was passed in a summary proceeding in a Shari`a court without the benefit of legal counsel.

Saudi Arabia also continued its policy of executing drug traffickers, after proceedings that fall far short of international standards on fair trials. On October 4, General Mohammed al-Maleki, a drug enforcement official, stated that, "more than 38 people of different nationalities have been executed since the death penalty was enforced against drug smugglers" in 1987. Most were convicted without the benefit of legal counsel.

Human rights abuses are facilitated in Saudi Arabia by the absence of an independent judiciary and the lack of scrutiny by a representative body or a free press. Although the March 1992 Basic Law of Government formally recognizes, for the first time, the principle of an independent judiciary, Middle East Watch continued to receive reports from within the judiciary that judges periodically come under pressure from senior members of the royal family and other government officials. Not surprisingly, they remain afraid to check official abuse of power. Moreover, under the Saudi government's interpretation of the Shari`a, the King is the spiritual as well as temporal head of the community (waliyy al-amr). He thus has broad discretion to overrule judicial decisions. Provincial governors in Saudi Arabia also have the authority to review court decisions.

Because of the blurred distinction between civil and criminal law in Saudi Arabia, detention and torture are common even in cases of commercial and labor disputes. This is compounded by the royal family's deep involvement in many business enterprises as well as its control of all senior governmental posts. The prime minister, his two deputies and the ministers of interior, defense, foreign affairs and their deputies are all members of the royal family. All the provincial governors of Saudi Arabia are members of the royal family or of the Sudairi family, maternal relatives of King Fahd.

The royal family's dominance of the legislative and executive branches of government, its significant influence on the judiciary and its commandingposition in the business community have led to a concentration of power that has few parallels in the world-a state of affairs that has been immunized from criticism by the absence of a free press or parliament. This monopoly of power has left government officials and other prominent citizens, primarily members of the royal family and their associates, free to abuse their positions.

The March 1992 laws codifying the largely unwritten legal system, including the Basic Law of Government and the Consultative Council Law, have not significantly changed the lack of legal protection of human rights. In fact, far from adhering to international standards on civil and political rights, these new laws do little more than codify royal authoritarianism, and deprive Saudi citizens of even the modest electoral rights they already had.

By virtue of the new laws, Saudi citizens today have fewer civil and political rights than they had in 1926. Their right to vote for national and provincial councils is eliminated; the Consultative Council is stripped of the little power it had left; rights of women and minorities are totally ignored; existing severe restrictions on thought, religion, speech, assembly and association have been maintained; and no ban is articulated on extrajudicial killings, torture or cruel or inhuman punishment. The new laws expand King Fahd's near absolute authority over both legislative and executive matters. They were drafted by an ad hoc committee headed by Prince Nayef, the King's brother who also heads the Interior Ministry, the government agency identified with most violations of human rights in Saudi Arabia.

The Law of the Consultative Council replaces the existing Consultative Council, established in 1926, with a new advisory group by the same name that was to be appointed by King Fahd by the beginning of September. By the end of November, only the president of the new Council had been appointed: Shaikh Muhammed ibn Jubair, who is a former minister of justice, a Shari`a judge and a long-time associate of King Fahd.

The King will have the right to dismiss any or all of the new council's 61 members. The Consultative Council is allowed to discuss and interpret laws, but has no power to legislate. The government is not required to submit its budget to the Council or consult it on important decisions. Its powers, such as they are, remain subordinated to those of the Council of Ministers, which is chaired by the King in his role as Prime Minister.

The new laws do not ban discrimination on the basis of gender or religious beliefs. Nor is there any remedy in the new laws for the notorious due process deficiencies of the Saudi penal system. Based on Shari'a as interpreted by government-appointed clergy, the unwritten criminal code does not permit defendants to have legal representation in the courtroom, even when facing the death penalty.

Comments by Saudi leaders indicate that the new statutes are not the beginning of a gradual process of democratization. Rather, they appear to be the maximum concessions that the ruling family is willing to grant in response to internal demands and external pressures.

In 1992, Saudi Arabia continued to stifle the expression of views critical of its own on matters both secular and religious. During late 1991 and early 1992, scores of Islamist opponents were rounded up by the secret police after they criticized the government in mosque sermons, secret leaflets and clandestinely distributed audiocassettes. A number of Islamist leaders who publicly criticized the government were dismissed from their government jobs and banned from travel or from public speaking.

In July, a 47-page Memorandum of Advice signed by 109 Islamist intellectuals was distributed in the Kingdom, calling for reform of the public administration and increased accountability of government officials. The signers also sought greater autonomy for Islamic preachers, including freedom of expression, as well as an end to torture and arbitrary arrests and searches. Saudi authorities questioned and threatened a number of the signatories and attacked the banned memorandum in the official media. King Fahd also convened the Council of Senior Scholars which subsequently issued a strong condemnation of the memorandum. The Council, in turn, was criticized by a number of the Kingdom's more independent clergy. Following the distribution of the Memorandum of Advice, more Islamists were formally banned from publicly speaking against the government and a number of them were suspended from their government jobs.

The government owns and operates all radio and television stations in the Kingdom, and it keeps the privately owned local press on a very short leash, not allowing it to publish any critical views of government policies. A number of foreign publications were barred from the country in 1992 for publishing such views. In September, Khalil al-Fezai`, editor-in-chief of al-Yaum (Today), was dismissed by the Minister of Information, who is authorized under the press code to take such action without the necessity of a hearing. It was widely believed that his dismissal was prompted by his approval of articles perceived as critical of policies of Prince Muhammed ibn Fahd, the King's son, who is also the governor of the Eastern Province, where the newspaper is based.

During 1992, the royal family and its close associates expanded their influence over major regional and international news organizations. For example, the new owner of the international news agency United Press International is a brother-in-law of King Fahd, who also owns MBC, a London-based, worldwide satellite radio and television network. Such control, in addition to majority or controlling ownership in major dailies in the region, strengthens considerably the Saudi government's near monopoly over news reaching Saudi Arabia about the country and other subjects of interest to its rulers.

The long-standing Saudi policy of severely restricting access by foreign reporters to the Kingdom was reinstated during 1992 after a brief interlude before and after the Gulf War. Most applications by journalists from major U.S. and British television, radio and newspaper outlets were turned down. It thus remains difficult to follow events in Saudi Arabia except through government channels.

The Right to Monitor

Since monitoring human rights violations is defined by the government as political activity, Saudi Arabian law and practice strictly prohibit such an undertaking. Saudi opposition political groups have had to work clandestinely inside the country or operate outside the Kingdom. A few affiliated human rights committees operate from Damascus, London, Tehran and the United States. Among these groups is the London-based International Committee for Human Rights in the Gulf and Arabian Peninsula. The Committee publishes occasional reports as well as Arabia Monitor, an English monthly started in 1992 and issued from Washington. Another affiliated magazine, Al-Jazeera al-Arabia (The Arabian Peninsula), an Arabic monthly issued in London, regularly publishes articles on human rights violations, especially those related to the Shi`a minority.

Following reports of the forced repatriation of close to 300 Iraqi refugees in December 1991, as well as violent clashes at the Rafha refugee camp in which a number of refugees were killed, Saudi Arabia permitted international organizations to expand their activities in the camps for Iraqi refugees. Since early 1992, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the International Committee of the Red Cross have made regular visits to both the Rafha and al-Artawiyya camps and have been closely involved in resettling refugees. The United States, Iran, Sweden and Finland have agreed to accept several thousand refugees from these camps in 1992 and 1993. The United States has set a quota of 3,500 refugees for the two years.

Requests by Middle East Watch to visit Saudi Arabia, to interview refugees about conditions in Iraq and to take up issues on Saudi human rights practices with local authorities, went unanswered in 1992. Similarly, Saudi authorities have failed to respond to the numerous inquiries that Middle East Watch made during the year on specific incidents of human rights violations.

U.S. Policy

The United States, by virtue of a long and intimate relationship with Saudi Arabia spanning over 50 years, has been in a position to help effect an improvement in the dismal human rights record. But the U.S. government has rarely criticized Saudi violations. Human rights principles appear to have been subordinated to strategic and economic interests, in the mistaken belief that promotion of human rights and participatory democracy in the Kingdom would have a deleterious effect on those interests.

The broad range of cooperation between the two countries is premised on a U.S. commitment to the defense of Saudi Arabia, a commitment demonstrated by the military campaign to reverse the Iraqi invasion of neighboring Kuwait. President Bush's original justification for dispatching U.S. troops to Saudi Arabia, in August 1990, was the perceived threat of an Iraqi invasion of the Kingdom. Post-war cooperation has involved extensive contacts between the two countries on future security arrangements in the Gulf, Saudi defense plans, the fate of the Iraqi government of Saddam Hussein, the Arab-Israeli peace process, and economic aid to the Commonwealth of Independent States.

The Bush administration has identified defense of the Arabian Peninsula a key determinant of U.S. policy in the Middle East. On September 11, Edward Djerejian, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, told the National Association of Arab Americans:

America has two key sets of policy goals in the Near East. The first has to do with a lasting and comprehensive peace between Israel and her Arab neighbors; the second-the creation of viable security arrangements for our friends and allies on the Arabian Peninsula.

On October 1, in testimony before the U.S. House of Representatives, Secretary Djerejian explained further the purpose of these close ties. After outlining levels of cooperation with the six members of the Gulf Cooperation Council (gcc), which he praised as much closer than before the Gulf War, Secretary Djerejian said, "We have now concluded or renewed agreements with four of the gcc states and have excellent working arrangements with all of them....It is important to understand that the purpose of both arms sales and collective security measures are to deter threats to our shared interests, and to raise the threshold of future requirements for direct U.S. military actions."

Cooperation between the two governments has included bilateral security arrangements and the provision of advanced U.S. weapons in a package totaling $14 billion for 1992-93. The U.S. military holds periodic joint exercises with Saudi forces, maintains an enhanced naval presence in the Persian Gulf, prepositions substantial materiel in the country, and has unrestricted access to Saudi facilities.

This close cooperation and the military alliance that is projected to last long into the future, was underscored by U.S. Rear Admiral Raynor A. K. Taylor, who told The Washington Post in September: "We've got ships going into ports left and right. We've got ships and airplanes doing bilateral exercises left and right....Having to have a 90-day advance notice to go into Jiddah or Dammam, that doesn't exist anymore....The rapport and working relationships are a lot healthier."

On September 11, as part of this long-standing armament program, President Bush announced the sale of 72 F-15 fighter planes to Saudi Arabia. The $9 billion deal, which includes 48 modified F-15E Strike Eagles-planes that have never before been exported-came despite the President's 1991 initiative promising to curb the flow of arms to the Middle East.

Considering this special relationship between the two countries and the enormous goodwill the Saudi government has towards the United States, it is remarkable that the Bush administration did not utilize its leverage to bring about a significant change in the Saudi human rights record. A sustained engagement with the Saudi government aimed at improving this record would enhance the U.S. position in the country, especially among members of the nascent reform movement. In Middle East Watch's judgement, such engagement would probably strengthen, rather than weaken, the special relationship between the two countries, particularly in the long run.

As in previous years, U.S. officials refrained in 1992 from voicing public criticism of Saudi human rights violations, some of which were catalogued, in some detail, in the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1991. Even when victims of abuse are American citizens, U.S. officials have shied away from publicly criticizing Saudi human rights practices.

The U.S. embassy has complained occasionally that Saudi authoritiesrarely notify it of the arrest of American citizens. According to State Department officials interviewed by Middle East Watch in September 1992, Saudi Arabia still declines to sign a standard bilateral consular agreement to allow for immediate access to American detainees, even though U.S. regulations provide Saudi consular officers with immediate access to Saudi detainees in U.S. jails.

During 1992, the Bush Administration continued its efforts to prevent Scott Nelson, an American safety engineer who had worked at a Saudi government-owned hospital, from obtaining civil damages in U.S. courts for unlawful detention and torture he suffered while in Saudi Arabia. Following a call for help contained in a letter from Prince Bandar ibn Sultan, the Bush administration filed an amicus curiae brief with the U.S. Supreme Court supporting the Saudi position that U.S. courts have no jurisdiction in the case under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976 (fsia). Despite the duty under international law to provide remedies to torture victims, the administration adopted a cramped reading of the fsia provisions that a lower appellate court had found allowed Nelson's suit.

The Administration also lobbied members of the House Judiciary Committee to stymie efforts to amend the fsia. In May 1991, an amendment to the law was introduced in the House of Representatives that would have made explicitly clear that American victims of torture and the family of victims of extrajudicial killings abroad are entitled to a civil remedy in U.S. courts. Despite the administration's opposition, the amendment was adopted by the House Judiciary Committee on September 23, 1992, although it ultimately never reached the House floor.

U.S. officials went out of their way to praise the establishment of an appointed Consultative Council and the adoption of the Basic Law of Government-actions that merely expanded royal authority, and outlawed democracy and elections as Western imports not suitable for Saudi citizens. Secretary Djerejian told a House subcommittee in March that, following the adoption of the laws, President Bush wrote to King Fahd "to commend his initiative." Secretary Djerejian also described the laws as "a very important statement on expanding the participation of the citizens in the Saudi governmental structure and processes." The U.S. government, the Secretary added, had welcomed "King Fahd's decision to establish a consultative council...and his reaffirmation of limits on governmental interference in citizens' private lives, in accordance with Saudi religion and tradition." He also asserted that "rights of Saudi citizens are enumerated" in the new laws.

This praise was jarring in light of the statement by King Fahd that: "The democratic system that is predominant in the world is not a suitable system for the peoples of our region. Our peoples' makeup and unique qualities are different from those of the rest of the world....The system of free elections is not suitable to our country....In may view, Western democracies may be suitable in their own countries but they do not suit other countries." Secretary Djerejian, while noting without criticizing that the Consultative Council would not be an elected body, suggested in congressional testimony that in evaluating the Saudi laws "you have to remember the environment in the Arab world" and "Saudi religion and tradition." This relativism stood in sharp contrast to U.S. claims of support elsewhere of "genuine periodic elections."

The Work of Middle East Watch

In 1992, Middle East Watch continued its close monitoring of human rights developments in the Kingdom. It also continued its attempts to engage the government formally in a dialogue on human rights matters. On a number of occasions during the year, Middle East Watch communicated with both the Saudi and U.S. governments over a number of developments, seeking clarifications or providing criticisms. Middle East Watch's requests to send a mission to the Kingdom have yet to be answered.

In May, Middle East Watch issued Empty Reforms: Saudi Arabia's New Basic Laws, a 65-page report on the constitutional changes announced by King Fahd on March 1. The report demonstrated that the laws introduced by Saudi Arabia do not provide recognition or protection of human rights. The report also pointed out that in some key areas, such as elections and the mandate of the Consultative Council, the announced changes were a step backwards.

In September, Human Rights Watch filed a brief with the U.S. Supreme Court as amicus curiae in support of Scott Nelson, an American worker who is suing the government of Saudi Arabia for torture and arbitrary arrest during his employment with a Saudi government agency. The Bush administration filed a brief with the court supporting the Saudi government's contention that U.S. courts lack jurisdiction under the 1976 Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act (fsia). In 1991, Nelson had won an appeals court ruling that U.S. courts have jurisdiction under the "commercial activities" exception to fsia. Human Rights Watch argued that the appeal court judgement was correct because torture and arbitrary detention are routinely used in Saudi Arabia to resolve commercial disputes involving Saudi government interests.

Also in September, in testimony before the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Europe and the Middle East and the Subcommittee on International Organizations, Middle East Watch briefed the two subcommittees on conditions in Saudi Arabia. It urged the U.S. government to use its good offices to improve Saudi Arabia's observance of internationally recognized human rights.
TUNISIA

Human Rights Developments

For the third consecutive year, the human rights picture in Tunisia was dominated by the crackdown on the main opposition movement, the Islamist Nahdha (Renaissance) party. The political reforms that President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali introduced with much fanfare after ousting Habib Bourguiba in 1987 have been eviscerated by the crackdown.

The dominant human rights event of 1992 was the trial of 279 suspected Nahdha members who had been arrested in 1990 and 1991. They were accused of plotting to overthrow the government and assassinate the president, in order to establish an Islamic republic. The trial, which took place in two military courts in July and August, was reminiscent of the mass trials of Islamists that took place in 1981 and 1987. As in the past, most of the defendants in the 1992 case were convicted: 46 received life sentences, and another 219 were condemned to between one and 24 years in prison.

The number of Islamists currently in prison is not known. In October 1992, Amnesty International stated that more than 9,000 Islamists had been detained at some point over the prior two years.

The government claims that an-Nahdha is an extremist group, willing to use violence to install a repressive theocracy. An-Nahdha, by contrast, says it is committed to using only democratic, nonviolent means to achieve a tolerant Islamic state. However, in recent years, Nahdha's leadership failed to condemn unconditionally acts of violence and intimidation committed by Islamists. For example, the party's leaders denied authorizing a fatal arson attack by members against a branch office of the ruling party in 1991, but called it an understandable response to state repression. Nahdha supporters were also implicated in numerous incidents of violence on campuses in 1991.

While cracking down on an-Nahdha, the government kept a tight grip on civil society and opposition politics. The independent press has been pressured into greater self-censorship, and the Tunisian League for Human Rights temporarily dissolved itself rather than submit to a repressive new law of associations. The parliament remains the exclusive domain of the ruling Constitutional Democratic Rally since opposition parties boycotted elections in 1989.

The issue of torture figured prominently in the Nahdha trial, where most of the defendants attempted to persuade the court to throw out their confessions to the police on the grounds that these had been extracted through torture. Without the confessions, the prosecution's evidence of an insurrectional plot by an-Nahdha would have been flimsy.

Torture was also raised in a major report by Amnesty International that described "systematic" abuses in police and National Guard stations and in the Ministry of Interior headquarters in Tunis. Amnesty documented several deaths in detention in 1991 that were apparently due to torture and found that theevidence that "violations are condoned at the highest level is compelling."

The testimony of the defendants in the 1992 Nahdha trial corroborated Amnesty's finding that torture frequently occurs when suspects are held in incommunicado detention beyond the ten-day legal limit. Both identified the authorities' falsification of the date of arrest as a stratagem that facilitates such abuse. By logging a date of arrest that is later than the actual date, authorities disguise the fact that suspects are being held incommunicado beyond the legal limit. By the time that detainees are brought before a judge, any physical sign of abuse is likely to have faded. The government's denial that arrest dates are falsified is not credible; some of the disputed arrests have occurred in the presence of witnesses who confirmed the actual dates they occurred.

In the 1992 trials, the military courts ruled that the confessions of the Nahdha defendants were admissible. This decision came after court-ordered medical exams of more than 100 defendants who claimed to have been tortured were said to have turned up no evidence of torture. However, the medical examinations were highly inadequate. Since much of the alleged abuse had been inflicted more than nine months earlier, only forensic specialists trained in detecting the sequelae of torture could have detected signs of mistreatment from so long before. By failing to assign such specialists to conduct the examinations, the court helped to reinforce a system in which torture is both practiced and tolerated.

The Nahdha trial exhibited other irregularities that denied the defendants their right to a fair trial. Defense lawyers were not given timely and complete access to case dossiers. The trial was assigned to a military court even though only a minority of the defendants were army personnel and none of the major charges was a violation of the Code of Military Justice. Public access to the courtroom was sharply restricted, although journalists and international observers were permitted to attend without interpreters.

One of the charges on which nearly all the defendants were convicted was membership in an illegal organization. The government has refused to recognize Tunisia's main Islamist movement, which currently calls itself an-Nahda, since it first applied for recognition in 1981. The most recent grounds for the government's refusal has been the 1988 law on political parties, which forbids parties based on religion. Middle East Watch views this law as a violation of the right of free association.

Middle East Watch takes the same view toward amendments to the law of association that were promulgated in 1992. The amendments bar individuals from simultaneously holding a leadership position in an association and a political party, and prohibit organizations from refusing membership to any person who claims to accept its principles and decisions. Rather than comply with these amendments, which intrude on an association's autonomy to choose members and office-holders, the 15-year-old Tunisian League for Human Rights dissolved itself in June. In late October, after negotiations with the government, League members met to consider replacing office-holders to comply with the new law, but failed to approve such a move.

The League had come under government pressure before its dissolution. Most of the government-controlled and government-influenced media refused to cover its communiqus. In January, police interrogated Moncef Marzouqi, the League's president, for more than two hours about remarks he had made to the foreign press about human rights abuses in Tunisia.

The extent of press self-censorship in Tunisia was sadly evident during the Nahdha trial. Newspapers issued by the government or the ruling party ran stories that resembled prosecution summations of the proceedings. The independent press was somewhat more balanced, publishing excerpts from the trial but selecting them in a manner that played down the allegations of torture.

Although seizures and suspensions of periodicals dropped off in 1992, the decline seemed to have less to do with greater tolerance than with the inculcation of self-censorship. The prosecution of several journalists, often for "defaming" state institutions, added to the chilling effect. The broadly defined defamation statutes criminalize any public allegation or imputation attacking the honor or reputation of a person. Proving the statement's truth cannot be used as a defense when the defamation concerns the president or agovernment minister.

Most recently, Omar S'Habou, director of the weekly Le Maghreb, was given a ten-month sentence for defamation and spreading false information for writing that the minister of transportation had favored one automobile import firm over another. S'Habou was amnestied in July, near the end of his sentence.

As human rights practices have deteriorated in Tunisia, the government has grown increasingly vocal in defending its record. In speeches by the president and cabinet ministers, in publications, and in public relations efforts abroad, the government has proclaimed its adherence to international standards, allowed observers to attend the Nahdha trial, and consistently issued long rebuttals to criticisms by human rights organizations.

Partly in response to criticism from Amnesty International, President Ben Ali appointed a commission to investigate human rights abuses in 1991. After submitting an initial report to the government without making all of its findings public, the commission released a second, wholly public report in July 1992 which marked a step forward in acknowledging that abuses of detainees were more than an isolated phenomenon. Avoiding the word "torture," the report said that, over an unspecified period, 116 police officers had been implicated in 105 cases of "bad treatment." However, the value of this admission was undermined by the report's generally upbeat tone and its failure to provide details about the cases.

During the Nahdha trial, officials assured visitors that once the trial was over, the government would again seize the initiative in promoting human rights. The implication was that eliminating the Islamist "threat" would make Tunisia safe for human rights and political pluralism. But unless dramatic new steps are taken in these directions, the trial, with all of its irregularities and allegations of confessions extracted through torture, will seem less like a brief detour from the path of reform than a confirmation that the repressive ways of former President Bourguiba have fully returned.

The Right to Monitor

The Tunisian League for Human Rights, the country's only independent human rights group, decided to dissolve itself in June after 15 years rather than submit to an intrusive new law of associations. As described above, it had been subject to growing pressures prior to taking this step. In October 1992, League members met to debate complying with the new law, but failed to agree on this course of action.

Foreign human rights groups are generally permitted to enter and travel around Tunisia. Several groups, including Middle East Watch, sent observers to attend the Nahdha trial. The main obstacle to their work was the fear felt by many potential sources about reprisals for speaking to a human rights group. As the New York-based Lawyers Committee for Human Rights reported, following a June visit, this fear is generated by the ubiquitous plainclothes police force that monitors phone calls, keeps watch on opposition figures, and trails visiting human rights delegations and journalists. The fear is reinforced by the government's use of laws on defamation to interrogate and sometimes prosecute Tunisians who criticize the government to foreign and local media (see above).

In February, authorities confiscated copies of an Amnesty International report from shops and the office of the Tunis section of Amnesty. The Ministry of Interior said later that the branch had disregarded the legal procedures for obtaining authorization to distribute the publication.

U.S. Policy

The Bush administration was clearly disturbed by the human rights implications of Tunisia's crackdown on the Islamist movement, and by its retreat from the initial commitment of the Ben Ali government to promote human rights and political pluralism. To date, however, the modest aid that the U.S. sends to Tunisia has not been jeopardized on human rights grounds. Tunisia received about $24 million in fiscal year 1992, and was slated to receive $26 million in fiscal year 1993.

U.S. disapproval came through in the frank and critical assessment of Tunisia in the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in1991, issued in January 1992, as well as in a few public actions by State Department officials in 1992. The Country Reports noted, for example, that given the restrictions on political activity, "the ability of citizens in Tunisia to change their government through democratic means has yet to be demonstrated."

Responding to questions from the House Foreign Relations Committee in February, Assistant Secretary for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs Richard Schifter stated, "There are credible reports that at least 11 Islamists have died under suspicious circumstances while in detention....We are conducting a frank and active dialogue with the Tunisian Government to address human rights problems...."

That dialogue is conducted largely in private. Secretary Schifter visited Tunisia in February and was received by President Ben Ali. He also took the laudable step of meeting with the president of the Tunisian League for Human Rights, Moncef Marzouqi, only a couple of weeks after Marzouqi had been held for questioning by the police. In a visit two months later, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Lincoln Bloomfield also met with representatives of the League, shortly after the parliament had passed a law that the League denounced as a threat to its independence.

However, neither Schifter nor Bloomfield, nor Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Edward Djerejian, who was in Tunis in July, used the occasions of their visits to voice publicly U.S. concerns about human rights. Djerejian even went so far as to tell a journalist upon his departure from Tunisia on July 10 that on human rights, "Tunisia was making progress."

This comment was unfortunate, coming on the second day of the Nahdha trials. However, the U.S. administration did demonstrate its concern about the fairness of those proceedings by dispatching a political officer from the embassy to observe the trials during July and August. The observer was the only diplomat from any embassy to attend the trial on a daily basis. Her presence, however, did not lead to any public reaction to the trial by U.S. officials.

The Work of Middle East Watch

Middle East Watch's program on Tunisia is intended to highlight the growing human rights violations that have accompanied the crackdown on Islamists, and to pressure the government, which is unusually sensitive about its image on human rights, to curtail the abuses. During 1992, Middle East Watch raised its concerns in meetings with Tunisia's Justice Minister, Foreign Minister [Ken: is this who you and Andrew met? I don't have the notes.], and other officials.

In July, Middle East Watch dispatched an observer to Tunisia to attend the mass trial of Nahdha activists. The observer also represented the Washington-based International Human Rights Law Group.

The two organizations issued two statements during the trials urging that they be halted until important irregularities were addressed. In October, the two groups published a lengthy report analyzing the violations of basic due-process norms that had made the trial fundamentally unfair.

In February, Middle East Watch sent a letter to President Ben Ali protesting the interrogation of Moncef al-Marzouqi, president of the Tunisian League for Human Rights. Middle East Watch also issued protests against the restrictive new amendment to the law of associations, both after it was adopted and when the League dissolved itself rather than comply with it.
YEMEN

Human Rights Developments

Yemen, the most impoverished country on the Arabian peninsula, has embarked on a process of political liberalization, albeit with mixed results. The process was triggered by the May 1990 agreement that unified the formerly hostile states of North Yemen (the Yemen Arab Republic, or yar) and South Yemen (the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen, or pdry). In each state, the ruling party had not allowed multiparty politics since its assumption of power, in1962 in the yar and in 1967 in the pdry. Past rights violations included arbitrary and incommunicado detention, unfair trials, abuse of prisoners and detainees, and restrictions on freedom of speech and assembly.

The transitional government, a coalition of the two former ruling parties that was formed with unification, has eased the patterns of state-sponsored repression that had been common in both nations. Most Yemenis formerly living in exile returned to the country, and general amnesties freed many, but not all, of the political prisoners. In 1992, institutions of civil society continued to develop, as political parties openly participated in the system and scores of opposition newspapers and magazines flourished. At the same time, the climate was marred by incidents of political violence by unidentified forces.

The country's first parliamentary election since unification was scheduled to be held by November 22, and would have represented the first legislative contest on the Arabian peninsula based on universal suffrage and competition between political parties. Although parliament's power does not equal that granted by the constitution to the five-member Presidential Council, the election was viewed as significant as a forum for legitimizing the expansion of civil society in Yemen. But on November 14, the Presidential Council announced that the election would be postponed until April 27, 1993, thus extending the life of the transitional government beyond that envisaged at unification. The government's explanation for the move, which caused an outcry by some opposition political parties, was that the 17-member multiparty Supreme Elections Committee-whose chair is a member of the Presidential Council-had been unable to complete the tasks assigned to it in preparation for the election.

Loosened restrictions on freedom of expression and association since unification has yielded some 160 newspapers and magazines. Over 40 political parties operated freely, although most of them were small and distinguished more by personal conflicts among their leaders than by substantial variations in agendas. However, new laws governing the press and other media (issued in 1990), and political and other associations (1991), contain vaguely worded provisions giving the government the power to clamp down again on civil society if it wishes.

Although opposition publications openly criticize the government, some issues remained off-limits, such as criticism of the president. The press law stipulates that journalists, editors and publishing houses must refrain from any statement that might "criticize the person of the head of state, or to attribute to him declarations or pictures unless the declarations were made or the picture taken during a public speech." The law stipulates that "[t]hese provisions do not necessarily apply to constructive criticism," without defining the term. In September, Minister of Information Muhammed Ahmed Jerhoum told Middle East Watch that his office had tried to stop a publication from attacking Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak and the government of Saudi Arabia. He explained that the ban on criticism of the Yemeni head of state also applied to leaders of other countries, in effect making press comment on Yemen's foreign policy hostage to the considerations of the government of the day. A Western diplomat told Middle East Watch that comment on the government's stance regarding the 1990-1991 Gulf crisis remained beyond the limits of permissible discussion.

Yemen's political parties functioned during 1992 without formal legal status, despite the 1991 political parties law which provided for the licensing of parties and an appeals process against adverse administrative decisions. The commission assigned by the law to vet political parties was unable to process applications for licenses because of the resignation of its chair, who nonetheless continued to serve as the Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs. One possible reason why the government dragged its feet in implementing the law was its potentially substantial effect on Yemen's political scene. The law prohibits any member of the judiciary, police, military or diplomatic corps from participating in a political party. In 1992, several opposition figures called for ruling party leaders in the transitional government with military rank, such as Yemen's president, Lieutenant General Ali Abdullah Saleh, to resign in keeping with the law.

Shortly after Yemeni voters approved the unification constitution in1990, a series of unexplained armed attacks on political figures began to mar the path to peaceful elections. Until September 1992, most of the violence was directed at members of the Yemeni Socialist Party and other political parties of the left, suggesting to some that northern conservatives perhaps were responsible. But, in late September, members of President Saleh's General People's Congress (the ruling party of the former yar) also were targeted by unknown assailants.

For most of 1992, the government refused to acknowledge any pattern to the attacks and did not characterize the incidents as politically motivated violence. This stance changed in October, when President Saleh announced that arrests had been made, and that the assailants-still unidentified-intended "to sow suspicion and create a crisis of confidence....[P]erhaps their aim was also to prevent the general elections from being held by disrupting security." Political violence has precedence in recent Yemeni history, and many citizens have voiced concern about the prospects of its return. The attacks contributed to a climate of uncertainty amid the broadly positive developments that have marked the post-unification transition period.

The Right To Monitor

The Yemeni government permits international human rights groups to visit the country and monitor conditions, and allows local rights advocates, such as the Yemeni chapter of the regionwide Arab Organization for Human Rights, to operate and publicize concerns. While the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc) has monitored the yar's detention centers for many years, it gained access to the prisons of the former pdry only in 1989, after being denied admission for over a decade. The icrc now conducts regular visits to prisons throughout the country.

U.S. Policy

Despite the lessening of rights abuses in Yemen, and the country's tentative steps toward political liberalization, U.S. policy toward the newly unified state has been decidedly cool ever since Yemen voted against the 1990 U.N. resolution authorizing the use of force to expel Iraqi troops from Kuwait. When the Gulf crisis erupted in August 1990, Yemen was receiving almost $22 million annually in U.S. economic assistance grants ($10.6 million of which was for agricultural development) and about $10 million in concessional food loans. In what the Bush administration termed "program adjustments," aid to Yemen was slashed to $2.9 million for fiscal year 1991 and $3 million for fiscal year 1992. Food assistance was eliminated. According to the U.S. Agency for International Development, aid to Yemen "is now confined to humanitarian and human resource development assistance, with the health sector as the program cornerstone and maternal child health and family care (family planning) services its primary focus." For fiscal year 1993, the Yemeni government has requested $6 million in developmental assistance and $10 million in food aid. Although Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Edward Djerejian in an address on October 16 noted "positively the upcoming parliamentary elections in Yemen," aid levels have not been adjusted.

The Work of Middle East Watch

Middle East Watch initiated its first work on Yemen in 1992, establishing contact with a broad range of Yemenis, including parliamentarians, members of the political opposition and government officials, in an attempt to assess the progress that was being made toward the institutionalization of political pluralism and respect for human rights. In November, prior to the government's announcement that the parliamentary elections would be postponed, Middle East Watch published a 25-page newsletter, "Yemen: Steps Toward Civil Society." The document examined issues of concern as the elections approached as well as the context of some of Yemen's human rights improvements. Earlier in the year, Middle East Watch wrote to President Saleh on behalf of Mansur Rajih, a writer and poet who had belonged to a leftist organization in the yar. He was sentenced to death for a murder in 1984 in a trial that may not have met international standards for fairness, and Amnesty International had adopted him as a prisoner of conscience. In August, the Yemeni government responded tothe letter with a defense of its legal process.
UNITED STATES

Human Rights Watch's reporting on human rights violations in the Untied States took new directions in 1992. Americas Watch released a major report documenting U.S. human rights abuses along the U.S.-Mexico border. Americas Watch and the Fund for Free Expression investigated restrictions on freedom of expression in Miami's Cuban exile community. The Fund for Free Expression addressed the potential threats to freedom of speech posed by the movement for "English-language only" laws in the United States. The Fund and other divisions of Human Rights Watch also protested the U.S. government's attempt to deport two permanent residents for their lawful political activities. These and other Fund activities are described in the separate chapter on the Fund.

Human Rights Watch and its Prison Project continued to monitor human rights abuses in U.S. detention facilities. Human Rights Watch also issued a protest to the acquittal of police officers who beat motorist Rodney King in 1991. Human Rights Watch welcomed U.S. ratification of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, but was opposed the Bush administration's inclusion of reservations to important rights and enforcement mechanisms.

Border Violence

In May 1992, Americas Watch released Brutality Unchecked: Human Rights Abuses Along the U.S. Border With Mexico, an 80-page report on human rights abuses committed by the U.S. Border Patrol of the Immigration and Naturalization Service (ins). The report found that abuse by ins agents is similar in kind and severity to abuses that Human Rights Watch has documented in other countries with serious human rights violations, including unjustified killing, torture, and rape, and routine beatings, rough physical treatment, and racially motivated verbal abuse. The response of the U.S. government to criticism of these abuses has been as defensive and unyielding as the responses of many other abusive governments.

One reason ins misconduct is so pervasive is that the ins does not adequately train or supervise its agents. Furthermore, the ins and the Justice Department are willing to cover up or defend even the most egregious conduct of agents. Investigations of ins abuses are almost invariably perfunctory, and the government is unwilling to prosecute or punish agents even when criminal or civil sanctions are clearly warranted. The ins covers up misconduct through a variety of failures and affirmative measures, including an ineffective complaint process that cannot identify or remedy abuses; refusal to divulge the names of agents involved in shootings and other serious incidents, making it difficult for victims to identify their abusers in the formal complaint process; failure to remove from active duty officers who have been implicated in shootings and other violations; and filing retaliatory criminal charges, of a sort usually reserved for flagrant violators of immigration laws or those suspected of serious crimes, against individuals who are victims of ins abuse, in order to intimidate them into silence.

Serious human rights abuses-particularly unjustified shootings and other excessive uses of force-occur when the Border Patrolapprehends undocumented migrants. The ins shooting policy permits an agent to shoot only in self-defense, in defense of another officer, or in defense of an innocent third party, and alerts agents that they may face criminal sanctions for violating the guidelines. In practice, however, agents violate the guidelines with impunity. For example:

 On September 8, 1990, an out-of-uniform Border Patrol agent shot and killed a 17-year-old attempting to cross the border. The autopsy report indicated that the victim was shot point blank; witnesses to the shooting testified that the agent knocked the victim down and shot him twice in the stomach. The agent claimed that the youth had thrown a rock and hit him. The Border Patrol did not identify the officer involved, but publicly released his version of events, which contradicted the medical evidence and witness statements. The agent was returned to normal duty the following day. No charges were ever filed against him.

 On November 18, 1990, a Border Patrol agent shot a 15-year-old who was straddling the fence along the border near Calexico, California, causing severe internal injury. The Calexico chief of police who investigated the case concluded that the shooting was unjustified, but no criminal charges have been filed.

 On May 25, 1990, a Border Patrol agent injured two people when he shot into a van. The local police investigator found that the shooting was unjustified. The Federal Bureau of Investigation investigated the shooting and forwarded its conclusions to the Justice Department, which returned the case to the ins. No local or federal charges were ever filed. The ins subsequently acknowledged that the agent had violated the shooting guidelines, and the agent was suspended without pay for 30 days.

 In June 1992, after Brutality Unchecked was released, a Border Patrol agent patrolling near Nogales, Arizona, shot a man twice in the back. Although five agents were on the scene, the shooting was not reported for more than 15 hours and medical help was not secured for the injured man, who died of his wounds.

Not all deaths at the hands of the Border Patrol involve firearms. In February 1988, a 17-year-old died from a skull fracture and brain hemorrhage that he sustained when a Border agent threw him to the pavement. The agent was conducting a neighborhood sweep in Madera, California, and had stopped the victim to check his immigration status. The agent responsible for the death had a history of violent encounters: twice, the vehicle he was driving struck pedestrians, resulting in the death of a Mexican migrant, and in a separate incident, he was the subject of a civil suit for assaulting two farm workers. Although the FBI, local law enforcement officials, and the Justice Department investigated the death in Madera, the agent was never indicted; instead, he was transferred to Florida, promoted to Senior Border Patrol Agent, and assigned to numerous supervisory and training positions along the border.

Border guards and ins agents engage in other non-lethal forms of physical abuse as well, including beatings and rough physical treatment. Americas Watch has investigated a 1991 case of two Guatemalan men who were tortured while in custody of Border Patrol agents. Human rights groups monitoring the border unhesitatingly state that sexual abuse is rampant. In a handful of cases, ins agents have been prosecuted for raping undocumented migrant women, although far more often, rape goes unreported. Since most arrests take place in remote border regions at night, the only witnesses to these crimes are often undocumented migrants. Agents have taken advantage of these witnesses' lack of legal status in the U.S. to silence them, threatening retaliation through the legal system if they complain.

Injuries and deaths have also occurred as a result of the Border Patrol's dangerous use of vehicles to chase and intimidate border crossers. At least six migrants were run over and killed between 1985 and 1989. Just after the publication of Brutality Unchecked, six people died as a result of a controversial car chase in Temecula, California, in which Border Patrol agents pursued a vehicle believed to be carrying undocumented migrants.

Many human rights abuses against migrants occur in detention. During the 1980s, the ins steadily increased the number of people detained pending adjudication of their immigration or asylum claims. Many of those detained pose no risk to the safety or property of others and are not flight risks. Some are released on parole, although this is decided on a case-by-case basis and appears to be arbitrary, and others are sometimes released upon payment of a bond. However, there are drastic differences across the country in the amount of bond required; in some regions, notably El Paso and Laredo, bond amounts are set so high as to preclude release.

The physical conditions of detention facilities have not improved to meet the needs of these increasing numbers of detainees. Most facilities were not designed for long-term detention, but detainees are now being held for months and sometimes years. Many of the detention facilities are located in deserts, yet detainees during the day are confined outdoors without protection from the sun. Overcrowding also makes adequate indoor living space a serious problem. Detention conditions are even worse at the ins holding cells or staging facilities. These were intended to be holding areas where detainees await transfer to detention centers, but some detainees are kept for days with inadequate access to food and telephones.

The ins also detains adults in county and city jails, where conditions vary widely. Since the ins does not always make special provision for treatment of detainees, and smaller jails do not have facilities to segregate inmates, detainees in immigration proceedings are often held with prisoners who are accused or convicted of violent crimes. Physical conditions at some of these jails are harsher than at the ins's own detention centers: detainees at some jails are kept in small cells and denied exercise, recreation, telephones to contact lawyers, or access to immigration information and other written material.

Physical abuse of detainees is a serious problem in a numberof facilities. Most cases involve excesses apparently meant as discipline, punishment or warnings to detainees. Excessive force has also been used to prevent or suppress detainee protests about detention conditions. Two monitoring groups in California documented over a dozen cases of adults who say they were beaten in 1990 in the El Centro Service Processing Center, an ins-run detention center in California. In practically every case, a detainee was singled out, locked in a shower room, and beaten, because a detention officer disliked his or her "attitude." In March 1990, the ins dispatched a large team of officers in riot gear allegedly to prevent a protest over conditions at the Port Isabel Service Processing Center in Texas. Several detainees reported being hit, kicked, and thrown to the floor. Although detainees complained to the ins about several of these incidents, the ins is not known to have investigated.

The ins practice of detaining minors subjects many undocumented youths to human rights abuse. Federal standards applicable to minors in the juvenile justice system presume that detention is adverse to a child's interest, and require pretrial release to a suitable adult. They distinguish between delinquent and non-delinquent children, and require that the latter not be placed in secure facilities. In practice, however, the ins continues to detain children in juvenile justice facilities that are not licensed for shelter care and that house immigration detainees with youths accused of crimes. The ins also fails to ensure that all minors in detention understand and can exercise their rights, unnecessarily prevents release from detention through restrictive bond provisions, and confines minors under substandard conditions with inadequate care.

To end human rights violations by the Border Patrol and the ins, Americas Watch offered a series of recommendations. Central among them was the creation of an independent Board of Review to examine allegations of abuse and to make appropriate recommendations for prosecution or discipline. Americas Watch also called for the establishment of meaningful confidential procedures for registering complaints. Other recommendations addressed the use of force and firearms, conditions in ins detention facilities, and the treatment of minors. The report concluded that the ins needs to emphasize the protection of human rights in enforcing immigration laws, and make clear that all ins agents must respect the legal rights of all people.

Freedom of Expression in Miami's Cuban Exile Community

Miami's Cuban exile community, long dominated by forces fiercely opposed to the government of Fidel Castro in Cuba and to any dialogue with it, has been the site of serious restrictions on freedom of expression for those who dissent from a rigid anti-Castro stance. In August 1992, Americas Watch and the Fund for Free Expression issued Dangerous Dialogue: Attacks on Freedom of Expression in Miami's Cuban Exile Community, a report which documented numerous incidents of harassment and violent intimidation of moderate voices within the community. The report generated attention and controversy, including threatened legal action from Miami's Mayor Xavier Surez if parts of the report werenot retracted. Americas Watch and the Fund for Free Expression responded by verifying the accuracy of every disputed claim.

Suppression of dissent in Miami takes a variety of forms, including attacks on artistic freedom, academic freedom, the press, and human rights activists. Some exile organizations, and an influential group of Spanish-language radio talk shows, play an important role in creating a repressive political climate by denouncing dissenters as "pro-Castro" or "Communists." Although many of the parties responsible for violence are private actors, Dangerous Dialogue found government complicity, ranging from direct harassment of dissident speech to a pattern of inaction in the face of political violence. Some incidents described in the report include:

 Miami's Cuban Museum of Arts and Culture has been the target of sustained violence because it shows works by artists in Cuba or artists who have not denounced the Castro government. In 1988, a bomb left under a museum board member's car exploded and destroyed the museum's front door, and museum officials later received personal death threats. Although police investigated five such threats against the museum's director, no criminal charges have been filed. In 1990, another bomb exploded outside the museum. The FBI found that the bombing suspects had deliberately targeted institutions that advocated dialogue with Cuba.

 Academics who advocate alternative approaches to Cuba have been attacked for expressing these views. The director of the Institute for Cuban Studies at Miami-Dade University, who came to Miami from Cuba in 1960, has sponsored numerous conferences discussing exchanges with Cuba and evaluating U.S. foreign policy. In 1988, she was a target of numerous verbal attacks over the radio, and on the eve of a conference she organized featuring prominent moderates, a sophisticated bomb was exploded in her garage.

 Radio Progreso, a Spanish-language station whose leading figure, Francisco Aruca, is a prominent advocate of closer ties with Cuba, has been a particular target of attack. In February 1992, three men broke into the station's studios, beat and tied up an employee, and damaged equipment. In 1989, two bombs exploded in the offices of Aruca's tourism company. Nobody was charged in these incidents. Another Radio Progreso talk-show host who came to Miami after 19 years as a political prisoner in Cuba was assaulted and beaten by demonstrators after one of his broadcasts in February. Vandals have broken into his office twice, destroyed his files, and scrawled "Communists are not allowed to have a business" across a wall. No arrests have been made in any of these incidents.

 The Cuban American National Foundation (canf), the dominant exile group in Miami, began a boycott campaign in early 1992 against the Miami Herald and its Spanish language version El Nuevo Herald to protest Herald editorials about relations with Cuba. The campaign involved bitter accusations that the paper was "communist" and "pro-Castro." In the ensuing controversy, the Herald's offices received bomb threats, its distribution boxes were vandalized, andits publisher received personal death threats. The canf eventually called off the campaign.

Although many of these incidents involved private actors, federal, state and local government authorities have played a significant role in creating the climate of intimidation. This role has taken three forms: direct harassment by the government itself, government funding of groups that seek to deny freedom of expression to others, and official statements encouraging private actors.

Local and federal government officials have participated directly in harassing persons who are not part of the fiercely anti-Castro camp, by denying permits arbitrarily, launching groundless investigations, and cutting off funding for dissident artists. The Cuban Museum of Arts and Culture has been a target of sustained government harassment since 1988, when a controversy erupted over reports that the museum had auctioned works by artists in Cuba or who had once supported Castro. Within two months, the Florida House of Representatives voted to cancel a $150,000 grant to the museum. The Miami City Commission then began a campaign to evict the museum from the city-owned property it leased for many years. In May 1991, a federal judge blocked the proposed eviction, finding that the Miami City Commission had engaged in improper conduct toward the museum.

Another example of government harassment of dissidents is the federal government's series of unwarranted investigations of Ramn Cernuda, a Miami business executive and former vice president of the Cuban Museum. Cernuda, who is perhaps the best known advocate of an alternative approach to Cuba, represents in exile a Havana-based human rights group that champions the cause of Cuban dissidents who are denounced by right-wing exile groups for their commitment to nonviolent change in Cuba. On May 5, 1989, during the Cuban Museum controversy, 14 U.S. Treasury agents raided Cernuda's home and office and confiscated 220 works of Cuban art. Several newspapers denounced the raid as a purely political act linked not to law enforcement but to the controversy over the Cuban Museum. In September 1989, a federal judge ordered Cernuda's paintings returned, and criticized the prosecutor for commencing the suit.

After this ruling, Cernuda was the target of a series of other investigations by government agencies. In November 1989, the immigration authorities seized and kept his travel documents for two months when he returned home from a conference in Canada. In December 1989, immigration officials raided his publishing offices in an unsuccessful search for illegal workers. In February 1990, the Florida Labor department began an investigation for possible labor violations. Shortly afterward, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service commenced an audit that took a year and resulted in a request that he claim his art collection as a personal rather than a business expense. None of the other investigations ever resulted in a charge or disciplinary action.

Government authorities bear some responsibility for the actions of groups that receive government funds and engage in repressive activities. For example, the Miami City Commission provided a $15,000 grant to the 1989 Cuban-American Festival, whichbanned three singers from performing because they had performed in Cuba.

Finally, there have been government statements and actions that encourage and embolden those private actors who may be inclined toward criminal violence. During the canf campaign against the Herald, Mayor Surez joined with the canf to form the Cuban Anti-Defamation League and, on behalf of the group, publicly complained about the Herald. In another incident reported in 1986, a group protesting U.S. aid to the Nicaraguan contra movement was physically attacked by a fiercely anti-Castro exile group that held a counterdemonstration a few yards away. When some of the victims met with Mayor Surez later to complain about the police's handling of the demonstration, he reportedly pointed out that most of them did not live in Miami and questioned why the city should pay to protect them. The Mayor's actions, along with the Miami City Commission's handling of permits for demonstrations and rallies and its treatment of the Cuban Museum, contribute to the impression that the Miami government is not ardently interested in preventing harassment of dissidents.

The official response to the violence and intimidation in Miami has been marked by a notable failure to prosecute criminal acts directed against dissidents. While in the last few years there have been over a dozen bombings aimed at those who favor a moderate approach to the Cuban government, there has not been a single arrest or prosecution in that time. Moreover, the authorities responsible for enforcing the laws more often appear to be concerned with discrediting activists than with apprehending those responsible. In some cases, police officers reportedly looked on and did nothing as violence or vandalism was taking place.

Americas Watch and the Fund for Free Expression concluded that governmental leadership could greatly improve the climate for freedom of expression in Miami, and made several recommendations. Law enforcement authorities should assure that a full and complete investigation is carried out with respect to every criminal act of violence, intimidation and vandalism, and that those responsible are brought to justice. Government leaders at every level, from the President to Mayor Surez, should speak out clearly and forcefully against acts of violence and intimidation. Furthermore, the City of Miami should cease its efforts to harass the Cuban Museum of Arts and Culture, and should make decisions about funding, demonstration permits and police protection free of content-based ideological considerations.

Police Brutality

In April 1992, a jury in Simi Valley, California acquitted four Los Angeles police officers responsible for the brutal beating of motorist Rodney King. The beating, 14 months earlier, had been captured on videotape by a bystander. In response to the verdict, Human Rights Watch stressed that the Rodney King beating was not an isolated occurrence but part of a recurrent, widespread pattern of police brutality in the United States. Human Rights Watch also emphasized that because police brutality violates the U.S. Constitution as well as international law, the duty to remedy and prevent it lies not only with the state but also with the federalgovernment.

Standards of police use of force remain vague and inconsistent across the country. As Human Rights Watch reported in its July 1991 study, Police Brutality in the United States: A Policy Statement on the Need for Federal Oversight, responsibility for the confusion lies with the federal government, which has failed to establish standards to prevent the use of excessive force, or even to keep statistics on the prevalence of abuse. A week after the police beat Rodney King, then-Attorney General Dick Thornburgh asked the National Institute of Justice to study the relationship between incidents of police brutality and departmental training programs and procedures to deter brutality. Predictably, the consultants assigned to the research were stymied by the lack of national records on the use of force by police. Nor were there any records correlating the use of force by police with different police training programs or procedures.

This deliberate policy of ignorance on the part of the federal government persists in a time when the federal government allocates hundreds of millions of dollars annually to assist local law enforcement officers in the performance of their duties. Federal programs instruct local police officers to combat crimes such as money laundering and drug trafficking. Yet, because federal officials consider police brutality a local problem, they provide no comparable instruction. Human Rights Watch maintains that the U.S. constitution and international human rights law compel the federal government to set minimum standards for police behavior, to keep records on adherence to those standards, and to provide guidance on compliance.

U.S. Prisons

The Prison Project of Human Rights Watch continued its appeal to the U.S. government to safeguard human rights in U.S. prisons. Following up its 1991 study of prison conditions in the United States, Human Rights Watch met with congressional staff members and wrote to Attorney General William Barr expressing concern about the increasing use of super maximum security prisons in federal and state prisons, and accompanying human rights violations. In a reply letter, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Prisons, J. Michael Quinlan, did not address violations in state facilities, and noted, among other things, that inmates at the Marion, Illinois super maximum security facility stay "only about three years".

In October, the Prison Project also expressed concern about the treatment of a federal inmate, Brett Kimberlin, who made allegations in 1988 of having sold marijuana to then vice-presidential candidate Dan Quayle. Human Rights Watch requested information from Attorney General Barr about the Bureau's reasons for placing Kimberlin in administrative detention after he made the allegation, denying him access to the press, and cancelling his press conference on the issue.

Human Rights Watch has also been engaged in a study of the participation of medical personnel in executions, and expects to release a report in early 1993.

Ratification of the International Covenant on Civil and PoliticalRights

The U.S. Senate consented to the ratification of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights on April 2, 1992. On June 8, the executive branch formally deposited the instrument of ratification with the United Nations, finally bringing the United States into the growing community of states that have formally adopted the Covenant. The treaty had been submitted to the Senate in 1977 by President Carter. In August 1991, President Bush sent Congress a formal statement in favor of ratification, along with numerous proposed reservations, understandings and declarations that limited the Covenant's applicability in the United States.

Although Human Rights Watch supported ratification of the treaty, we objected to many of the limiting provisions proposed by the administration and adopted by the Senate. For example, the Bush administration objected to the Covenant's prohibition on the imposition of the death penalty for crimes committed by persons under the age of 18, and reserved the right to impose capital punishment for juvenile offenders.

Human Rights Watch also objected to the Bush administration's position that the provisions of the Covenant were not self-executing, and thus not enforceable in U.S. courts in the absence of implementing legislation. This declaration deprives U.S. courts of their role in enforcing treaty compliance, and denies U.S. citizens judicial protection of their rights under the Covenant. The administration defended its position on the grounds that since existing U.S. law generally complied with the Covenant, no implementing legislation was necessary.

Human Rights Watch supported one of the reservations to the Covenant that binds the U.S. to a higher standard of freedom of speech than was guaranteed by the language of the Covenant.

Litigation in U.S. Courts

In recent years Human Rights Watch has become increasingly involved in civil litigation in U.S. courts in cases in which international law standards are relevant.

 Hudson v. McMillian. On February 25, 1992, the Supreme Court reversed a lower court, and held that a beating of a prisoner constituted cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the Eighth Amendment to the U.S. constitution. Prison guards in a Louisiana prison had handcuffed, shackled, and beaten an inmate, loosening his teeth and cracking his dental plate. The court of appeals found that the beating did not violate the constitution because no "significant injury" resulted. In a 1991 amicus curiae brief, Human Rights Watch helped refute this claim by describing various abuses that often leave no physical injury but clearly constitute torture. In a concurring opinion, Justice Blackmun noted: "[W]ere we to hold to the contrary, we might place various kinds of state-sponsored torture and abuse-the kind ingeniously designed to cause pain but without a telltale `significant injury'-entirely beyond the pale of the Constitution."



 United States v. Alvarez Machain. In another case, also involving allegations of torture, the Supreme Court dealt a blow tointernational law by upholding the U.S. government's right to kidnap foreigners and bring them to the United States for trial. U.S. agents kidnapped Humberto Alvarez Machain, a Mexican national, and brought him to the United States. He alleges that he was tortured en route. The Mexican government protested the abduction and formally demanded his return. Americas Watch had filed an amicus curiae brief that called for Alvarez Machain's repatriation on the grounds that the extradition treaty between the United States and Mexico should be interpreted to prohibit unauthorized cross-border abductions and that the kidnapping interfered with Mexico's sovereign duty to protect the human rights of one of its citizens. The Court stated, "Respondent [Alvarez Machain] and his amici may be correct that Respondent's abduction was `shocking'...and that it may be in violation of general international law principles....We conclude, however, that Respondent's abduction was not in violation of the Extradition Treaty between the United States and Mexico."

 Nelson v. Saudi Arabia. Human Rights Watch also submitted an amicus curiae brief to the United States Supreme Court in a case in which a U.S. citizen filed suit against the government of Saudi Arabia for torture and prolonged arbitrary detention. Scott Nelson alleges that while employed as an engineer at King Faisal Specialist Hospital in Saudi Arabia he reported an unsafe condition to his superiors and a government commission of investigation. Thereafter he faced harassment on the job and subsequently was arrested, tortured, forced to sign a statement in Arabic that he did not understand, and held in custody without being told the charges against him for 39 days. The government of Saudi Arabia argued that it had immunity from suit in U.S. courts because it was a foreign sovereign. Nelson responded that because Saudi Arabia's actions were related to his employment, which was commercial in nature, the abusive treatment should be held to fall under the "commercial activity" exception to the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act. In its amicus curiae brief, Human Rights Watch argued that Nelson's torture and detention were appropriately treated as "commercial activity" because the Saudi government routinely engages in such abuse in connection with commercial disputes in which it has an interest. Human Rights Watch also stressed that international law requires torture victims to be given an opportunity to obtain compensation from those responsible for their mistreatment: because Nelson is extremely unlikely to obtain civil redress in Saudi courts, the Supreme Court should resolve any ambiguity in the reach of "commercial activity" in favor of providing him a civil remedy in the United States. Argument in the case was heard on November 30, 1992, and a decision is expected in 1993.

 Haitian Centers Council v. McNary. Americas Watch filed two amicus curiae briefs in 1992 in cases alleging that the United States had violated international law in its treatment of Haitian refugees. In the first brief, Americas Watch argued that the continued incommunicado detention at Guantnamo Bay Naval Base of hundreds of Haitians who had made a prima facie showing that theywere refugees violated international law. The Haitians were confined in camps surrounded by barbed wire; were barred from making telephone calls, communicating by mail, or receiving visitors, including attorneys; and were prohibited from traveling anywhere, even at their own expense, except back to Haiti. Americas Watch argued that international law prohibits such prolonged incommunicado detention, and noted numerous instances in which the U.S. State Department had denounced similar detention in other countries. In the second brief, Americas Watch argued that the summary forcible repatriation of Haitian boat people, without screening to exclude refugees, violated the international law prohibition of the forcible return of refugees to countries where they face political persecution. The U.S. government sought to justify the summary repatriations in part by citing a survey it had conducted of 2,500 repatriates, none of whom alleged that they had been persecuted upon their return to Haiti. Americas Watch found that the survey was flawed because it excluded repatriates who are at greatest risk of persecution-those who had not been repatriated because under an earlier policy they had been screened and found to have credible claims of persecution, and those who had been repatriated but perceived themselves to be in too great a danger to risk speaking with U.S. government investigators, particularly in the circumstances of little privacy in which the interviews were often conducted. In both cases, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals held in favor of the Haitian refugees. The latter case is pending before the U.S. Supreme Court, and Americas Watch is preparing another amicus brief.



 Trajano v. Marcos. In October, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals upheld a default judgment against Imee Marcos-Manotoc, daughter of former Philippine President Ferdinand Marcos, for the torture and murder of Archimedes Trajano. The Trajano family alleged that after Archimedes asked a question of Marcos-Manotoc during an open forum at which she was speaking, he was kidnapped, interrogated, and tortured to death by military intelligence personnel who were at the scene. The suit was filed in the United States under the Alien Tort Statute. Marcos-Manotoc did not appear during trial court proceedings. Human Rights Watch supported the Trajano family's arguments that victims of torture and other tortious violations of the law of nations are entitled to access to United States courts.

 Sison v. Marcos. In cooperation with the American Civil Liberties Union of Southern California, Human Rights Watch assumed the representation of three Philippine victims of human rights abuses. Along with 21 other individuals and a class of people numbering as many 10,000 who were victims of torture, disappearance and summary execution during the Marcos dictatorship, they sued the estate of former Philippine President Ferdinand Marcos in the U.S. District Court in Hawaii. In September, a jury ruled in favor of all but one of the victims following a two-week trial during which the jury heard testimony from more than 30 victims of human rights abuses, former U.S. government officials, and leading experts on human rights conditions in the Philippines during the Marcos era.The verdict was a clear statement that victims of human rights abuses can obtain justice in U.S. courts.

 Border Patrol Abuse. In June, Human Rights Watch filed administrative proceedings under the Federal Tort Claims Act on behalf of two Guatemalan nationals who allege that they were tortured by Border Patrol agents near Falfurrias, Texas in 1991. The two men claim that they were beaten while being interrogated about who had assisted them to enter the United States without authorization. One of the men was forced to remove his pants, threatened with rape, and shocked on the buttocks with an 18-inch-long electrical apparatus.

 United States v. Noreiga. Human Rights Watch filed an amicus curiae brief in a district court in Florida in November 1992 in connection with the sentencing of former Panamanian strongman Manuel Noreiga after his conviction on drug trafficking charges. Claiming that he was entitled to treatment as a prisoner of war under the Third Geneva Convention of 1949, Noreiga sought the right to serve his sentence in a military prison rather than a civilian institution. Human Rights Watch concurred with Noreiga's claim of entitlement to prisoner-of-war status and agreed that he was entitled to certain privileges during his incarceration as a result, but disagreed that these privileges included the right to serve a sentence in a military prison as long as a U.S. soldier would be similarly treated, as U.S. regulations provide.

THEMATIC REPORTS

Repressive governments often defend their practices by asserting that human rights must take a back seat to economic development. In 1992, Human Rights Watch challenged this false dichotomy between political and civil rights and economic rights in two publications, Indivisible Human Rights: The Relationship of Political and Civil Rights to Survival, Subsistence and Poverty and Defending the Earth: Abuses of Human Rights and the Environment.

Indivisible Human Rights, released in September at the summit meeting of non-aligned nations in Jakarta, illustrated the connection between socioeconomic well being and enjoyment of certain civil and political rights, particularly freedom of expression, association, and the press, free and competitive elections, and freedom of movement. The report addressed four areas-famine, land, environment, and work-where subsistence and survival are related to, and sometimes dependent upon, guarantees of civil and political rights.

Every single major famine in modern history has been caused, at least in significant part, by systematic abuse of human rights. If food shortages exist, assistance to stricken areas can be mobilized only when information about shortages can be shared and governments are obliged to act responsibly. Principles of democratic accountability lie at the heart of an effective system of famine prevention: a free press and democratically electedrepresentatives can disseminate information, pressure a government to respond, and seek to correct past mistakes.

India provides an example of a country that has successfully avoided famine in recent years, despite droughts and chronic poverty. This is due in great part to a free press that exposes abuses, and a democratically elected government that is pressured to respond to shortages. Tanzania also demonstrates the importance of political accountability in triggering a government response: food is an electoral issue in Tanzania's competitive electoral environment, so local representatives are quick to request relief for their district. Frequently, however, governments have suppressed information about the onset of famine with impunity. The most serious famine in recorded history, which claimed between 15 and 30 million lives in China between 1958 and 1961, occurred in virtual secrecy. The famine was propelled by the Chinese government's restrictions on the flow of information on crops among provinces and its unwillingness, even when it knew the extent of the famine, to respond. Warfare, and the accompanying censorship of information and restrictions on movement of people and food, caused major famines in the 1980s in Eritrea and southern Sudan.

Land use and ownership is another context in which democratic accountability is closely intertwined with a community's survival. In urban and rural areas alike, subsistence often depends upon access to land on which people may farm, live, set up shop, or herd animals. Governments that abuse their authority over land use can jeopardize entire communities. For example, freedom of movement is essential to the livelihood of pastoral nomadic populations or those who depend upon trade or migrant labor. However, some governments deny this freedom, by restricting pastoralists to land insufficient to sustain their herds, as in Kenya, or by closing markets and encouraging settled farmers to deny pastoralists access to land, as in Mali. Livelihood is also endangered through forced relocation schemes, where dominant groups are moved into a community, or subordinate groups out, for commercial, political or security reasons. In South Africa, the denial of civil and political rights to the majority black population has been an essential tool in permitting the government to displace large numbers of black residents.

Businesses and governments forcibly evict peasants and villages for new development projects, for commercial farming or logging and other business interests. These evictions are often accomplished by quashing political rights: those who protest are arrested or threatened with arrest, and some villagers are never compensated for their seized land. Urban residents are at risk as well, as governments violently relocate squatters who have adverse tribal or political affiliations. When there are few checks on government authority to seize land, or no sanctions against private actors who dispossess others of land, subsistence is endangered.

Enforcement of labor rights, particularly the rights of workers to organize, bargain collectively and to be free of forced or involuntary labor, is in many countries directly linked to workers' health and economic survival. Suppression of these labor rights is made easier when there is no free press to question government policies, no opposition parties, no accountability andlittle or no possibility of the poor successfully challenging their abusers through the courts.

The most obvious way in which deprivation of labor rights leads to socioeconomic devastation is the practice of forced labor. Workers' lives are also routinely endangered by hazardous working conditions: from Indonesia's shoe manufacturing plants to a non-union United States chicken processing plant, workers have died in unsafe work environments. The ability of industry owners and governments to suppress information about safety violations, and to prevent workers from forming effective unions that could seek enforcement of safety codes, allows these abuses to continue unredressed. The tactics used by governments to prevent the formation of unions include allowing only a single, government-controlled union, as in China; making formation of independent unions so difficult as to be practically impossible (Indonesia); registration procedures that give the government control over opposition unions (Mexico); and, in many countries, direct attacks on unionists to discourage organizing.

Defending the Earth, published jointly with the Natural Resources Defense Counsel and presented at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in June, examined the link between denial of civil and political rights and environmental degradation. People all over the world die and suffer from environmental and human calamities that could have been avoided if the policies that led to them had been subjected to public scrutiny and debate. Defending the Earth detailed this relationship through numerous case studies in which censorship of free expression contributed directly to environmental degradation.

Governmental suppression of environmental activism takes numerous forms. In some countries, activists suffer direct physical attacks, imprisonment, official denunciation or harassment, or retaliatory libel suits. Governments also use their broad authority to regulate private associations to disband or harass environmentally activist organizations. Because the press plays a critical role in stimulating public awareness of environmental issues, the media and journalists are often the target of censorship and harassment. Governments also fire or punish "whistleblowers" to silence those who question policy or expose misconduct. Lastly, governments restrict access to information about environmental issues, thus limiting the public's ability to respond.

In Brazil, for example, rural activists fighting the destruction of the rain forest have been murdered. Malaysia has used its repressive internal security laws to detain and harass anti-logging groups. Eritrea's devastated natural environment is a result of the last 30 years of warfare and the Ethiopian government's policies of massive forced relocation of people, destruction of feasible land use practices, and suppression of information. In the former Soviet Union, extreme repression of dissent allowed massive environmental abuses to continue unchallenged. At the other end of the political spectrum, even a democratic society like India has engaged in police abuse and used its "Official Secrets Act" to suppress opposition to an environmentally hazardous dam project. "Whistleblowers" in theUnited States who alert the public to safety hazards in the nuclear weapons industry have been persecuted, demoted and fired. Other examples are drawn from the Philippines, where criminal libel laws have been used to deter the press from exposing environmental abuses; Mexico, where the government has tried to coopt environmental activists and conceal information about environmental hazards; and Kenya, where an outspoken environmental activist has been detained, harassed and denounced as "subversive" for her opposition to destruction of a park in Nairobi.
THE FUND FOR FREE EXPRESSION

The Fund for Free Expression, one of the six divisions of Human Rights Watch, monitors and combats government censorship around the world and in the United States. In 1992, the Fund published newsletters on freedom of expression issues in the United States; sent appeals to the U.S. and foreign governments regarding threats to free expression in individual cases; and, along with Americas Watch, released Dangerous Dialogue: Attacks on Freedom of Expression in Miami's Exile Community (see chapter on United States). The Fund also continued to administer the Hellman/Hammett grants to persecuted writers and the International Academic Freedom Committee.

In appeals to foreign governments, the Fund expressed concern about the use of libel laws to silence government critics and human rights monitors. In August, a Polish man was convicted of slander for criticizing President Lech Walesa, and received a one-year suspended prison sentence and a fine equivalent to one month's salary. In Brazil, a human rights monitor who denounced a political candidate's prior involvement in a case of forced labor was convicted of slander in September. The Fund protested both convictions, calling on the respective governments to overturn these decisions on appeal and to affirm citizens' rights to voice criticism of candidates for office and elected officials.

The Fund also communicated with the U.S. government about restrictions on free expression in the United States. In a trial that began on October 27, the U.S. seeks to deport two permanent residents based upon their contributions to humanitarian projects in Palestine. Although they have never been accused of committing any crime or belonging to a terrorist organization, and their activity could not be penalized if they were citizens, they are being deported under a law allowing deportation of anyone who lends material support to a terrorist organization.

In a letter to Attorney General William Barr, the Fund and other Human Rights Watch divisions urged the U.S. to halt the deportation proceedings. In February, the Fund protested the U.S. Senate Special Counsel's issuance of subpoenas to journalists Nina Totenberg and Timothy Phelps asking the identity of their confidential sources concerning Professor Anita Hill's claims of sexual harassment against Justice Clarence Thomas.

February 14, 1992 marked the third anniversary of the fatwa-or death sentence-pronounced by Ayatollah Rouhollah Khomeini of Iran against British novelist Salman Rushdie. As the fatwa continues,and the accompanying bounty has been increased (see chapter on Iran), Rushdie remains in hiding; there have been violent attacks on people associated with publication of The Satanic Verses and other controversial works; and there is a continuing danger to U.S. publishers, booksellers and readers. The Fund, along with PEN and the American Association of Publishers, met with State Department officials to ask the U.S. to condemn the fatwa and ensuing violence, and to seek assurances that such state-supported terrorism would be a primary issue in formulating U.S. and U.N. policy toward Iran. The Fund also issued "The Threat Against Salman Rushdie," describing the continued threats against Rushdie and calling on the United Nations Human Rights Commission to extend the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on Iran to press for removal of the fatwa.

Minority Languages and English-Only Laws in the United States

In March 1992, the Fund issued a report on the movement to make English the "official language" of the United States. Official English laws have been passed in 18 states and numerous municipalities, with noticeable, and sometimes extreme, effects. The law in Dade County, Florida prohibited signs in zoos that identify animals by their Latin scientific names; the mayor of Monterey Park, California, where thousands speak Chinese, refused the Taiwan government's donation of 10,000 Chinese books to the public library because of an English-only law; a Parole Board in Arizona canceled a non-English speaking prisoner's parole hearing, fearing that the state's English-only law-later held unconstitutional-prohibited simultaneous interpretation. The workplace in particular has been the site of increasing language restrictions, where people who converse in languages other than English have faced dismissal and demotion.

No comprehensive right to use a language other than English has been recognized in the United States. However, English-only laws have a potentially harmful effect on the exercise of other legally protected rights, including the rights to a fair trial, voting, freedom from employment discrimination, and freedom of expression.

In 1993, the Fund plans to release a report on censorship of minority languages around the world, including restrictions on the press, total bans, restrictions on language in schools, restrictions on government funding, and official languages.

Communications Technologies and Civil Liberties

Traditionally, the U.S. government has regulated different forms of communications to differing degrees: while printed communication, for example, cannot be censored by prior restraints, broadcasters are subject to licensing and some content controls. But as new computer-based technologies emerge-such as electronic billboards and complex data retrieval systems-these distinctions are no longer applicable. In July 1992, the Fund investigated the impact of these new technologies in "Electrifying Speech: New Communications Technologies and Traditional Civil Liberties."

It is by no means a foregone conclusion among potential regulators that electronic speech is protected by the FirstAmendment of the U.S. constitution, or even so, the scope of that protection. In March 1990, for example, federal agents raided a Texas publisher of computer games and an electronic bulletin board. Agents seized computers and all of the information and private communications used to publish the bulletin board, and kept the information for four months. In a lawsuit filed against the Secret Service, the owner has argued that the search warrant constituted a prior restraint on publication.

Computer technology raises new issues about protection of individual privacy, since computers offer new means for government and business surveillance. For example, employers often reserve the right to read all electronic mail of employees, sometimes without informing employees of this policy. The changing form of information also alters regulation of access to government information. While theoretically computerization could enhance government responses to citizens' requests for records, the access laws have left unaddressed what constitutes a "record" and a reasonable search, at times increasing the difficulty of obtaining comprehensive records.

The Committee for International Academic Freedom

The Committee for International Academic Freedom opposes harassment and human rights violations directed at teachers and students, as well as censorship and the closing of universities for political reasons. It sends letters and cables of protest to governments on behalf of imprisoned or harassed educators and scholars, and alerts the U.S. academic community to incidents of human rights abuses against their peers worldwide.

The committee is comprised of 23 university presidents and scholars. Jonathan Fanton of the New School for Social Research, Vartan Gregorian of Brown University, Hanna Holborn Gray of the University of Chicago, and Charles Young of the University of California at Los Angeles are co-chairs.

In 1992, the committee sent 17 letters to governments protesting abuses against teachers and students, and issued two membership bulletins. The letters addressed the following countries and issues: Bulgaria, concerning the National Assembly's adoption of a law barring service in various academic and scientific positions on the basis of current and past associations, rather than individual qualifications and proof of illegal, corrupt or repressive activities; China, about the arrests and continued imprisonment of teachers and students in Hunan Province for participating in the 1989 pro-democracy movement; Colombia, where a high school teacher was murdered and others receive death threats; Cuba, where 11 university professors were dismissed for signing a human rights declaration; Czechoslovakia, about the removal of the rector and other government interference with Trnava University; Guatemala, concerning numerous incidents of threats, intimidation, attacks and murder against students and university teachers; Haiti, where students were detained without charges, and student demonstrations have been met with violence; Indonesia, two letters, concerning students held in long-term detention as a result of participation in peaceful demonstrations, and about two student emcees at a rock concert who were detained for making punsthat changed the meaning of Islamic phrases; Israel, concerning a West Bank professor who was barred from returning home after a stay in the United States because of the political affiliations of his brother; Ivory Coast, protesting an army raid on a university campus during which students were reportedly raped and beaten and four were killed, and protesting as well the subsequent fines and prison sentences against student leaders, professors, and 12 government critics who protested the army's actions; Myanmar (Burma), two letters about the detention of students and the temporary closure of 27 universities in response to non-violent pro-democracy demonstrations; Nigeria, where campuses have been closed and hundreds of students have been detained in a wave of governmental repression beginning in May 1991; Peru, where, after university students were forced to participate in a "census" by the military, 19 students were murdered and at least seven others "disappeared"; and Venezuela, two letters concerning the use of excessive force against students participating in anti-government demonstrations, reported incidents of torture and ill-treatment of those detained in connection with these demonstrations, and the deaths of three students while participating in them.

Hellman/Hammett Awards

Under the terms of legacies from the writers Lillian Hellman and Dashiell Hammett, the Fund for Free Expression administers grants for writers in financial need as the result of political persecution. In 1992, the third year of the program, 36 writers from 16 countries received grants in amounts of up to $10,000 each.

Among this year's recipients were Ettore Capriolo, the Italian translator of Salman Rushdie's Satanic Verses, who was assaulted and stabbed in Milan by an unknown assailant; Maria Elena Cruz Varela, a Cuban poet who was beaten, detained and denounced as a traitor and a "CIA lackey" after she and other writers submitted a letter calling for elections and the release of political prisoners; Max du Preez, a South African journalist who founded the first Afrikaans-language newspaper opposed to apartheid and has since faced numerous attempts at harassment and intimidation; Li Guiren, a Chinese publisher imprisoned for taking part in the pro-democracy movement who is currently gravely ill in a prison hospital; and Ilker Demir, a Turkish journalist who was tortured while in detention in connection with his work as an editor. Additional grants were given to writers from Burma (15), Cambodia, China (5), Croatia, Kenya, Morocco, Pakistan, Peru (2), Somalia, South Korea, Vietnam (2), and Yugoslavia.

Nominations for these grants are solicited in the fall and decisions announced early the following year. In addition to the annual grants, smaller amounts are available on an ongoing basis from a special emergency fund. In 1992, emergency grants were awarded to seven writers from seven countries, including Sudan, Yugoslavia and Peru.
THE PRISON PROJECT

The Prison Project of Human Rights Watch was formed in 1988 to focus international attention on prison conditions worldwide. Its work cuts across the five regional divisions of the organization. The project investigates conditions for sentenced prisoners, without limiting its work to prisoners held for political reasons.

In addition to pressing for improvement in prison conditions in particular countries that are studied, the project seeks to place the problem of prison conditions on the international human rights agenda. We believe that a government's claim to respect human rights should be assessed in part on the basis of how it treats its prisoners. Our experience has repeatedly shown that a number of democratic countries that are rarely or never a focus of human rights investigations are in fact guilty of serious human rights violations within their prisons.

In 1991, in an effort to call for increased international attention to prison conditions, the project prepared a document outlining prison conditions in several of the countries participating in the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (csce) and released it at the opening of a csce meeting on human rights held in Moscow. The project is currently preparing a worldwide study of prison conditions, which we plan to release at the time of the U.N.-sponsored World Conference on Human Rights in June 1993.

In previous years, the project conducted studies and published reports on prison conditions in Brazil, Czechoslovakia, India, Indonesia, Israel and the Occupied Territories, Jamaica, Mexico, Poland, the former Soviet Union, Turkey, and the United States (including a separate newsletter on Puerto Rico).

In 1992, the project released reports on prison conditions in Romania, Spain, and the United Kingdom. The reports on Spain and the United Kingdom were released in those countries (in Spain, in a Spanish-language version) and generated substantial media attention there.

In February, the project conducted an investigation of Egyptian prisons. The results will be published in a report, expected in early 1993.

In August 1992, the project began an investigation of prison conditions in South Africa. Among the prisons visited was one in the homeland of Bophuthatswana. An additional trip in 1993 is planned to complete the investigation. In the meantime, the project was asked to provide testimony by an attorney representing inmates in a class-action suit challenging prison conditions in one of the institutions visited. The project filed an affidavit describing its findings on that institution.

In October, the project conducted an emergency mission to Brazil, in response to the news that at least 111 inmates were killed by police in a Sao Paulo prison in the course of a prison disturbance. A newsletter outlining the findings was published in the aftermath, in English and Portuguese, and Americas Watch joined with two other organizations in filing a formal complaint against Brazil with the Inter American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States. Both the mission and the report received unprecedented media exposure in Brazil.

In 1992, in meetings with Congressional staff members and in a letter to the Attorney General, the project continued to express its concern over the proliferation of super maximum-security institutions (known as "maxi-maxis") in the United States. The project also addressed a letter to the Attorney General concerning a prisoner who appears to have received punitive treatment in prisons for political reasons.

The project has coordinated Human Rights Watch's efforts in opposition to the death penalty. In 1992, in conjunction with three other groups, including two medical organizations, the project has undertaken a study of medical involvement in executions. We hope that by challenging this involvement as a violation of medical ethics we will open a fruitful new avenue for curtailing use of the death penalty.

As a result of the project's investigation of prison conditions in the former Soviet Union, the project was approached by a member of the Russian parliament seeking advice on reforming the country's prisons.

The Prison Project has been able to secure access to penal institutions in more than half of the countries in which investigations have been undertaken. The project has a self-imposed set of rules for prison visits: investigators undertake visits only when they, not the authorities, can suggest institutions to be visited, when the investigators can be confident that they will be allowed to talk privately with inmates of their choice, and when the investigators can gain access to the entire facility to be examined. These rules are adopted to avoid being shown model prisons or the most presentable parts of institutions. When no access is possible, reporting is based on interviews with former prisoners, prisoners on furloughs, relatives of inmates, lawyers, prison experts and prison staff, and on documentary evidence. Prison investigations are usually conducted by teams composed of a staff member and a member of the Prison Advisory Committee, which guides the work of the project. Occasionally, the project invites an outside expert to participate in a particular investigation.

The Prison Advisory Committee is chaired by Herman Schwartz, of the American University Law School. Other members are Nan Aron, Vivian Berger, Haywood Burns, Alejandro Garro, William Hellerstein, Edward Koren, Sheldon Krantz, Benjamin Malcolm, Diane Orentlicher, Norman Rosenberg, David Rothman and Clarence Sundram. The director of the project is Joanna Weschler. Anthony Levintow is the associate.
THE WOMEN'S RIGHTS PROJECT

The Women's Rights Project of Human Rights Watch was established in 1990 to work in conjunction with Human Rights Watch's regional divisions to monitor violence against women and discrimination on the basis of sex that is either committed or tolerated by governments. The Project grew out of Human Rights Watch's recognition of the epidemic proportions of violence and gender discrimination around the world and of the past failure of human rights organizations, and the international community, to holdgovernments accountable for abuses of women's basic human rights. The Project monitors the performance of specific countries in securing and protecting women's human rights, highlights individual cases of international significance, and serves as a link between women's rights and human rights communities at both a national and international level.This section does not evaluate progress in women's human rights throughout the world, but describes developments in countries most closely monitored by the Project in 1992: Pakistan, Poland, Kuwait, Czechoslovakia, Peru, Egypt, and Brazil.

Women's Human Rights Developments

This chapter does not evaluate progress in women's human rights throughout the world, but describes developments in countries most closely monitored by the Project in 1992: Pakistan, Poland, Kuwait, Czechoslovakia, Peru, Egypt and Brazil.

Pakistan

In June, the Women's Rights Project and Asia Watch released Double Jeopardy: Police Abuse of Women in Pakistan. The report documents routine discrimination in the incarceration of women in Pakistan and finds that, once imprisoned, women detainees are often denied basic protections guaranteed under domestic and international law. More than 70 percent reported physical and sexual abuse in custody, yet not a single officer has ever been criminally punished for such abuse. More than 60 percent of all female detainees in Pakistan are imprisoned under the Hudood Ordinances, Islamic penal laws that criminalize, among other things, fornication, adultery and rape, and prescribe punishments for these offenses that include stoning to death and public flogging. Women alleging rape are often accused of adultery because as women the courts tend to disbelieve their testimony and thus suspect them of having consented to the rape they report. If medical evidence indicates that sexual intercourse has occurred, the victim may herself be charged with adultery or fornication. Discriminatory treatment of women's testimony is built into the Hudood laws. For example, proof of rape for maximum punishment requires a confession or the testimony of four male Muslim witnesses to the act of penetration; the testimony of women carries no legal weight. In one case that was investigated, 18-year-old Majeeda Mujid was abducted by several men who repeatedly raped her. When she complained to the police, they charged her with illicit sex and let the men go free.

Although acquittal rates for women in Hudood cases are estimated at over 30 percent, by the time a woman has been vindicated she often has already spent months and in many cases years in prison and, in all likelihood, has been subjected to police abuse while in custody. It is also common for judges to remand female rape and abduction victims as a form of indefinite "protective custody" to private detention facilities where they are often subjected to further abuse.

The report also found that women and girls from Bangladesh, many of whom have been forcibly trafficked through India to Pakistan for the purpose of domestic or sexual servitude, are arrested by the Pakistani police, often for Hudood offenses, andsubjected to the same abusive and discriminatory treatment as that suffered by their Pakistani counterparts.

Poland

On March 12, the Women's Rights Project and Helsinki Watch published Hidden Victims: Sex Discrimination in Post-Communist Poland. The report concluded that although the current Polish constitution outlaws sex discrimination, legalized discrimination exists in health care, freedom of association and-an especially vital field in this time of economic hardship-employment.

Laws allowing for jobs to be reserved and early retirement to be imposed on the basis of sex remain in force in Poland. Qualified women are often openly denied employment on the basis of sex, and employers suffer no legal sanction for such practices. Women, who previously counted for less than half of Poland's working population, now constitute more than half of the unemployed. They are the last hired and first fired.

Polish women are also suffering discrimination in the area of health care, and the government is failing to protect them against such abuse, despite its constitutional and international obligations to do so. Under a new national medical ethical code, abortion and pre-natal testing-both medical procedures used exclusively by women-are the only two otherwise legal medical procedures that are banned. Although the code was issued by a private institution, the Medical College, every doctor must join the college to practice medicine, and those who perform the prohibited services are subject to having their licenses revoked. A suit by Poland's Ombudsman challenging the code's constitutionality to our knowledge remains unsettled.

Women seeking to organize Poland's first independent women's groups have also met with discrimination from state authorities.

Kuwait

In August, the Women's Rights Project and Middle East Watch released Punishing the Victim, Rape and Mistreatment of Asian maids in Kuwait. The report found that nearly 2,000 maids have fled their abusive Kuwaiti employers since Kuwait's liberation in March 1991, yet no more than a handful of cases had ever been investigated or prosecuted. Rather than investigate or prosecute alleged abusers, Kuwaiti authorities often detained maids seeking to report crimes to the police or simply returned them to their abusive employers. Worse, there have also been credible reports of abuse of women domestic servants in police custody, which likewise goes unpunished.

One third of the 60 cases investigated involved rape or sexual abuse of maids, over two thirds involved physical assault. Almost without exception the women interviewed spoke of debt bondage, passport deprivation and near-total confinement in the homes of their employers. All of these abuses are illegal, but have been largely ignored by the Kuwaiti government.

Since the report's release, no action has been taken by the Kuwaiti government either to prosecute abusive employers, or to provide Asian maids better protection against abuse. Domestic servants continue to be excluded from Kuwait's labor law, whichregulates working hours and salaries and provides for arbitration of employment disputes. As of September 22, over 200 Filipina women were crowded into their embassy in Kuwait. Some 130 to 140 Indian women have sought shelter in their embassy since May. In September, the Kuwaiti government reportedly prohibited Asian embassies from housing the women, but has offered no viable alternative shelter.

The new government brought about by the victory of the opposition in the recent elections may offer hope for better results. The new parliament has formed two committees dedicated to human rights and may be more responsive to the Asian maids' plight.

Czechoslovakia

Also in August, Helsinki Watch released Struggling for Ethnic Identity, a report on Czechoslovakia's Endangered Gypsies. The report included a chapter on involuntary sterilization of Gypsy women, which is also to be released as a separate Women's Rights Project newsletter entitled Against Their Will. The researchers found that Czechoslovakia's past policies toward Romany women have gone unpunished by the present government and continue to effect Romany women today. In particular, the current governments have failed to investigate, publicly condemn and prosecute those responsible for state-supported medical procedures in which Romany women were sterilized without their full, informed and voluntary consent by doctors in the state's employ.

During the communist period in Czechoslovakia the government took specific steps to encourage the sterilization of Romany women in order to reduce the "high, unhealthy" Romany population. As a result, a disproportionately high percentage of Romany women were sterilized, often involuntarily and in violation of existing sterilization law and of their right to equal protection under the law without regard to sex or ethnicity.

Many Romany women reported that they were sterilized without their knowledge during a caesarean section or an abortion. Others told us they were not fully informed about the irreversible consequences of the operation. Most women said they had agreed to the operation to obtain monetary and material grants that were aggressively offered to them by government social and health workers.

Czech prosecutors, informed in early 1990 by the Committee for Human Rights In Prague of 90 cases of possible involuntary sterilization of Romany women, have yet to respond. Perfunctory investigations by Slovak prosecutors have yielded no punishment of accused medical or other government officials. The failure of the Czech and Slovak governments to investigate and prosecute past sterilization practices has allowed both doctors and government workers implicated in the involuntary sterilization of Romany women to go unpunished and denied Romany women their right to equal protection of the law. Moreover, discrimination against Romany women continues in some state medical facilities.

Peru

In December, Americas Watch and the Women's Rights Project released Untold Terror: Violence Against Women in Peru's Armed Conflict. The report found that despite explicit international prohibitions onmurder, torture and ill-treatment of noncombatants, both the government security forces and the Shining Path insurgency use violence against civilian women as a form of tactical warfare. Soldiers and police routinely rape women. The Shining Path frequently murders them. The violence is often undertaken to punish, coerce or intimidate female victims or to achieve broader political ends. At times, the violence takes gender-specific forms, as in the security forces' use of rape exclusively against women. At other times, the victim's gender does not influence the form of the abuse, but affects its motivation, as in the Shining Path's execution of community activists, many of whom are women.

In one case described in Untold Terror, a combined Army-civil defense patrol entered a hamlet near Tarma, Junin, on May 27, 1991, invaded a women's home, executed her husband as a "terrorist" and then hung her from the ceiling and raped her repeatedly. In another July 1991 case, in San Pedro de Cachi, Ayachucho, soldiers gang-raped 39-year-old Luzimila, whose son had reportedly been murdered by civil defensemen earlier that year. She explained, "They said my husband was with the terrorists, so I had to pay the price." Even in cases in which the soldiers' intent is not overtly political-as when two women waiting for a bus in Lima in August 1991 were abducted by an Army patrol and raped by 12 soldiers-the effect is the same: women are being terrorized by the state security forces and rape is the method of choice.

Rape of women by the Shining Path is much less common, perhaps due to explicit prohibitions within its ranks and the high number of women militants. More often the Shining Path threatens and murders women activists with the express purpose of intimidating them and their peers, terrorizing their families and communities, and destroying what the Shining Path considers to be competing popular organizations. Since 1985, 10 female grassroots leaders have been killed. One of the most brutal attacks was on Maria Elena Moyano, the vice-mayor of Villa El Salvador, a Lima municipality of 300,000, and a founder of the Villa Women's Federation (fepomuves). Moyano was shot by a Shining Path assassination squad on February 15, 1992, and her body was blown up in the town square. In the weeks before her murder, Moyano strongly condemned guerilla attempts to bully others into joining them. The Shining Path is not known to have taken any action to discipline those responsible.

Violations of women's basic rights by both sides to the Peruvian conflict routinely go unpunished, as do human rights abuses in Peru more generally. However, women victims of human rights abuse often face an added obstacle, when the prosecution of rape is concerned. Accused rapists tried under Peru's penal law often go unpunished as a result of the courts' routine acceptance of discriminatory attitudes toward female victims. The conduct of secret military courts is unknown, but police and soldiers accused of rape and tried under the code of military justice are often acquitted. The Shining Path, far from disciplining those within its ranks who murder women, actively promotes this heinous crime, referring to it in the case of Maria Elena Moyano as "exemplary punishment."

The Right to Monitor

In Pakistan, activists who have attempted to highlight abuses of women's rights are generally able to function without fear of interference or harassment by the authorities. However, on November 18, eleven members of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, an independent monitoring organization, who were observing a protest march in Islamabad by the opposition Peoples Party of Pakistan (ppp), were detained at the Margalla police station after the demonstration was broken up by police. The monitors, including two women, and the driver, who was beaten, were detained in one cell for 36 hours. They were not produced before a magistrate.

In Poland, however, women's rights activists are somewhat more constrained. For decades, Poland had no independent women's movement. Women's groups independent of official sponsorship first appeared in the early 1980s, but like other independent organizations, they could obtain legal recognition only after the 1989 law on associations went into effect. That year a few small feminist organizations were registered and gained legal status, but in November 1991, a Provincial Court judge refused to register a woman's rights group, partly on the grounds that, as she put it, Polish women have too many rights, are very tired as a result, and do not need any new rights. The decision is being appealed.

Of those countries closely monitored by the Women's Rights Project in 1992, Peru poses the biggest threat to women's rights organizing and monitoring. The level of violence against women by both parties to the conflict has made women afraid-even terrified-to organize in opposition to violence by either side. Women who have been raped by the security forces are deterred from reporting the crime by the prospect that the public humiliation and risk of retaliation that they will endure will have little likelihood of breaking the pattern of impunity enjoyed by official abusers. As for those who contemplated speaking out against abuse by the Shining Path, Maria Elena Moyano and other victims like her, while revered as symbols of courage, are also object lessons of the risks involved. The insurgents have denounced women's rights groups as "madam feminists [who are] sleep-inducing mattresses...that serve as an instrument of oppression and retardation of women with the goal of leading them from the path of the people's war." Many of the women community activists killed by the Shining Path were leading feminists as well.

In 1991, the Women's Rights Project and Middle East Watch reported on the closure of the Arab Women's Solidarity Association (awsa), a prominent women's rights organization, by the Egyptian government. On May 7, 1992, an Egyptian administrative court decided to uphold the decree dissolving awsa, and refused to grant an injunction that would have allowed awsa to continue operating while it awaits the outcome of a further appeal. The court ruled that awsa's activities "threatened the peace and political and social order of the state by spreading ideas and beliefs offensive to the rule of Islamic Shari`a [Islamic law] and the religion of Islam." awsa officials believe that the Egyptian government clamped down on the organization because it had questioned the government's policy during the Gulf crisis, although the dissolution culminates years of official harassment of the organization's founder, Dr.Nawal el-Saadawi, for her work on behalf of women. awsa's women's rights activities in Egypt have had to end.

The International Response

One of the primary obstacles to ensuring and promoting the human rights of women worldwide is the failure of the international community, in particular the United Nations, aggressively to investigate abuses of women's rights that fall within its mandate. On August 14, the Project's Advisory Committee wrote to Antoine Blanca, Secretary-General of the U.N. World Conference on Human Rights, to be held in Vienna in June 1993, urging him to ensure that women's rights were fully integrated into the World Conference's agenda. The Committee made several recommendations for improving the implementation of existing human rights instruments; evaluating the effectiveness of existing human rights mechanisms; and improving the effectiveness of the U.N. human rights machinery specifically with protecting women's human rights. In October, the Project, together with the International Human Rights Law Group, hosted a meeting with several Western government officials, including U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Human Rights Commission Kenneth Blackwell, to discuss how the full integration of women's rights into the World Conference agenda might best be achieved. A similar meeting with a broader range of government representatives is scheduled for December 17.

U.S. Policy

Although the abuse of women in police custody in Pakistan and the discriminatory nature of the Hudood Ordinances are noted in the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1991, issued in January 1992, concern for these human rights issues has not figured prominently in relations between the two countries. On July 6, U.S. Ambassador Nicholas Platt stated in a letter to the Women's Rights Project that "the U.S. has supported programs in Pakistan aimed at strengthening democratic institutions and the rule of law." He added that embassy and consulate staff have been "actively engaged in raising public awareness of human rights issues," notably through a country-wide seminar on women's legal rights held in April 1992.

Members of Congress have raised concerns about police abuse of women in Pakistan. On July 27, Representatives Dante Fascell, chair of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Stephen Solarz, chair of the House Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs, and Gus Yatron, chair of the House Subcommittee on Human Rights and International Organizations, wrote to Pakistani Ambassador Syeda Abida Hussain to urge: "[I]n the fourth year of Pakistan's return to democratic rule, it is our hope that your government will also make its laws and legal system truly democratic for all Pakistani people." They called on the Pakistan government to "prosecute officers who engage in sexual or physical abuse of women in custody, take immediate steps to enforce the laws and rules pertaining to the detention of women in police custody, comply with the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners and...consider repealing the Hudood Ordinances and the Law of Evidence which fail to guarantee the full equality of womenbefore the law." The Congressional Human Rights Caucus sent a letter to Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif urging him to "ensure an end to torture-including rape-while in police custody and prosecute those responsible for the abuse of detainee."

Legal issues concerning women have also been raised with the World Bank. In August, the Women's Rights Project and Asia Watch met with Bank officials to discuss the report on Pakistan and its recommendations.

In June, the Women's Rights Project hosted Anna Popowicz, the former Commissioner for Women's Affairs in Poland, in a series of meetings with human rights organizations and congressional staff in Washington, to discuss rising sex discrimination during the transition to democracy in Poland. The Senate Appropriations Committee report accompanying the 1993 foreign aid appropriations bill reflects these conversations and the need for the U.S. to focus on the transition's particular effects on women in Eastern Europe. It states that "women throughout Eastern Europe are shouldering far more than their share of the burdens of political and economic reforms and receiving too few of the benefits. In access to employment, health care, and other social services, women are suffering disproportionately." The Committee instructed the U.S. Agency for International Development to "make sure that U.S. assistance programs in Eastern Europe take into account the impact of reforms on the status of women and promote the equal status of women."

Despite its preeminent influence in Kuwait, the U.S. government has not taken a firm public stand, either before or after the Gulf War, on behalf of abused Asian maids. This low profile has been maintained despite glaring evidence of an endemic problem.

In meetings in Kuwait with representatives from the Women's Rights Project and Middle East Watch, the U.S. Ambassador to Kuwait, Edward Gnehm, said that the U.S had been "pressing the Kuwaitis to rewrite and revise their laws and to strengthen" the channels of redress available to the maids. In an August meeting in Washington, State Department officials from the Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs told us that they concurred with the report's findings and were raising three issues in particular with the Kuwaiti government: the need for legal reform, the provision of shelter to abused maids, and the creation of an office to handle disputes within the Ministry of the Interior. At no time did the State Department mention urging the Kuwaitis to punish abusive employers. Nor has existing U.S. policy produced notable results in Kuwait: no shelters have been created, efforts at legal reform have been limited to unsuccessful attempts to regulate Kuwaiti recruiting agencies, and no effective means has been created to handle the maids' employment disputes.

On August 13, Congresswoman Patricia Schroeder wrote a letter to the Emir of Kuwait, Shaik Jaber al-Ahmed al-Jaber al-Sabah, highlighting the findings of the Women's Rights Project/Middle East Watch report on abuse of Asian maids in Kuwait and calling on the Emir to "help these women reach safety, investigate their claims fairly, and punish their abusers fully." In October, 53 members of Congress, including House Foreign Affairs Committee chair DanteFascell, also wrote the Emir, again calling attention to the report's findings and urging the Emir to "take the necessary steps towards addressing and preventing the abuse of domestic servants in Kuwait." The letter called on the Emir to order a thorough investigation of past and pending cases and to hold accountable those responsible for abuse.

On February 5, 1992, Human Rights Watch gave testimony before the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Human Rights, evaluating the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in 1992. Although we found that the State Department's reporting on abuses of women's rights had generally improved, its reporting on violence against women was scant and several reports contained exactly the same sentence: "Although violence against women is known to occur, little is known about its extent." We urged the State Department to investigate the incidence of violence against women more vigorously and to analyze why so little information is available.

In addition, we noted that the State Department continues inappropriately to relegate reporting on violations of women's rights exclusively to the report's section on discrimination, rather than also classifying them under the appropriate substantive violation. For example, the report on Algeria mentions in the discrimination section that women are often denied the right to travel on the basis of their gender, but makes no mention of this restriction in the section on freedom of movement. Relegating abuses of women solely to the discrimination section gives the false impression that they are merely "women's issues" as opposed to classic human rights issues affecting large numbers of Algerians. On August 6, 1992, the Women's Rights Project sent a letter to the Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs making additional recommendations concerning how the State Department's reporting on women's rights in the annual Country Reports might be further improved.

To redress these inadequacies in U.S. policy, the Clinton administration should make a more concerted effort than its predecessor to integrate attention to violations of women's rights into its human rights policy. In the absence of such attention in the past, in Pakistan for example, abuses of women's human rights have been allowed to occur without sustained opposition from the human rights community and, as a result, have reached epidemic proportions.

Bilateral action to include women's rights in U.S. human rights policy should be accompanied by efforts on the multilateral level to improve the effectiveness of international mechanisms to protect women against human rights abuse and to hold states accountable for committing or tolerating women's human rights violations. In particular, the United States should take a leading role in the forthcoming 1993 U.N. World Conference on Human Rights to ensure that women's rights are fully integrated into the conference's agenda and that specific recommendations emerge from the conference designed to better ensure and promote women's human rights worldwide.

The Work of the Women's Rights Project

In addition to releasing the five reports detailed above, the Women's Rights Project engaged in several follow-up activities and missions. Throughout 1992 the Women's Rights Project and Asia Watch met with Pakistani officials at the embassy in Washington to discuss the mission's findings and the report's recommendations. The release of Double Jeopardy and its coverage in the press led to public exchanges with the Pakistani government. In a letter to The New York Times on August 20, the Women's Rights Project and Asia Watch noted that the majority of female prisoners had been improperly charged, unfairly tried and routinely subjected to custodial abuse. Shortly after the letter was published, Naem Chatta, Minister of State, Women's Division, requested a meeting to discuss the report. The Pakistani embassy then responded with a letter to The New York Times on September 18 which criticized the report because it dealt only with the treatment of women, who constitute a minority of those imprisoned. The government claimed that women are protected by a law requiring the presence of a female constable during a woman's arrest; that women cannot be remanded to police custody; and that a wife cannot be punished for adultery.

On October 7, The New York Times published a response by Pakistani human rights lawyers Hina Jilani and Asma Jahangir, which pointed out that none of the embassy's claims is true. With the introduction of the Hudood laws in 1979, adultery became a criminal offense. Legislation prohibiting the overnight detention of women in police custody was proposed in September 1992, but does not yet exist. And the presence of a female constable, of whom there are few in the entire country, is not mandatory.

In October, an Asia Watch staff member traveled to Pakistan to investigate recent cases of abuse of women prisoners and to meet with government officials.

With regard to Poland, the Women's Rights Project arranged the meetings for the former Polish Commissioner of Women noted above. On May 13, the Project together with Helsinki Watch issued a press release calling on the Polish government to suspend provisions of the new national Medical Ethics Code that discriminate against women in their access to health care services at state-run hospitals-the principal source of medical care in Poland.

On June 15, the Women's Rights Project and Middle East Watch wrote the Emir of Kuwait to call his attention to the cases of Singala Bolassi, a Sri Lankan domestic servant in immediate danger of being returned to her employer whom she accused of raping her and throwing her from a third-floor balcony, and of Helen Demitillar, a Filipina domestic servant who reportedly already had been returned to her employer despite her charge that he had raped her. The Emir sent no response.

On September 13, the Women's Rights Project, together with former U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs Patt Derian, who participated in the Kuwait mission, met with Kuwait's Ambassador to the United States, Shaik Saud Nassir Al-Sabah, now a high-ranking official in the Kuwaiti government. Ambassador Al-Sabah said that while his government must shoulder some of the blame for the maids' problems, the maids' themselves are also at fault and often wrongfully charge abuse inorder to secure better jobs. He agreed that to some extent the maids' vulnerability to abuse was attributable to the lack of regulation of their employment in Kuwait, and that the government should give attention to this problem, but he claimed that it was constrained by a lack of adequate resources.

In August, the Women's Rights Project released the Portuguese version of its first report, Criminal Injustice: Violence Against Women in Brazil, originally published in 1991. A Project representative gave a plenary address at the first Latin American regional meeting on violence against women and human rights held in northeastern Brazil, and talked with press, government officials and local monitors in Brazil about the report's findings. Since the report's release in 1991, the police in Rio de Janeiro have begun a training course on violence against women, a nongovernmental project has begun research on the continuing use of the honor defense to acquit men who kill their allegedly adulterous wives, and a government campaign has been launched to eliminate discrimination against women in the state of Sao Paulo.

THE CALIFORNIA COMMITTEE AND THE LOS ANGELES OFFICE

The Los Angeles office of Human Rights Watch was opened in 1989 to complement the work of the California Committee of Human Rights Watch-a group of concerned Californians who actively promote and participate in our work. The Los Angeles office is responsible for Americas Watch's research on Mexico and the U.S.-Mexican border area. The office also is available to carry out research and campaign tasks for all components of Human Rights Watch and sponsors a series of community education programs on human rights issues. In 1992, the office assumed increased responsibility for litigation and other legal work to support cases in U.S. courts that raise international human rights questions within our mandate.

In the first half of the year, research attention focused on human rights abuses by the U.S. Border Patrol and other agencies of the Immigration and Naturalization Service (ins) during the arrest and detention of undocumented migrants. An Americas Watch report on ins abuses was released in May. (See section on the United States for a summary of the report's findings.) Following the release of the report, Los Angeles and Washington staff met with members of Congress to inform them of our findings and to press for the creation of an independent Board of Review to receive and investigate complaints of ins abuse. In July, the Los Angeles office prepared testimony on ins abuses that was presented to the House Judiciary Subcommittee on International Law, Immigration and Refugees.

In the second half of the year, research attention shifted to Mexico. Los Angeles office staff visited Mexico in November to meet with senior federal government officials and representatives of the National Human Rights Commission, attend a meeting of the nationwide nongovernmental human rights network All Rights for All, and participate in a press conference organized by the Planeta publishing house to promote the release of the first three Americas Watch reports on Mexico in a Spanish-language edition. The staffalso prepared articles for publication on human rights conditions in Mexico and the human rights implications of the case of United States v. Alvarez Machain, contributed to a forthcoming Human Rights Watch/Yale University Press book on human rights in Mexico, spoke at a conference for women leaders from Mexico and California, and conducted numerous press interviews.

With the assistance of two Middle East Watch research interns, the Los Angeles office conducted follow-up interviews over the summer with Palestinian families in Kuwait who were facing imminent deportation from Kuwait and assisted with the preparation of affidavits in support of asylum applications submitted by family members in the United States and Canada who would be at risk of persecution if returned to Kuwait. The office also followed developments leading up to Lebanon's first parliamentary elections in 20 years and has continued to assist Middle East Watch monitor developments there in the post-election period.

In 1992, the office took increased responsibility for litigation. It assumed significant responsibility for writing many of the amicus curiae briefs filed by Human Rights Watch and its regional divisions. In addition, the office successfully litigated the liability phase of the Sison v. Marcos litigation. (See chapter on the United States for a description of these cases.) It also coordinated efforts to ensure that human rights trial monitors were present during the deportation proceedings against two permanent residents who had made humanitarian contributions to a Palestinian organization. (See chapter on the Fund for Free Expression.)

As part of its public education program, the California Committee and Los Angeles office organized a series of well attended events featuring speakers from the Human Rights Watch staff. Presentations were made on the peace process in El Salvador, human rights developments in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, the work of the Women's Rights Project, and the connection between freedom of expression and the prevention of environmental, health, and human rights disasters. The California Committee also sponsored the Los Angeles premier of the Human Rights Watch film festival. In December, the California Committee hosted a celebratory dinner to honor 14 human rights monitors from around the world. The dinner is part of a ten-day nationwide series of events organized by Human Rights Watch to pay tribute to individuals who have dedicated themselves to defending and promoting human rights in their countries. This year one of the monitors comes from the United States, and is being honored for his work in combatting abuse by U.S. immigration officials along the Mexican border.
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH AND CONGRESSIONAL CASEWORK

Human Rights Watch continued to work closely with two casework groups composed of members of Congress-the Congressional Friends of Human Rights Monitors and the Congressional Committee to Support Writers and Journalists. Both groups are bipartisan and bicameral. Human Rights Watch initiated the formation of these groups to enable concerned members of Congress to write letters and urgentcables to governments that violate the basic rights of human rights monitors, writers and journalists. Human Rights Watch supplies the groups with information about appropriate cases of concern; the groups, in turn, determine which cases they would like to pursue.

The goals of the congressional casework groups are three-fold. Most important, their letters and cables help to pressure governments to end their persecution of human rights monitors, journalists and writers who criticize repressive acts by their governments. Second, members of the congressional groups are informed about these important incidents of violence and intimidation against human rights activists and writers. Finally, copies of letters and cables are sent to U.S. ambassadors in the relevant countries to inform them about cases of concern.

The Congressional Friends of Human Rights Monitors, which was formed in 1983, is composed of 37 senators and 144 members of the House of Representatives. The five members of the Steering Committee for the group are senators Dave Durenberger, James Jeffords and Daniel Patrick Moynihan, and Representatives Tony Hall and Constance A. Morella.

In 1992, the committee took up the cases of dozens of human rights monitors who had been killed, arrested arbitrarily, assaulted or harassed. For example:

 The committee wrote to the Colombian government several times on behalf of members of the Regional Human Rights Committee (credhos), who were repeatedly targeted for violent attacks. In January, the committee wrote an urgent cable to President Cesar Gaviria to express its deep concern over the murder of Blanca Cecilia Valero de Duran, the secretary for credhos, who was shot dead in front of the credhos office in Barrancabermeja. When credhos member Julio Cesar Berrio Villegas was shot and killed, the committee again wrote to President Gaviria to express concern and to call for an investigation into the assassination. And in an August 7 letter to the Colombian ambassador to the U.S., the committee expressed its concern over threats and attacks directed against credhos members, including a June ambush in which at least six armed men fired machine guns into vehicles carrying credhos investigators.

 In April, the committee sent an urgent cable to Syrian President Hafez Al-Asad protesting the harsh sentencing of 13 human rights monitors, to terms ranging from three to ten years of hard labor. The committee called upon President Asad to annul the State Security Court's decisions or, at least, to order a retrial before a regularly constituted civilian court. Ten of the human rights activists remain imprisoned.

 In an August letter to the Nigerian ambassador to the U.S., the committee protested charges brought against several Nigerian human rights activists. After three of the human rights monitors were held in incommunicado detention in May, human rights lawyer Chief Gani Fawehinmi filed legal actions on their behalf. Chief Gani Fawehinmi was then detained. After several weeks in custody, all four were charged with conspiracy and treasonable felony. The committee called on the Nigerian government to drop all chargesagainst these human rights activists. Charges are still pending and trial is scheduled for March 1993.

 The committee wrote a letter in August to the Sri Lankan government after two members of the Lawyers for Human Rights and Development were harassed and threatened by armed men. The committee urged the government to provide adequate protection for the two human rights activists and to investigate the acts of intimidation.

 As in past years, the committee continued to watch closely the attacks against members of human rights organizations in Guatemala, particularly members of the Consejo de Comunidades Etnicas Runujel Junam (cerj). Since its creation in 1988, 19 cerj members have been killed or disappeared. In May, the committee sent an urgent cable to President Jorge Serrano protesting death threats and a grenade attack against cerj leader Amlcar Mendez and his family and asking the government to investigate these incidents. In August, the committee wrote to the Guatemalan government to express its concern over death threats received by the human rights group Casa Alianza. The letter also expressed concern over death threats and attacks against other Guatemalan human rights activists and called on the Guatemalan government to investigate those attacks thoroughly.

Other cases raised by the group include: the murder of Indian human rights activist Narra Prabhakar Reddy; death threats against several Brazilian human rights activists; the detention and alleged torture of Turkish human rights leader Sekvan Aytug; and the sentencing of Cuban human rights activist Yndamiro Restano Diaz.

The Congressional Committee to Support Writers and Journalists was formed in 1988 and is composed of 19 senators and 85 members of the House of Representatives. During 1992, the members of the Steering Committee for the group were senators William Cohen and Bob Graham and Representatives Bill Green and John Lewis.

In 1992, the committee denounced attacks against individual journalists and writers, as well as acts of censorship. For instance:

 After the June murder of Egyptian writer Faraj Fouda, the committee wrote to the Egyptian government to express its deep concern over the attack. Fouda was attacked because of his writings which, at times, criticized Islamic fundamentalism. The committee urged the government to continue its investigation into the assassination and to take every step possible to protect other writers and journalists in Egypt who had been threatened.

 In July, the committee wrote to officials in Beijing to protest four-year prison sentences imposed on two Chinese journalists and to denounce a series of attacks and incidents of harassment against foreign journalists and writers in China. The two Chinese journalists, Qi Lin and Wu Xuecan, were reportedly sentenced as a result of their reporting. (Qi Lin was later released on "medical parole.") In addition, several foreign journalists were beaten and harassed while attempting to carry out their journalistic duties inBeijing. The committee also asked the Chinese government to cease its attacks and acts of intimidation against foreign journalists in China.

 The committee wrote to leaders of the Haitian regime to express its concern over the detention and torture of journalist Jean Mario Paul, the disappearance of journalist Flix Lamy, and death threats against journalist Guy Delva. Jean Mario Paul, a reporter for Radio Antilles, was detained for more than five months, during which he was tortured by soldiers and prison guards. Flix Lamy of Radio Galaxie was apprehended by uniformed policemen and plainclothes officers in December 1991 and never seen again. And Guy Delva, who works for the Voice of America, reportedly received telephoned death threats after he attempted to report on censorship following the September 1991 military coup. The committee called on the Haitian regime to investigate Jean Mario Paul's allegations of torture and to prosecute those responsible. The committee also asked that the regime make every effort to locate Flix Lamy and to investigate the threats against Guy Delva.

 In a July letter, the committee wrote to the Kenyan government to express its concern about sedition charges brought against five journalists associated with the news magazine Society, as well as a June arson attack on the magazine's offices. Also noting raids and confiscations of the magazine by Kenyan authorities, the committee expressed concern that these charges and incidents of harassment may be a result of the magazines critical reporting about the Kenyan government.

 In April, the committee wrote to then New York Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown and to U.S. Attorney General William Barr to express deep concern over the murder of Manuel de Dios Unanue, the former editor in chief of the New York-based El Diario-La Prensa. De Dios was reportedly shot execution-style at a restaurant in Queens, New York. His colleagues believe that he was targeted because of his reporting on controversial issues such as drug trafficking, U.S. relations with Cuba, and political scandals in Puerto Rico. The committee called on Commissioner Brown and Attorney General Barr to investigate the assassination thoroughly.

Other cases raised by the committee in 1992 included: the charges brought against three newspaper editors in Rwanda; the detention of journalist Nayef Sweitat by Israeli authorities; the apparent targeting of journalists during fighting in former Yugoslavia; the beatings of four Pakistani journalists reporting on elections in Sindh province; the post-coup detention of Peruvian journalist Gustavo Gorriti; the beatings of dozens of foreign and Thai journalists during demonstrations in Bangkok; and several violent attacks against Venezuelan journalists attempting to report on demonstrations in Caracas.

In Turkey, where 11 journalists were killed during the year, the committee wrote to the Turkish government to express its concern. The committee also published a Letter to the Editor in The New York Times on October 8, denouncing the alarming number ofattacks against journalists and calling on the government to investigate these attacks thoroughly.

HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH AND CONGRESSIONAL CASEWORK

Human Rights Watch continued to work closely with two casework groups composed of members of Congress-the Congressional Friends of Human Rights Monitors and the Congressional Committee to Support Writers and Journalists. Both groups are bipartisan and bicameral. Human Rights Watch initiated the formation of these groups to enable concerned members of Congress to write letters and urgentcables to governments that violate the basic rights of human rights monitors, writers and journalists. Human Rights Watch supplies the groups with information about appropriate cases of concern; the groups, in turn, determine which cases they would like to pursue.

The goals of the congressional casework groups are three-fold. Most important, their letters and cables help to pressure governments to end their persecution of human rights monitors, journalists and writers who criticize repressive acts by their governments. Second, members of the congressional groups are informed about these important incidents of violence and intimidation against human rights activists and writers. Finally, copies of letters and cables are sent to U.S. ambassadors in the relevant countries to inform them about cases of concern.

The Congressional Friends of Human Rights Monitors, which was formed in 1983, is composed of 37 senators and 144 members of the House of Representatives. The five members of the Steering Committee for the group are senators Dave Durenberger, James Jeffords and Daniel Patrick Moynihan, and Representatives Tony Hall and Constance A. Morella.

In 1992, the committee took up the cases of dozens of human rights monitors who had been killed, arrested arbitrarily, assaulted or harassed. For example:

 The committee wrote to the Colombian government several times on behalf of members of the Regional Human Rights Committee (credhos), who were repeatedly targeted for violent attacks. In January, the committee wrote an urgent cable to President Cesar Gaviria to express its deep concern over the murder of Blanca Cecilia Valero de Duran, the secretary for credhos, who was shot dead in front of the credhos office in Barrancabermeja. When credhos member Julio Cesar Berrio Villegas was shot and killed, the committee again wrote to President Gaviria to express concern and to call for an investigation into the assassination. And in an August 7 letter to the Colombian ambassador to the U.S., the committee expressed its concern over threats and attacks directed against credhos members, including a June ambush in which at least six armed men fired machine guns into vehicles carrying credhos investigators.

 In April, the committee sent an urgent cable to Syrian President Hafez Al-Asad protesting the harsh sentencing of 13 human rights monitors, to terms ranging from three to ten years of hard labor. The committee called upon President Asad to annul the State Security Court's decisions or, at least, to order a retrial before a regularly constituted civilian court. Ten of the human rights activists remain imprisoned.

 In an August letter to the Nigerian ambassador to the U.S., the committee protested charges brought against several Nigerian human rights activists. After three of the human rights monitors were held in incommunicado detention in May, human rights lawyer Chief Gani Fawehinmi filed legal actions on their behalf. Chief Gani Fawehinmi was then detained. After several weeks in custody, all four were charged with conspiracy and treasonable felony. The committee called on the Nigerian government to drop all chargesagainst these human rights activists. Charges are still pending and trial is scheduled for March 1993.

 The committee wrote a letter in August to the Sri Lankan government after two members of the Lawyers for Human Rights and Development were harassed and threatened by armed men. The committee urged the government to provide adequate protection for the two human rights activists and to investigate the acts of intimidation.

 As in past years, the committee continued to watch closely the attacks against members of human rights organizations in Guatemala, particularly members of the Consejo de Comunidades Etnicas Runujel Junam (cerj). Since its creation in 1988, 19 cerj members have been killed or disappeared. In May, the committee sent an urgent cable to President Jorge Serrano protesting death threats and a grenade attack against cerj leader Amlcar Mendez and his family and asking the government to investigate these incidents. In August, the committee wrote to the Guatemalan government to express its concern over death threats received by the human rights group Casa Alianza. The letter also expressed concern over death threats and attacks against other Guatemalan human rights activists and called on the Guatemalan government to investigate those attacks thoroughly.

Other cases raised by the group include: the murder of Indian human rights activist Narra Prabhakar Reddy; death threats against several Brazilian human rights activists; the detention and alleged torture of Turkish human rights leader Sekvan Aytug; and the sentencing of Cuban human rights activist Yndamiro Restano Diaz.

The Congressional Committee to Support Writers and Journalists was formed in 1988 and is composed of 19 senators and 85 members of the House of Representatives. During 1992, the members of the Steering Committee for the group were senators William Cohen and Bob Graham and Representatives Bill Green and John Lewis.

In 1992, the committee denounced attacks against individual journalists and writers, as well as acts of censorship. For instance:

 After the June murder of Egyptian writer Faraj Fouda, the committee wrote to the Egyptian government to express its deep concern over the attack. Fouda was attacked because of his writings which, at times, criticized Islamic fundamentalism. The committee urged the government to continue its investigation into the assassination and to take every step possible to protect other writers and journalists in Egypt who had been threatened.

 In July, the committee wrote to officials in Beijing to protest four-year prison sentences imposed on two Chinese journalists and to denounce a series of attacks and incidents of harassment against foreign journalists and writers in China. The two Chinese journalists, Qi Lin and Wu Xuecan, were reportedly sentenced as a result of their reporting. (Qi Lin was later released on "medical parole.") In addition, several foreign journalists were beaten and harassed while attempting to carry out their journalistic duties inBeijing. The committee also asked the Chinese government to cease its attacks and acts of intimidation against foreign journalists in China.

 The committee wrote to leaders of the Haitian regime to express its concern over the detention and torture of journalist Jean Mario Paul, the disappearance of journalist Flix Lamy, and death threats against journalist Guy Delva. Jean Mario Paul, a reporter for Radio Antilles, was detained for more than five months, during which he was tortured by soldiers and prison guards. Flix Lamy of Radio Galaxie was apprehended by uniformed policemen and plainclothes officers in December 1991 and never seen again. And Guy Delva, who works for the Voice of America, reportedly received telephoned death threats after he attempted to report on censorship following the September 1991 military coup. The committee called on the Haitian regime to investigate Jean Mario Paul's allegations of torture and to prosecute those responsible. The committee also asked that the regime make every effort to locate Flix Lamy and to investigate the threats against Guy Delva.

 In a July letter, the committee wrote to the Kenyan government to express its concern about sedition charges brought against five journalists associated with the news magazine Society, as well as a June arson attack on the magazine's offices. Also noting raids and confiscations of the magazine by Kenyan authorities, the committee expressed concern that these charges and incidents of harassment may be a result of the magazines critical reporting about the Kenyan government.

 In April, the committee wrote to then New York Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown and to U.S. Attorney General William Barr to express deep concern over the murder of Manuel de Dios Unanue, the former editor in chief of the New York-based El Diario-La Prensa. De Dios was reportedly shot execution-style at a restaurant in Queens, New York. His colleagues believe that he was targeted because of his reporting on controversial issues such as drug trafficking, U.S. relations with Cuba, and political scandals in Puerto Rico. The committee called on Commissioner Brown and Attorney General Barr to investigate the assassination thoroughly.

Other cases raised by the committee in 1992 included: the charges brought against three newspaper editors in Rwanda; the detention of journalist Nayef Sweitat by Israeli authorities; the apparent targeting of journalists during fighting in former Yugoslavia; the beatings of four Pakistani journalists reporting on elections in Sindh province; the post-coup detention of Peruvian journalist Gustavo Gorriti; the beatings of dozens of foreign and Thai journalists during demonstrations in Bangkok; and several violent attacks against Venezuelan journalists attempting to report on demonstrations in Caracas.

In Turkey, where 11 journalists were killed during the year, the committee wrote to the Turkish government to express its concern. The committee also published a Letter to the Editor in The New York Times on October 8, denouncing the alarming number ofattacks against journalists and calling on the government to investigate these attacks thoroughly.

HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH AND CONGRESSIONAL CASEWORK

Human Rights Watch continued to work closely with two casework groups composed of members of Congress-the Congressional Friends of Human Rights Monitors and the Congressional Committee to Support Writers and Journalists. Both groups are bipartisan and bicameral. Human Rights Watch initiated the formation of these groups to enable concerned members of Congress to write letters and urgentcables to governments that violate the basic rights of human rights monitors, writers and journalists. Human Rights Watch supplies the groups with information about appropriate cases of concern; the groups, in turn, determine which cases they would like to pursue.

The goals of the congressional casework groups are three-fold. Most important, their letters and cables help to pressure governments to end their persecution of human rights monitors, journalists and writers who criticize repressive acts by their governments. Second, members of the congressional groups are informed about these important incidents of violence and intimidation against human rights activists and writers. Finally, copies of letters and cables are sent to U.S. ambassadors in the relevant countries to inform them about cases of concern.

The Congressional Friends of Human Rights Monitors, which was formed in 1983, is composed of 37 senators and 144 members of the House of Representatives. The five members of the Steering Committee for the group are senators Dave Durenberger, James Jeffords and Daniel Patrick Moynihan, and Representatives Tony Hall and Constance A. Morella.

In 1992, the committee took up the cases of dozens of human rights monitors who had been killed, arrested arbitrarily, assaulted or harassed. For example:

 The committee wrote to the Colombian government several times on behalf of members of the Regional Human Rights Committee (credhos), who were repeatedly targeted for violent attacks. In January, the committee wrote an urgent cable to President Cesar Gaviria to express its deep concern over the murder of Blanca Cecilia Valero de Duran, the secretary for credhos, who was shot dead in front of the credhos office in Barrancabermeja. When credhos member Julio Cesar Berrio Villegas was shot and killed, the committee again wrote to President Gaviria to express concern and to call for an investigation into the assassination. And in an August 7 letter to the Colombian ambassador to the U.S., the committee expressed its concern over threats and attacks directed against credhos members, including a June ambush in which at least six armed men fired machine guns into vehicles carrying credhos investigators.

 In April, the committee sent an urgent cable to Syrian President Hafez Al-Asad protesting the harsh sentencing of 13 human rights monitors, to terms ranging from three to ten years of hard labor. The committee called upon President Asad to annul the State Security Court's decisions or, at least, to order a retrial before a regularly constituted civilian court. Ten of the human rights activists remain imprisoned.

 In an August letter to the Nigerian ambassador to the U.S., the committee protested charges brought against several Nigerian human rights activists. After three of the human rights monitors were held in incommunicado detention in May, human rights lawyer Chief Gani Fawehinmi filed legal actions on their behalf. Chief Gani Fawehinmi was then detained. After several weeks in custody, all four were charged with conspiracy and treasonable felony. The committee called on the Nigerian government to drop all chargesagainst these human rights activists. Charges are still pending and trial is scheduled for March 1993.

 The committee wrote a letter in August to the Sri Lankan government after two members of the Lawyers for Human Rights and Development were harassed and threatened by armed men. The committee urged the government to provide adequate protection for the two human rights activists and to investigate the acts of intimidation.

 As in past years, the committee continued to watch closely the attacks against members of human rights organizations in Guatemala, particularly members of the Consejo de Comunidades Etnicas Runujel Junam (cerj). Since its creation in 1988, 19 cerj members have been killed or disappeared. In May, the committee sent an urgent cable to President Jorge Serrano protesting death threats and a grenade attack against cerj leader Amlcar Mendez and his family and asking the government to investigate these incidents. In August, the committee wrote to the Guatemalan government to express its concern over death threats received by the human rights group Casa Alianza. The letter also expressed concern over death threats and attacks against other Guatemalan human rights activists and called on the Guatemalan government to investigate those attacks thoroughly.

Other cases raised by the group include: the murder of Indian human rights activist Narra Prabhakar Reddy; death threats against several Brazilian human rights activists; the detention and alleged torture of Turkish human rights leader Sekvan Aytug; and the sentencing of Cuban human rights activist Yndamiro Restano Diaz.

The Congressional Committee to Support Writers and Journalists was formed in 1988 and is composed of 19 senators and 85 members of the House of Representatives. During 1992, the members of the Steering Committee for the group were senators William Cohen and Bob Graham and Representatives Bill Green and John Lewis.

In 1992, the committee denounced attacks against individual journalists and writers, as well as acts of censorship. For instance:

 After the June murder of Egyptian writer Faraj Fouda, the committee wrote to the Egyptian government to express its deep concern over the attack. Fouda was attacked because of his writings which, at times, criticized Islamic fundamentalism. The committee urged the government to continue its investigation into the assassination and to take every step possible to protect other writers and journalists in Egypt who had been threatened.

 In July, the committee wrote to officials in Beijing to protest four-year prison sentences imposed on two Chinese journalists and to denounce a series of attacks and incidents of harassment against foreign journalists and writers in China. The two Chinese journalists, Qi Lin and Wu Xuecan, were reportedly sentenced as a result of their reporting. (Qi Lin was later released on "medical parole.") In addition, several foreign journalists were beaten and harassed while attempting to carry out their journalistic duties inBeijing. The committee also asked the Chinese government to cease its attacks and acts of intimidation against foreign journalists in China.

 The committee wrote to leaders of the Haitian regime to express its concern over the detention and torture of journalist Jean Mario Paul, the disappearance of journalist Flix Lamy, and death threats against journalist Guy Delva. Jean Mario Paul, a reporter for Radio Antilles, was detained for more than five months, during which he was tortured by soldiers and prison guards. Flix Lamy of Radio Galaxie was apprehended by uniformed policemen and plainclothes officers in December 1991 and never seen again. And Guy Delva, who works for the Voice of America, reportedly received telephoned death threats after he attempted to report on censorship following the September 1991 military coup. The committee called on the Haitian regime to investigate Jean Mario Paul's allegations of torture and to prosecute those responsible. The committee also asked that the regime make every effort to locate Flix Lamy and to investigate the threats against Guy Delva.

 In a July letter, the committee wrote to the Kenyan government to express its concern about sedition charges brought against five journalists associated with the news magazine Society, as well as a June arson attack on the magazine's offices. Also noting raids and confiscations of the magazine by Kenyan authorities, the committee expressed concern that these charges and incidents of harassment may be a result of the magazines critical reporting about the Kenyan government.

 In April, the committee wrote to then New York Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown and to U.S. Attorney General William Barr to express deep concern over the murder of Manuel de Dios Unanue, the former editor in chief of the New York-based El Diario-La Prensa. De Dios was reportedly shot execution-style at a restaurant in Queens, New York. His colleagues believe that he was targeted because of his reporting on controversial issues such as drug trafficking, U.S. relations with Cuba, and political scandals in Puerto Rico. The committee called on Commissioner Brown and Attorney General Barr to investigate the assassination thoroughly.

Other cases raised by the committee in 1992 included: the charges brought against three newspaper editors in Rwanda; the detention of journalist Nayef Sweitat by Israeli authorities; the apparent targeting of journalists during fighting in former Yugoslavia; the beatings of four Pakistani journalists reporting on elections in Sindh province; the post-coup detention of Peruvian journalist Gustavo Gorriti; the beatings of dozens of foreign and Thai journalists during demonstrations in Bangkok; and several violent attacks against Venezuelan journalists attempting to report on demonstrations in Caracas.

In Turkey, where 11 journalists were killed during the year, the committee wrote to the Turkish government to express its concern. The committee also published a Letter to the Editor in The New York Times on October 8, denouncing the alarming number ofattacks against journalists and calling on the government to investigate these attacks thoroughly.

THE ARMS PROJECT

The Arms Project of Human Rights Watch was formed in September 1992 with a grant from the Rockefeller Foundation. Its purpose is to monitor and prevent transfers of weapons of all kinds to governments or other groups that systematically commit gross violations of human rights or the laws of war. In addition, the Arms Project seeks to promote freedom of expression and freedom of information concerning arms transfers worldwide.

Over the long term, the Arms Project seeks to build a research base enabling it to establish a country index of arms transfers, at least for the human rights-abusing regimes of most concern to Human Rights Watch. The project will begin with a small list of countries and add new countries gradually.

The project currently has a director and will eventually have two additional professional staff, in addition to consultants and support staff. In the meantime, consultation has begun with arms-transfer monitoring groups, U.S. government regulators and lawyers, U.N. officials, and others familiar with weapons-proliferation issues to explore ways in which arms and human rights issues intersect. In addition, the project has been meeting with experts on weapons, proliferation, human rights, and international law for the purpose of forming an Advisory Committee.

The project is already pursuing several substantive issues. In conjunction with Helsinki Watch, it is preparing to undertake major research in 1993 concerning the illegal use of foreign, and particularly U.S., weapons against the Kurds in the Turkish government's war against Kurdish Workers Party guerrillas. In conjunction with Asia Watch, the project is planning in early 1993 to examine weapons flows to and from Afghanistan, and their connection to human rights abuses there and in neighboring India and Pakistan. In Russia, the project, working with Helsinki Watch, has taken up the free expression case of a Russian scientist arrested and jailed for publicly alleging continued Russian chemical weapons research in violation of a recent chemical weapons treaty between Russia and the United States. In conjunction with Middle East Watch, the project is preparing a research program on recent massive arms transfers to Iran.

The project has also undertaken active work on the issue of land mines. It has begun work in conjunction with other organizations to promote a worldwide ban on the production, transfer and use of anti-personnel mines, including a revision of the U.N. Land mines Protocol. Two major conferences on land mines are planned in 1993, and the project is committed to producing a global land mines report, drawing on country studies carried out during the past two years by the regional divisions of Human Rights Watch, together with chapters on the current state of the law, and the practical necessity and legal feasibility of a ban.

The project is examining the use of chemical and biological weapons in violation of the laws of war, as well as theproliferation of these weapons, and assisting Middle East Watch in its effort to establish accountability for crimes against humanity and genocide in Iraqi Kurdistan. The Iraqi government's use of chemical weapons against the Kurds is an example of the sort of abusive use of weapons that the project will investigate. The project has also already begun work on issues of U.S. arms export licensing and transfer, including transfers of dual-use technology. Working through the Washington office of Human Rights Watch, the project is seeking ways to introduce human rights criteria into U.S. government administrative decisions on arms export licenses. The project has also drafted letters to Congress concerning specific weapons sales to countries that commit systematic human rights violations, such as jet fighter sales to Saudi Arabia and tank sales to Kuwait.

In all of these projects, the key concern is the promotion of human rights. The project is not a disarmament organization; its touchstone for opposing a weapons transfer is the human rights record of the recipient. It is not concerned per se with security, stability, or global or regional peace, but instead with the proposition that governments that abuse human rights or violate the laws of war, and particularly governments and groups that use weapons to those ends, ought not to have access to them. The director of the Arms Project is Kenneth Anderson, and its staff associate is Barbara Baker.












































