INDONESIA
This year's State Department report, like its predecessor, provides an essentially complete and accurate description of the endemic human rights violations in Indonesia. The report correctly attributes these violations to the political domination of the president, his top appointees and the military. However, while the report blames the armed forces for the most serious human rights violations, it gives inadequate weight to the policy-setting role of the Chief Executive. Emphasizing internal security, the Chief Executive demands that national unity and social order be maintained at any cost. The report contrasts Indonesia's dynamic economy with its restrictive political system, but fails to note the government's conviction that strict social control is required to attract foreign investment. Without this investment, the country would not prosper and its leading officials and industrialists would not enjoy such a high standard of living.
One of the most startling statements in the report is that "Indonesia was a vigorous participant in the June World Conference on Human Rights in Vienna and joined the consensus on the concept of the universality of human rights." All the countries at the conference, even the most egregious violators, joined the watered-down "consensus." The report does not mention that Indonesia was a leader at the March 1993 Asian Nation Preparatory conference in Bangkok. Out of that conference came the regional declaration that, "[wjhile human rights are universal in nature, they must be considered in the context of . . . national and regional peculiarities and various historical, cultural and religious backgrounds." The declaration stressed the principle of national sovereignty and non-interference in the internal affairs of states, with promotion of human rights "best left for States to decide." Since the Vienna conference. President Suharto has expressed this point of view on many occasions.
The report also describes in fairly favorable terms the Indonesian National Commission on Human Rights created just prior to the Vienna conference. While the commission provides a useful forum for raising issues that would not usually be raised, it is not an independent monitor of human rights. Because it was established by presidential decree, it could equally well be abolished by another stroke of the president's pen. In fact. President Suharto selected the 25 members and the first chair of the commission. Even after this fu"st commission establishes election rules for future members, the president must approve all future chairpersons and vice chairs.
The report also does not mention that the first chair of this human rights ccOTimission, former Supreme Court Chief Justice Ali Said, a retired army lieutenant general, was Chief Justice of the Extraordinary Military Tribunal created in 1966 to secure then-General Suharto's putsch against the Sukarno government. The
166
INDONESIA
tribunal conducted summary trials against more than a million suspected members of the Indonesian Communist Party. Mr. Said was also Minister of Justice during the so-called "Petrus" killings, when the police shot down thousands of suspected criminals in the streets over a two-year period rather than arresting them. Furthermore, the president has complete power over the commission's budget. Finally, the commission has no executive or judicial powers to compel investigations or even to receive complaints, but can only make recommendations to the govenmient. The report's statement that "skepticism exists" about the independence of the commission is a striking evasion of direct commentary about this issue in the State Department's own voice.
The report observes that the Indonesian government made a number of gestures to welcome foreign human rights monitors in 1993, but fails to note that most of these gestures were carefiilly orchestrated. At the trial of East Timor separatist leader Jose "Xanana" Gusmao, for example, foreigners were allowed to attend the prosecutor's complete presentation, but were strongly discouraged from attending the end of the trial. The report also fails to say that four Portuguese journalists who had been attending the Xanana trial were ordered out of Dili on February 4, during the early stages of the trial. In addition, a representative of Amnesty International who was present in Jakarta at the start of the trial was refused permission to attend on the basis that his visa had been issued solely for participation in a UN seminar on human rights in Jakarta. He was obliged to return to England to reapply for permission to travel to East Timor.
Regarding political and other extrajudicial killings, the report states that "confirmed killings of civilians by government or vigilante forces continued to be far lower than in the recent past." While this may be true, extrajudicial killings continue. Soldiers continued to shoot and kill separatist group leaders rather than arrest them, and Asia Watch reported two such deaths which occurred in North Sumatra in August 1993. In October 1993, Indonesian security forces killed 13 villagers and wounded eight others in Yapsie village, some 12 kilometers inside Papua New Guinea. In addition, the bald statement that extrajudicial killings have declined risks obscuring the fact that the government has failed to adequately investigate past abuses and to punish those responsible. The resulting climate of impunity makes future abuses more likely.
The report's statement that criminal sentences against the military police are "rarely heavy" is misleading. In fact, in political cases, sentences are never heavy. After the Dili massacre, for example, ten soldiers received sentences of 6-18 months for "disobeying orders," while most of the demonstrators received sentences of ten years to life for "subversion."
The State Department rightly says that efforts by the Indonesian government to account for the missing and dead in the Dili killings are inadequate. It should have gone on to stress, however, that the Indonesian government has in
167
CRITIQUE 1993
fact published information about the dead and the " disappeared" that is both false and misleading. The hidonesian government has only ever acknowledged that up to 66 people may have "disappeared" following the massacre, while Amnesty International estimates that the true figure may be as high as 200. The government says it has located the remains of only 19 of the dead, while independent observers say that between 100-250 people died during the massacre or in its immediate aftermath.
The report is technically correct in saying that, according to the Criminal Procedure Code (KUHAP), the legality of arrest and detention may be challenged in a pretrial hearing (praperadilan), and that compensation may be awarded for wrongftil detention. However, research by the Lawyers Committee in 1993 documented that it is virtually impossible for detainees to invoke this procedure, let alone receive compensation after being released without charge. In both military and civilian courts, habeas corpus appeals are rarely, if ever, accepted. Asia Watch reported many cases connected with the North Sumatra Protestant leadership dispute within the Huria Kristen Batak Protestan (HKBP), in which detainees remained in military prison for indefinite periods without trial and suffered physical abuse, because the courts refused to receive habeas petitions against army officers.
Regarding prison conditions, the report states correctly that prisoners under police or military custody are physically abused and mistreated and that conditions in civilian prisons are far better. In fact, conditions under military custody were so bad in Aceh that innocent prisoners detained there actually confessed, just in order to be moved to a civilian prison. At least in a civilian prison, they told legal aid investigators, they could avoid the torture they had endured in Aceh.
The report correctly states that under the Criminal Procedure Code, defendants have the right to confront witnesses and to produce witnesses in their own defense, but defendants do not have the right to remain silent to avoid self-incrimination. It should also be added that the Code does not provide for witness immunity or for compulsory process of defense witnesses. As the trials of members of the West Javan religious cult Haur Koneng illustrated, co-defendants are normally required to appear as witnesses in each other's trials. This effectively puts each defendant on trial several times over.
The report discloses that even when a trial is fairly conducted, the executive branch often dictates judgments and penalties in politically sensitive cases. In other cases, bribery is effective in influencing verdicts. As pointed out in last year's Critique, the Polgar Mahkehjapol, consisting of the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, the Minister of Justice, the Attorney General and the Chief of Police, is an institutionalized means of direct intrusion into judicial decisions.
The report takes a surprisingly favorable view of the trial of East Timor separatist Jose "Xanana" Gusmao, stating that the government-appointed defense
168
INDONESIA
counsel "conducted a vigorous defense." This account does not mention Xanana's December 1, 1993, letter to the International Commission of Jurists. In this, he complained that his appointed lawyer admitted to consulting regularly with army intelligence, insisted that Xanana remain completely passive, refused his request to have his defense statement translated from Portuguese into Indonesian, and did not protest when the judge stopped Xanana from reading his statement. Indeed, the lawyer immediately took away the only existing copy of his client's statement.
In the section on freedom of speech and press, the report notes that the "police reacted harshly" to a student demonstration at the Parliament in December 1993, arresting 21 people for "msuJting the President," a charge that carries a sentence of up to six years. President Suharto, referring to these and other student demonstrations during the previous several months, declared that the demonstrators "reflect tactics of the outlawed PKI [Communist Party]." Furthermore, the report makes the perplexing assertion that this police action was "in contrast to a generally more permissive attitude toward public demonstrations" In fact, all public gatherings were banned during the months of February and March, while the People's Consultative Assembly (MPR) was in session electing the new president.
The police were far from permissive about student demonstrations and arrested many students throughout the year. For example, on March 9, about 20 students defied the ban on public gatherings and met outside the MPR session, unfurling banners that read "dump Suharto" and "Indonesia is a republic not a kingdom." Security officers with truncheons and police dogs rushed the demonstrators and arrested several. Another student was sentenced in 1993 to six months in prison on slander charges for his role in a demonstration in which students carried posters asking a university administrator to account for his use of student fees. Also, on July 2, the police raided a student gathering and arrested 8 people as a preemptive security action against possible demonstrations in response to the visit of the education minister to Gajah Mada University. At a massive student demonstration at the National Islamic Institute in Yogya, more than 10 students were arrested for protesting the banning of their school newspaper. The paper was banned for publishing interviews with human rights activists Ali Sadikin and Adnan Buyung Nasution.
Other free speech violations omitted from the report include the convictions of two young men to three-and-a-half and four years in prison, respectively, on charges of "blasphemy" for performing word-play dramas on the Koran. Two Gajah Mada University students were arrested on similar charges; an Bast Timor dissident was sentenced to 22 months in prison for ripping an Indonesian flag and another was sentenced to one year for "defacing Indonesia currency." This activist had written a note to President Suharto on the back of a 10,000 rupiah bill (approximately US $5), demanding compensation for victims of the 1991 Dili massacre.
169
CRITIQUE 1993
Concerning freedom of the press, the report mentions a number of issues of concern, including the two-week delay in distribution of the Asian Wall Street Journal. It is also important to note that there is only one legally recognized association of news reporters, the government-controlled PWI. A seminar originally planned by an independent journalists association had to be sponsored instead by the Indonesian Bar Association, after the PWI urged police to prevent the seminar from convening.
On political rights, the report touches upon most of the aspects of presidential control of the political process. With regard to the People's Consultative Assembly, which elects the president, it would also be helpful to note that the president appoints half of the MPR's one thousand members. The president also appoints the military members to Parliament.
Law No. 3/1985 restricts candidates in general elections to representing either one of the two officially recognized parties or the government-sponsored organization GOLKAR. This law also gives President Suharto the power to monitor and supervise the selection of the parties' executive boards, while as GOLKAR'S "chief patron," the President selects its leaders and has final say on all GOLKAR decisions. In addition, under Suharto's guidance, the MPR may authorize him to interfere even fiirther in political party activities.
The report on government attitudes toward non-govemmental organizations is correct in stating that "some human rights monitors face government harassment." For example, several representatives of LBH-Ampera, a legal aid NGO, were detained by police after a peasant demonstration on October 6 in Bogor. The police chief accused them of being linked to the banned Communist Party. One of the activists received death threats from unidentified men who vandalized his home during the night. Even foreign government representatives visiting Indonesia received less than a warm welcome. The commander of the regional military post in Surabaya went so far as to accuse US congressmen on the Generalized System of Preference (GSP) team of espionage as a result of their investigations into labor union conditions.
The report's account of the special difficulties faced by women in Indonesia is very good. The section on children, however, while adequate, could have benefited from additional detail. Child labor, as the report states, continues to be rampant and often occurs under conditions akin to slavery. But it is wrong to imply that the problem is only a feature of "industrial areas." The Coordination Minister for Welfare reported in mid-1993 that there were 2.4 million child workers between age 10 and 14 in Indonesia. Only about 10% of these were working in urban areas, while the 90% in the villages were effectively beyond the reach of government control. The International Commission of Jurists, on the other hand, cited a figure of 6 million as the number of employed Indonesian children under 14 years of age.
170
INDONESIA
Department ofManpower Regulation No. 1 of 1987 allows children under 14 to work up to four hours a day; without parental supervision, children may not work "where dangers are great." However, the August 4, 1993 issue of TEMPO magazine gives details of many dramatic cases of illegal child labor, including the suspected employment of hundreds or thousands of underage children in fish traps off the coast of North Sumatra. While the report cannot be expected to catalogue individual abuses, some detail of this sort would have been useful in conveying the fiill force of abuses against children.
The section on on labor unions is extensive but somewhat inconsistent. Discussion of the right of association is good, but the collective bargaining section is spotty. For example, the report states that "[t]he majority of the collective bargaining agreements between the SPSI [the sole officially recognized labor union] and employers are negotiated bilaterally." Yet one of the major complaints of workers is interference by the military in labor-management disputes. In fact, the Indonesian military routinely participates in negotiations between labor and management. The reader must wait until two pages later for the report to concede that: "Military officiais occasionally have been reported present during negotiations between workers and management." Troops also reportedly maintain a heavy presence in industrial areas to protect factories fi"om potential strikes.
As the report demonstrates effectively, the SPSI is less an advocate for workers than a representative of employer or government interests. The 1993 annual report of the International Labor Organization, which should have been cited, criticizes the Indonesian government for allowing only a single union, the SPSI, which lacks all the attributes of a fi-ee trade union. The SPSI's "inability to redress some of the workers' grievances, particularly on the implementation of the minimum wage, has provoked rebellious industrial action."	disputes arise,
workers must deal with management, the Indonesian Employers Association (APINDO), the SPSI, the Ministry of Manpower and the military. Violent strikes are subject to punishment under criminal law, but no sanctions are defined for employer violations of worker rights.
The report fairly describes the legal arrangements for establishing minimum wage and health and safety standards, but somewhat downplays the wide gap between the regulations and the actual situation and quotes no figures. It insists that government policy has markedly improved both per capita income and income distribution. But according to research studies carried out by the Faculty of Socio-Politics at the University of Airlangga, the average daily take-home pay of workers in East Java m mid-1993 was 1500 rupiah (approximately US$0.75), while the cost of living was more than 2000 rupiah per day. The head of the East Java Regional Manpower Department stated that management would usually raise wages only after a strike and, even then, would dismiss employees who took part in the strike.
171
CRITIQUE 1993
The greatest deficiency in the report is its discussion of forced labor and transmigration. In just a few lines, the report treats accusations of fraudulent recruitment of workers as the allegations of NGOs and the press. Similarly, transmigration to and from indigenous regions is given only one sentence in the section dealing with the rights of indigenous people, with no indication of the government fraud that is often involved. Helen McNovill, a consultant to the UN Centre for Human Rights, has named Indonesia one of four countries that has violated the rights of indigenous peoples. Human rights activists are particularly concerned about the activities of the logging companies in relation to transmigration. Asia Watch has documented how logging companies recruit the native peoples of Irian Jaya, separating them from their subsistence farming or hunter-gatherer economies. Workers are paid with company-issued credit cards that can be used only at company stores and at company-fixed prices. Spiralling debt ensures that the workers remain indentured to the company.
The larger problem is that the lands of indigenous hunter-gatherers or shifting cultivators are often left fallow for years at a time under these primitive methods of subsistence and are then classified by the government as "empty lands" belonging to the state. Under this classification, the homelands of indigenous peoples continue to be licensed to logging companies and large-scale agricultural interests; the indigenous people are not consulted, and they receive no compensation. Javanese transmigrants are frequently brought in to work the land. By mid-1993, Irian Jaya alone had received 42,611 transmigrant famihes and was targeted to receive at least 52,000 more such families over the next five years. The Sou Moi people of Irian Jaya, the people of Yamdena, the Anak Dalam hunter-gatherers of North Sumatra, and the Bentian shifting cultivators of East Kalimantan all continue to protest violations of their land rights.
Furthermore, the pattern of displacement by transmigrants seriously violates the rights of both the indigenous peoples and the transmigrants themselves. Imported as workers for logging interests and agricultural estates, the transmigrants are frequently duped into leaving their Javanese villages with no means of return. Not noted in the report is the May 1993 arrest of 198 transmigrants, including 43 women and 13 children, who had been resettled at the Sei Lapan palm oil plantation in North Sumatra. They were arrested following a demonstration in which protesters were struck with rifle butts and six were seriously injured. Two were reported to have died in custody following the event.
172
