INDIA
The 1993 report, continuing the trend set by its recent predecessors, reflects a significant improvement in the State Department's reporting of human rights practices in India. As well as giving a fairly comprehensive picture of major developments, it includes credible statistical information that lends necessary perspective to the commentary. At the same time, the report also contains a few unfortunate omissions, a number of which concern violent acts and other abuses by the security forces.
In its description of the situation in northeastern India, for instance, the report fails to mention the serious outbreak of violence in Manipur in May 1993 that necessitated the deployment of the army and the imposition of a curfew for several days. Although the incident, was sparked by a private dispute, it escalated into large-scale communal violence in which at least 86 people were reported to have died. Underscoring the seriousness of the incident, the state Chief Minister was constrained to order the Director-General of Police for Manipur to go on leave in view of a number of lapses in the police's handling of the situation. The Union Minister of State for Home Affairs, who visited the affected areas, also admitted that the situation only deteriorated because of the police's failure to take timely action.
Similarly, in its treatment of fbe excessive use of force by the Border Security Force (BSF) in Kashmir, the report makes no mention of a major incident in April 1993, when a Muslim constable belonging to the Kashmir police was killed after being taken into custody by the mainly Hindu BSF. This incident led to widespread protests and a six-day strike by thousands of policemen who alleged that the constable, Riaz Ahmed, was killed after a senior Hindu police officer, K. Rajendran Kumar, ordered the BSF to "teach Ahmed a lesson." Althou^ the officer concerned was subsequently transferred from his post and a joint inquiry by the army and police ordered into the incident, it resulted in a tense stand-off between the police and the BSF, which was only resolved by the intervention of the Indian army nearly a week later.
In the same section, the report could have usefully mentioned another controversial show of force by the BSF on April 19,1993, when its troops opened fire on some 400 students who had gathered in the main square of Sopore town for an anti-government protest, At least six people were reported to have been killed, a press photographer was threatened at gunpoint by a soldier, and a press car was damaged in the gunfire.
The report fairly covers a later incident in Bijbehara on October 22, in which over 40 people died as the result of indiscriminate firing by BSF troops. It could have usefully added the information, released in early December, that one of
162
_INDIA
the two official investigations ordered by the government into this incident — a court of inquiry set up by the BSF itself — found four members of the force guilty, although no proceedings were to be instituted against them until the completion of a magisterial inquiry. (There is also a minor discrepancy in the number of casualties cited in the report: whereas it mentions a figure of 41 dead, relying on an estimate provided by People's Union of Civil Liberties, the BSF court of enquiry actually places the number killed at 43.)
Finally, in its discussion of the conduct of the security forces, the report might have referred to a widely-publicized paper circulated by the Indian Ministry of Defence in May 1993, which criticized the government's increasing dependence on the army to perform internal security duties that should normally be the province of the police and paramilitary forces. Such dependence, said the paper, had a corrosive effect on the army's morale and training schedules.
Because of the examples cited, the report's treatment of torture and abuse during interrogation by police and paramilitary forces somewhat misleadingly suggests that such incidents only occur in states experiencing separatist violence. Several other cases were reported in the Indian press during the year. One particularly heart-rending example of police brutality involved a 5-month-old infant, Rama, whose mother, Sofia Begum, had been taken into custody by police in Hyderabad, apparently for interrogation. While breast-feeding her infant, the woman was beaten by a sub-inspector; one of the blows struck the child, who died instantaneously. When confronted by an irate crowd, the police were reported to have used force and abuse to disperse them.
The report's treatment of the events connected with the demolition in December 1992 of the Babri Masjid mosque in Ayodhya should have been stronger. In the first place, it makes no mention at all of the fact that, of the 100,000 people taken into custody in the days immediately following that incident, some 1,200 remained in jail six months later, many of them without being charged — a fact admitted publicly by the Home Ministry. Second, the bland statement that, "[I]n February the Government used provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code to ban a large rally in the capital by the Hindu Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and to arrest those defying the ban," risks understating the scale of government action against a scheduled peaceful expression of dissent, The nature of the government's response was evident both fi-om the instructions that had been issued to the security forces (one inspector from the BSF was reported as saying: "We have orders to break [the BJP activists'] legs"), as well as from the actual force used. A number of members of parliament and other party workers were injured in the lathi (baton) charge, and BJP president Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi was hospitalized with a head injury.
The report fails to make good a serious omission pointed out in last year's Critique. This is the complete silence over New Delhi's controversial decision to dismiss the four BJP-ruled governments of Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh,
163
CRITIQUE 1993
Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan, soon after the demolition of the Babri Masjid mosque. This silence has been compounded in the 1993 report by a similar reticence over a landmark judgment of the Madhya Pradesh High Court on April 2, which held the dismissal of that state's government to be unconstitutional. Although the judgment was stayed by the Supreme Court pending an appeal, the high court ruling confirmed criticisms by many observers that the government's action had been clearly mala fide and aimed at punishing the B JP for its alleged role in the destruction of the mosque in Ayodhya. The report could also have usefully noted two other, related judgments: one by the Supreme Court, refiising to grant a stay of a special tribunal's order overturning the ban on three organizations that were proscribed following the Ayodhya incident, and another by the Orissa High Court, holding that it was illegal to have locked up the offices of one of the proscribed organizations, the Vishwa Hindu Parishad, under the Unlawfiil Activities (Prevention) Act.
Another significant omission in the report relates to legislation introduced by the government in July 1993, and aimed ostensibly at de-linking religion and politics. This move, which was widely criticized as a potential attack on the roots of multi-party democracy, involved changes to the Constitution and to the Representation of the People Act to permit the exclusion from elections of any political party or grouping that bore a religious name or had other religious appeal. The legislation was widely seen as an attempt to cripple the BJP, which was then making rapid advances in public opinion polls. After sustained public and political opposition, the government had not taken any action on the matter by the year's end.
The report rightly notes the circumstances under which the hidian government established a national human rights commission. It could have useftilly added that an Act of Parliament, to replace the Ordinance that created the commission in September 1993, was passed by both Houses in December.
The report is correct in observing that the government's monopoly on the electronic media is being gradually eroded by international satellite television. It fails to note, however, that the government sought to impose some wide-ranging curbs on cable television companies through the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Bill. This bill could, among other things, allow the authorities to impose a regime of de facto censorship and even prohibit a cable operator from transmitting any program "in the public interest." Not surprisingly, the bill attracted strong opposition from both the industry and the public, which forced the government to hold fiirther discussions with concerned parties. By year's end the bill had not been passed into law.
The report's comment on the manner in which the government has sometimes misused the Official Secrets Act (OSA) could have included a reference to a widely publicized July 1993 report on the subject by the Press Council of India. Among its fmdings, the Press Council report underscored the point that the security
164
_INDIA
of the state has often been confused with the security of the government, and the latter in turn with the interests of the military, bureaucratic and political establishment. It called for suitable amendments to the OSA and for the enactment of a law on individual privacy.
Yet another development which the report could have usefully noted concerns the independence of the judiciary, and the procedure for impeaching corrupt or otherwise unfit judges. This issue came to the fore with the failed attempt to impeach Supreme Court Justice V. Ramaswamy, who had been found guilty of corrupt practices by an official committee of investigation. The attempt foundered in parliament following extensive partisan horse-trading. The episode led to a vigorous debate among lawyers and in the press on the adequacy of existing mechanisms to deal with the threats posed by corrupt judges to the independence of the judiciary.
The report's discussion of the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act (TADA) is a significant improvement on its predecessor, and the authors deserve particular commendation for including the amendments to that law introduced in May 1993. They could have enhanced the value of the discussion by noting a landmark judgment of the Punjab High Court at the beginning of the year, ruling that it was not an offense under TADA to advocate the secession of a part of India from the Union, as long as that objective was to be achieved by peaceful and democratic means. In this case, the court quashed charges brought against Partap Singh, a retired colonel in the Indian army and human rights activist, who had formed a political party with the aim of achieving an independent sovereign Sikh state out of the Indian Union.
165
CRITIQUE 1993
