	IRAN
In the past year worldwide attention has again been focused upon human rights violations committed by the Iranian government, with little apparent effect. In many respects, the 1993 State Department report is a reiteration of the previous year's. The main reason for this, to which the report gives appropriate prominence, is Iran's success in evading international scrutiny of its human rights practices.
It is important to note that, as in 1992, the State Department had limited access to information about human rights in Iran. The Special Representative of the UN Commission on Human Rights continued to be barred from entering Iran and cooperation by the Iranian government with UN human rights officials has virtually ceased. Similarly, Iran has continued to refuse to allow the International Committee of the Red Cross to visit the country's prisons. International nongovernmental human rights organizations have extremely limited access to the country, and domestic human rights monitoring and advocacy groups are severely repressed and few in number.
The June election of President Rafsanjani to a second term brought with it the most repressive crackdown on "public vices" that Iran has seen in years. The campaign against immodest dress and other such infractions of Iran's moral code resulted in over 4,000 arrests by September. The report notes correctly that 802 men and women were detained in June for various dress code violations in Tehran. However, it does not emphasize the lack of due process involved with respect to such detentions. The Basijis, irregular paramilitary forces of volunteers who seek to uphold revolutionary ideals, set up checkpoints and undercover patrols, arresting and imprisoning hundreds of women on the charge of improper veiling and non-Islamic attire. The law empowering the Basijis provides no redress against arbitrary detention. Furthermore, the report of the UN Special Representative notes a statement by a member of the Council of Guardians, a group provided for by the Constitution, which must certify that any law passed in Iran is in accordance with Islamic law and the Constitution:
Iranian youth have not shed their blood and been martyred so that you, women, can flaunt your hair and corrupt our youth. The Basijis now have the role of the judicial police and can warn women and if they do not take heed can directly arrest them.
The report also fails to illustrate fully the impact on women of these campaigns for the "promotion of virtue." In fact, the report restricts discussion of violence against women to the topic of domestic violence, about which — not surprisingly — little is known. In May 1993, a 24 year-old woman reportedly lost her eyesight after acid was thrown in her face during a campaign against improper veiling in Isfahan. According to the Iranian newspaper Salam, a number of women
173
CRITIQUE 1993
in south-western Iran were beheaded by their male relatives as punishment for real or imagined sexual misconduct. Violations of the reinforced dress codes affected women more than men and frequently led to sentences of flogging. The punishment for infringing the dress code is 72 lashes.
The report does correctly note one improvement in the area of women's rights, which is that new legislation added to a woman's right to financial support after a divorce. However, as the report notes, it is unclear that this legislation has had or will have any practical consequences, in part because of stringent preconditions applied to those seeking compensation and because of the high degree of illiteracy among rural women. On the other hand, the report omits mention of a (heavily qualified) improvement in the area of women's rights. In July, Ayatollah Yazdi, head of the Judiciary Branch, affirmed a woman's right to work. However, this right was qualified by a provision that in the absence of a private nuptial contract specifying a wife's right to work outside the home or continue her studies, her husband had the right to deny these privileges.
The report accurately depicts the nature of discrimination against rehgious minorities such as the Baha'i community. While the report describes certain types of harassment and discrimination faced by the Baha'is, it fails to describe legislation passed in October that formalized the previously informal discrimination against all persons deemed not to be good Muslims. The bill bars government employment to members of "deviant groups . . . and groups whose constitution is based on the denial of divine religions." Because Baha'is are considered to be apostates, they are automatically banned from working for any public employer.
The report also neglects to mention that three adherents of the Baha'i faith were condemned to death solely because of their religious beliefs. The judgment against two of the defendants accuses them of a new kind of crime — fransmitting information that they were on trial for their lives to the Special Representative of the UN when he visited them in prison in Karaj in 1991. No criminal acts were cited in the 700-word verdict reaffirming the death sentence; the two Baha'is were merely accused of holding feasts, owning books and being "unprivileged infidels at war with the Muslim nation."
As the report notes, Muslims who have converted to Christianity also face discrimination. The report includes the case of Mehdi Dibaj, a Christian convert from Islam, who was sentenced to death for apostasy. Following international appeals, Dibaj was released; however, he was subsequently charged with religious espionage and upon his release from prison was forced to sign a statement that he would return to prison should Iranian police request it. After Dibaj's release, an Iranian bishop who had been an outspoken critic of his imprisormient, and succeeded in bringing it to international attention, was found dead twelve days after he mysteriously disappeared. Church members in Iran are reported to have said that
174
_IRAN
the Bishop was stabbed by Iranian security forces to punish him for causing international embarrassment for the Iranian government.
The death penalty in Iran is not reserved for "infidels." As the report notes, the Iranian press no longer reports most executions, making it difficult to determine the numbers of people killed for political reasons. Amnesty International (and the State Department) reported the execution of Mohsen Mohammadi Sabet while he was being held in incommunicado detention. The execution was carried out following legal proceedings that failed to meet minimum international standards for fairness and impartiality. In March, two men were sentenced to death for illegally leaving the country and belonging to the Kurdish Section of the Communist Party in Iran, Komala. In October, five more members of the Komala party were captured and are being held in incommunicado detention.
The State Department makes no mention of the fact that the death penalty is used in Iran for a variety of non-political offenses including homicide, armed robbery, drug trafficking, rape and other crimes. Nor does it assess the fairness of legal proceedings in these cases. In December, Iran's parliament approved the death penalty for producers and dealers of pornographic videotapes on their third conviction. In April, four persons were hanged after being found guilty of disturbing the public order and destroying public security. In May, a governess and mother of two children was hanged after being found guilty of adultery. According to Amnesty International, hundreds of people have been executed for drug-related offenses in the last two years.
The State Department correctly states that 1993 did not bring any judicial reform that would bring Iranian courts into compliance with international standards. In political cases, trials are almost always held in secret, often lasting only a few minutes. Detainees have no access to legal counsel and no right of appeal. The right to defense counsel is theoretically provided for in Iranian law, but in practice, as the report points out, especially in the revolutionary courts, defendants are not known to have access to a lawyer. In fact, in cases of a political nature, defense lawyers have been advised by senior judicial officials that they can only act if they believe in the guilt of their client. Lawyers have become too intimidated to appear before these courts even if they are allowed to do so.
According to the UN Special Representative's report, there are 19,000 political prisoners in Iran, many of whom have been summarily convicted in grossly unfair and secret trials or have confessed under torture. Responding to criticisms of the lengthy pretrial detention of suspects, Ayatollah Yazdi claimed in September that Iran's practice was superior to international standards, "because charging a defendant with a crime before trial is tantamount to an official finding of guilt." As the report makes clear, among the judiciary's .institutional weaknesses are its inconsistency and the lack of qualified jurists. Judges have been instructed that in the absence of post-revolutionary laws, they should act on the basis of their own
175
CRITIQUE 1993
knowledge of Islamic law. Thus, a multiplicity of interpretations of law and its applications has arisen. The laws which provide the criteria on which judicial appointments are based discriminate on grounds of sex, religion and political opinion; women are explicitly excluded from consideration. Judges must have obtained approved training in religious law from theological seminaries and may be dismissed by the Head of the Judiciary on the basis of religious considerations.
A fresh campaign against discordant voices in the press was launched this year after the election of President Rafsanjani. The main targets were former supporters of the revolution who, having lost an earlier battle for power in the Parliament, had become champions of free expression and more relaxed state controls. The State Department describes the most notorious examples of the government's crackdown on freedom of the press. In addition, during 1993, the press became vulnerable to unchecked vigilante attacks, in which hardliners issued death threats and attacked publications without fear of prosecution by the government. In June, a spokesman for the Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance acknowledged that the government was unable to stop these attacks and asked publications to "behave in a way as not to offend the sentiments of the hezbollahi (hardline revolutionaries)."
Iran's disregard for human rights extends beyond the country's borders. In 1993, Human Rights Watch/Middle East reported four successfiil assassinations, one attempted assassination and one abduction of Iranians linked to exiled opposition parties. In each instance, there were strong reasons to suppose Iranian government involvement. Such activities, in addition to Iran's outspoken opposition to the Arab-Israeli peace process and reports that Iran has gained access to the means to develop nuclear weapons, have led the Clinton Administration to adopt a harsher stance against Iran, which now tops the State Department's list of "terrorist nations." However, the lack of reliable firsthand information about human rights conditions in Iran makes it difficult for the 1993 State Department report to offer a detailed analysis of how Iran's conduct in that area compared with previous years.
176
