IRAQ
The 1993 report on Iraq corrects many of the mistakes and biases found in previous reports. It is more careful in providing the sources for reported violations and includes more complete and detailed coverage of important violations making excellent use of human rights reports prepared by the UN Special Rapporteur for Iraq. The report also avoids the overt political prejudice and the unsubstantiated condemnations of the Iraqi government so prevalent in the 1991 and 1992 reports. Furthermore, it includes several new sections that divide the violations into more logical and coherent categories. A notable addition is the section on violations of humanitarian law in internal conflicts, which places the abuses in the southern marshes in a more accurate legal and historical context than earlier reports have done. In all, the report presents a comprehensive and well-organized account of the pervasive human rights violations committed by the ruling Ba'ath Party.
However, two major defects still weaken the report's analysis. First, it is not clear that the report's conclusion that "Iraq's abysmal record on human rights did not improve in 1993 " is justified on the basis of the facts presented. As set forth in the report, the violations reported for 1993, while egregious and widespread, do not appear to reach the level of past abuses reported, particularly the 1988-89 Anfal campaign against the Kurds, A likely explanation is that heightened international scrutiny of Iraq has had some effect in deterring major atrocities.
Second, the report does not place events in Iraq in their ftill historical context, Most importantly, this means the context of recent US policy. In contrast to the previous two years, the 1993 report does at least make reference to the impact of the Gulf War and the international trade embargo; nevertheless, it fails to e?q)lore the critical linkages between the Gulf War and human rights, or between sanctions-related hardships and human rights.
It is necessary to recall that the two groups facing the most intense persecution from Baghdad — the Kurds in the north and Shi'a in the south — were encouraged by the US-led coalition to rise up against the Ba'ath government in the aftermath of the Gulf War. The international community then did nothing as the Iraqi army brutally put down the localized uprisings. Only after months of continued repression did the coalition establish "no-fly zones" above the 36th Parallel in the north (accompanied by a coalition-protected "safe haven" for returning Kurdish refugees) and below the 32nd parallel in the south. Ironically, some relief workers and human rights groups contend that the southern no-fly zone has actually led to increased artillery bombardment and overall repression, as a result of the government's fear of seeing its territory divided. This historical background in no way excuses Iraqi human rights violations in these regions; it merely points to heightened international responsibility to prevent such violations.
The report also fails to discuss the links between sanctions and himian
177
CRITIQUE 1993
rights. There is growing international awareness of the need to tailor sanctions to maximize their impact on the offending government and minimize their impact on civilians. In view of this, it is unfortunate that the report has avoided this topic altogether, especially given the incoherent and contradictory US policy regarding sanctions against Iraq, Haiti, the former Yugoslavia and China. Instead, exclusive responsibility for economic hardships is placed on the government of Iraq, while the US role is not mentioned. The problem with this approach is that numerous studies conducted in post-war Iraq have noted that sanctions have actually entrenched the power of the government of Saddam Hussein as the only authority capable of providing for the everyday needs of the population under its control. What little food or medicine enters the cotmtry is controlled and distributed by the government; the population is more isolated from the rest of the world and more dependent on the Ba'ath Party than ever before.
The report correctly notes that human rights violations in Iraq arise out of the fact that "political power in Iraq is concentrated in a repressive one-party apparatus under the control of Saddam Hussein." The Ba'athi government has never tolerated dissent, controlling all civil institutions from the press to unions to professional associations, and employing torture, killings and "disappearances" to crush any threat to its absolute authority. The abrupt international awareness of Iraqi human rights violations results not from their sudden occurrence, but rather from the increased scrutiny that has been applied to Iraq's behavior since the Gulf War.
While accurately noting that "the Iraqi regime has a long record of executing perceived opponents," and that "the UN Special Rapporteur oqjressed dismay at Iraq's liberal use of the death penalty," the report does not list any specific incidents that occurred in 1993, instead referring to "numerous credible reports" of executions of alleged coup plotters and reports of executions at several prisons. Other than the killings of a local politician and seven relief workers under suspicious circumstances, there are no specific or detailed examples of state killings. This overlooks several important cases documented by international human ri^ts organizations, such as the executions of Abd al-Karim Hanim, Jassem and Sufian Mukhlis and Rajeh al-Tikriti, and the "disappearance" of Majid Adham and Aziz al-Sayyid Jassem. In a similar vein, while the report provides good coverage of disappearances in earlier years, no specific cases are reported during 1993.
In contrast to the two previous reports, the 1988-1989 Anfal campaign against the Kurds is discussed at length. The report cites documentation by Max van der Stoel, UN Special Rapporteur on Human Rights in Iraq, that "tens of thousands" of Kurds were killed, and also refers to information from Human Rights Watch/Middle East and Physicians for Human Rights that between 50,000 and 100,000 Kurds were killed and as many as 4,000 villages destroyed. The report
178
_IRAN
notes that, "These human rights groups have built up a substantial body of evidence suggesting that Iraqi government efforts to eliminate Iraqi Kurdish communities were widespread, systematically planned, and ruthlessly implemented." However, although these same human rights groups argue that the Anfal campaign amounted to genocide, the report does not say directly whether the State Department believes that the 1951 Genocide Convention should therefore be applied against Iraq.
This is especially problematic in view of the concerns expressed by the Special Rapporteur and Human Rights Watch/Middle East that a similar campaign is currently being mounted against the Shi'as in the south, particularly the marsh Arabs. To its credit, the report takes a strong yet balanced approach to this issue. It notes that, "In 1993 a team of Middle East Watch and US Government researchers discovered, in a cache of Iraqi documents seized 2 years earlier by the Kurds, a 1989 Iraqi plan to destroy the marshlands and the people living there."
At the same time, the report has added a section titled "Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Conflicts," which places the events in the south in their proper legal and historical context. The report acknowledges that, because Shi'a rebel groups and army deserters have joined forces in recent years, "the marshes have become the site of guerrilla resistance." The government therefore has a right to use legitimate force against these guerrillas; the issue is whether the force used is indiscriminate or directed against civilian rather than military targets. The documentation of indiscriminate attacks is more substantial and credible than m previous reports; it still relies too heavily, however, on Iraqi opposition sources. Iraq's project of draining the southern wetlands to create a "Third River" is also given full and proper treatment. While noting that Iraq has put forth ostensibly legitimate explanations for draining the marshes, related to agricultural productivity, the report echoes the concerns of human rights groups and the Special Rapporteur that the main aim of the project is to enable the Iraqi army to root out all resistance and forcibly transfer the marsh Arabs to new locations, thereby destroying their centuries-old culture.
In a new section on children, the report condemns Iraq for deteriorating economic and health conditions throughout the country. It blames the government's failure to comply with UN resolutions aimed at allowing a one-time oil sale, whose proceeds would be used to purchase humanitarian supplies for Iraqi civilians, to fund UN operations in Iraq and to compensate Kuwait for war-related damages. However, this explanation does not fairly apportion the blame for Iraq's economic deterioration, which has resulted in dramatically increased mortality rates for vulnerable populations such as children. The coalition insisted on extremely onerous monitoring provisions within Iraq, ostensibly to protect Iraqi civilians. The unintended result, however, was that they received no humanitarian assistance. More importantly, the international community has ignored evidence that the sanctions have actually strengthened the Ba'ath Party government while harming
179
CRITIQUE 1993
the civihan population. In effect, Iraq's 18 milhon people have been made to suffer first by their own government and second by the United Nations.
A similar evasion of responsibility is evident in the report's condemnation of Iraq for imposing an internal blockade against the Kurdish north and certain regions in the south. While these blockades undoubtedly contribute to hardship in these regions, the primary cause remains the UN sanctions, which cover the whole of Iraq's territory. The report fails to mention that Kurdish groups have made repeated urgent appeals, both to the UN and the US, for sanctions to be lifted with respect to Kurdish-controlled territory in the north. These appeals have been refused, in part so as not to offend the Iraqi government's notion of sovereignty over Kurdistan, (A similar rationale was used to justify the State Department's refusal to send official representatives to monitor the 1993 elections in Kurdistan,)
Two final points are worth noting. First, while the report examines in detail the violations of humanitarian law committed in the course of Iraq's military operations in the south, it only mentions in passing similar allegations against Iran and Turkey for their indiscriminate bombing of perceived opponents within Iraqi territory. In the case of Turkey, whose warplanes have claimed the lives of numerous Kurdish civilians, the report mentions only one incident and notes that, "The Government of Turkey says Iraqi civilian deaths were unintended." The report covers Iran's role in a single sentence that refers, without condemnation, to "Iranian shelling of civilian villages," In contrast, the International Federation of Human Rights, a French human rights group, reports that Iranian shelling during 1993 occurred "on an almost daily basis," resulting in "tens of thousands" of Kurdish refugees and "over 100 villages damaged or destroyed,"
Second, it is encouraging that the report makes note of the fact that "innocent civilians continued to be killed or maimed by exploding landmines in northern Iraq" and condemns the Iraqi army for failing to clear these mines after the end of the war with Iran. Since landmines are by their very nature indiscriminate, the State Department should consider addressing this issue explicitly as an issue of human rights and humanitarian law. Such a position would require that future reports on Iraq also disclose the ongoing effect on civilians of the millions of mines and bomblets scattered by the coalition across southern Iraq during the Gulf War.
180
