	ISRAEL
The 1993 report on Israel presents an incomplete and distorted view of the human rights situation in that country. Its shortcomings stem from one frmdamental flaw: a failure to focus on a series of laws that have the effect of discriminating between Jewish and Arab citizens of Israel. Over the past decade, the State Department has gradually but progressively eliminated almost all references to Israeli laws and policies that are designed to promote the interests of Jews, both in Israel and abroad, and which have the effect of discriminating against Israeli Arabs. As a result, the 1993 report gives little indication of the scope of official anti-Arab discrimination in Israel.
Despite this significant shortcoming, there are several noteworthy improvements over last year's report. Most significantly, the section on torture now acknowledges that, "There are credible reports of abuses of Palestinian detainees." A lengthy discussion of prison conditions has also been added. The paragraph on conditions for Palestinians in military-run prison camps is commendably candid in its description and condemnation of Israeli practices. In the introductory section, the statement that "Israel has an independent judiciary" has been qualified with the observation that the Supreme Court generally sides with the government on issues of land and security. In keeping with newly updated State Department reporting instructions, the 1993 report contains an expanded section on the status of women, as well as new sections on the rights of children and the disabled. The section on women's rights now mentions the reality of workplace discrimination, in addition to the legal protection afforded to women. The section on worker rights has also been expanded and includes an improved discussion of the Israeli practice of denying unemployment and disability benefits to Palestinians from the Occupied Territories who are employed in Israel, despite the fact that they pay for these services.
At the same time, however, the coverage of discrimination against Israel's Arab citizens has actually decreased in comparison with the 1992 report. This disturbing trend has been underway for a decade, and the changes in the reports' language is worth close examination. While the reports have never adequately addressed the human rights situation of Israeli Arabs, they did at least acknowledge problems of Israel's Arab minority. They also noted — albeit in cursory fashion — some of the most serious forms of discrimination against the Palestinian citizens of Israel. The 1982 report, for example, mentioned that "Israel was founded as a Jewish state," and that "because of the Jewish character of the state and the continuing state of war between Israel and most of its Arab neighbors," the Arab minority is relatively powerless and tends to feel alienated." The 1982 Report also noted that, "Title to 93 percent of the land in Israel is held by the state or quasi-public organizations in trust for the Jewish people," and that, "Expropriations of
181
CRITIQUE 1993
Arab land . . . have been used for promoting Jewish settlement to the detriment of the Israeli Arab population in Arab-populated areas." Although these statements are as accurate today as they were in 1982, they were progressively phased out of the State Department reports from 1983 until 1988. After that, they disappeared altogether.
The report's deficiencies are particularly evident in the introduction and in the sections pertaining to fi"eedom of religion, fi"eedom of movement, the rights of citizens to change their government and discrimination based on race. According to the guidelines, the introduction should not only "not[e] those groups, including women and minorities, for whom such rights are restricted" but also "identif|y] the chief factors underlying rights violations."
The section of fi"eedom of religion is grossly misleading. The guidelines require that the reports mention whether there is "a state or otherwise favored religion" and whether "adherence or practice of a particular faith confer[s] either advantage or disadvantage in civil, political, economic, military, or other secular status." The report gives no indication of the many laws and practices that give Jews a favored status over Moslems and Christians. Instead, the section opens with the unqualified assertion that, "Israeli law provides strong guarantees of freedom for all faiths." Any accurate discussion of freedom of religion in Israel must begin by noting that Israel was founded as a Jewish state, as the reports did prior to 1988.
Although Israel is not a theocracy and freedom of worship is a recognized right, the report should also mention that the Jewish religion enjoys a favored status and that Jews have exclusive rights to a number of social and legal privileges. The privileges accorded to Jews are perhaps best discussed in detail in Section 2d (relating to freedom of movement) and Section 5 (relating to discrimination based on race). However, the discussion of religious freedom should at least mention — as the reports did until 1988 — that the Law of Return of 1950 and the Citizenship Law of 1952, which give every Jew the right to immigrate and gain automatic citizenship upon arrival, confer substantial advantages on Jews in matters of immigration, residence and citizenship.
The section on freedom of movement should state more clearly that Israel maintains a dual system of immigration and repatriation, designed to encourage Jewish immigration while preventing the repatriation of displaced Palestinians and their descendants. Although this section is stronger than many other parts of the report, it is still inadequate. It should add, for example, that Jews are not only granted the exclusive and unconditional right of immigration and automatic citizenship, but may also receive extensive fmancial assistance, both from the government and from the nominally private Jewish Agency, in the form of housing, job training and education benefits. No such assistance is available to non-Jewish immigrants. The report also downplays Israel's refiisal to repatriate hundreds of
182
_ISRAEL
thousands of Palestinians who fled during the civil war of 1948, and no longer mentions that this policy is contrary to UN Resolution 194 of 1948.
The discussion of freedom of movement within Israel should also be revised. The report should note, as it did from 1982-1987, that the laws allowing restrictions on freedom of movement, although used infrequently in recent years, have generally only been applied to Israeli Arabs.
The report's discussion of political rights should be revised and expanded to reflect the legal and practical limitations on the right of citizens, particularly Arab citizens, to participate fully in the political process. The State Department instructions indicate that the report should discuss whether "new, dissenting political parties [may] be formed and function," and whether they are "free to espouse peaceful change of a fimdamental kind." The report should therefore mention that the Knesset prohibits the presentation of any bill that "denies the existence of the State of Israel as the state of the Jewish people." Section 7 A of the "Basic Law; The Knesset," adopted in 1985, bars any party from participating in elections if it makes such a denial. These laws clearly limit the ability of citizens to seek certain types of fundamental political change, even if it is of a peaceful nature and poses no threat to state security. Many Israeli Arabs have objected to these laws, arguing that they could be used against any political party advocating the revocation of the Law of Return or peacefiilly working to fransform Israel from a Jewish state into one based on equal rights for all its citizens. Several organizations were banned prior to the passage of this law because they refrised to recognize the Jewish nature of the state.
The State Department instructions also require that the report discuss "whether the political system is dominated by one or a few ethnic groups, or excludes others from the decision-making process," and to "describe any specific laws or practices that restrict women or minorities . . . from participating in the government and political parties." In this regard, the report should have noted that although parties whose primary support is among Israeli Arabs regularly win seats in the Knesset, none has ever been invited to join a governing coalition. The exclusion of these parties from government greatly reduces the influence of Israeli Arabs on the decision-making process. In contrast, equally small Jewish religious parties have been part of virtually every governing coalition since the founding of the state.
The greatest weakness of the 1993 report lies in its wholly inadequate discussion of racial discrimination, which fails to mention Israeli laws and policies regarding land use, and makes no reference to Israel's highly discriminatory policies on immigration and repafriation. The report should have dedicated several paragraphs to a description of Israeli laws and'policies that discriminate in favor of Jews in matters concerning the ownership, use and development of land. The state controls 93% of the land in Israel and this land may be leased but not sold to Israeli
183
CRITIQUE 1993
citizens. The government manages and develops this land in partnership with three organizations: the Jewish National Fund (JNF), the Jewish Agency and the World Zionist Organization (WZO).
The report should also add some explanation to its discussion of unrecognized Arab villages. Several dozen Arab villages dating back to before 1948 have still not been granted legal recognition. The report states that "the problem of the legal status of unrecognized Arab villages remained unresolved," but says nothing about the significance or consequences of non-recognition. These villages are not connected to the water supply, the electricity grid or the telephone system, their residents cannot obtain permits to construct new buildings or expand existing ones, and the villages are vulnerable to government demolition orders.
The report cannot meaningfully discuss racial discrimination without mentioning Israel's policy of confiscating land from Palestinians in order to make room for the construction or expansion of settlements designed exclusively for Jews. Although most of this confiscation occurred within the first few years after the establishment of Israel, it remains a human rights issue of contemporary relevance for several reasons. First, although the government has already seized control of the vast majority of property once owned or used by Palestinians, some racially based confiscation continues to take place. The 1993 report mentions that the Palestinian population of the village of Ramyah is still negotiating the outcome of an eviction order issued by the government in 1991. It does not say, however, as did its two immediate predecessors, that the Palestinians are being evicted so that their property can be turned over to Jews. Nor is this single act of expropriation put into context by noting Israel's ongoing policies of discriminatory land confiscation and development, Second, although the majority of Israel lands have been confiscated from Palestinians who now live in surrounding countries, more than 75,000 Palestinians who remained in Israel also had their property confiscated because they were classified as "present absentees" under the Absentees' Property Law of 1950, Although the government has offered to pay compensation to these Israeli Arabs, it has refused to allow them to reclaim their property.
The State Department instructions state that the Country Reports should generally note human rights improvements "when they actually occur, as opposed to when they are talked about or promised by government officials." The 1993 report falls short of this standard when it notes pending legislation designed to allow the Palestinian villagers of Bir Am and Ikrit to rebuild their homes, but fails to mention that the villagers have been seeking to return to their land since the Israeli military expelled them in 1948 and illegally destroyed their villages in 1952.
The report should have noted that Israel has no laws prohibiting discrimination by private individuals in areas other than employment, such as housing. The Employment Service Law, which prohibits discrimination in employment on the basis of race, ethnicity, religion, age and political affiliation
184
_ISRAEL
contains no provisions for enforcement. In contrast, the Equal Opportunity Employment Law provides for strong and effective enforcement measures in the event of sex discrimination in the workplace.
The report mentions that "for security reasons, Israeli Arabs are not allowed to work in companies with defense contracts or in security-related fields." However, it does not attempt to assess whether there is a credible basis for this security rationale. It should have noted that the Employment Service Law does not apply in cases where a person is denied employment on security grounds. Furthermore, the report should have pointed out that the Israeli economy is largely based on defense-related industries. Therefore, the policy of denying employment in these industries to Israeli Arabs represents a serious form of racial discrimination and should be acknowledged as such.
In summary, the State Department report on Israel is incomplete and as a result presents a distorted picture. Its inadequate assessment of laws and official practices that discriminate against Israeli Arabs ignores some of the most egregious human rights violations occurring in the country.
185
CRITIQUE 1993
ISRAELI-OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
The 1993 State Department report contmues to understate the scope and severity of human rights violations in the Israeli-occupied territories. Although there have been improvements in some areas, notably in the sections on the use of excessive force and the rights of women, the 1993 report is on the whole less complete and accurate than last year's, particularly regarding extrajudicial killing, arbitrary arrest and deaths in detention. It virtually ignores the adverse human rights consequences relating to Jewish settlements in the occupied territories and by Israeli control over Palestinian land, water and economic development. Although the report provides a reasonably accurate account of the methods employed by Israel to suppress Palestinian resistance to occupation, it often downplays the extent and severity of Israeli violations.
For the second year in a row there has been a sharp reduction in e?q)licit references to the fact that a number of Israeli practices violate the Fourth Geneva Convention. The introductory sections of the 1993 and 1992 reports no longer mention that the United States is concerned about the human rights situation in the occupied territories, despite the fact that conditions have not significantly improved. The discussion of Israel's policy of sealing or demolishing homes no longer states that the practice violates the Fourth Geneva Convention. This fact is now only mentioned in passing. By virtue of this change, the State Department effectively deemphasizes the illegality of this form of collective punishment. The 1991 report stated that, "The United States opposes the use of administrative detention and believes that individuals accused of crimes should be brougjit before a court, presented with the evidence, and be allowed to defend themselves against the evidence"; several earlier reports mentioned that the practice of admiiiistrative detention violates the Fourth Geneva Convention. For the past two years, the reports have merely described the practice without comment.
Since 1992 the reports no longer mention that Israel's use of forced deportation as a form of punishment is a violation of article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention. This deletion is particularly striking because it immediately followed Israel's decision on December 17, 1992 to deport 415 Palestinians to Lebanon, by far the largest deportation ordered by Israel since 1967. The fact that the reports continue to cite as a violation of the Geneva Convention Israel's policy of transferring Palestinian prisoners to detention facilities in Israel only makes the omission more glaring.
The State Department instructs embassies that the Country Reports should "discuss not solely what... the government claims but what happens in actual practice." However, the introduction to the 1993 report, like most of its
186
_ISRAELI-OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
predecessors, continues to note without comment that, "Israel states that it observes the Geneva Convention's humanitarian provisions" — a statement so vague as to be meaningless. (The official US position is that Israel is boxmd by the Geneva Conventions, a view that Israel rejects.) The report itself documents numerous Israeli violations of what may be considered humanitarian provisions, including deportations in violation of article 49, house sealings, demolitions and other forms of property destruction in violation of articles 33 and 53, torture or physical mistreatment in violation of articles 31, 32 and 37, and punitive curfews and closures in violation of articles 33 and 39. The sentence about "humanitarian provisions" should therefore either be eliminated or qualified in future reports.
In general, the report is weakened by the State Department's failure to criticize most Israeli human rights abuses or to point out when Israeli policies violate international law. The paragraph in the introduction devoted to Israel's decision to seal off the West Bai± and Gaza indefmitely from Jerusalem and Israel goes a step further. The statement that, "While proving an effective measure in curbing Palestinian attacks against Israelis in Israel, closure has severely constricted Palestinians' freedom of movement and has caused a deterioration of economic conditions" creates the unfortunate impression that the State Department is vacillating in its criticism of collective punishment. The one positive development since last year is that the introduction now acknowledges that Israel has an obligation "under international occupation law to ensure, as far as possible, public order and the safety of the civilian population in the occupied territories."
The account of political and extrajudicial killing is significantly weaker than last year's. First, this section no longer mentions the number of Palestinians killed by the regular Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) or by Jewish settles, even though the State Department reporting instructions clearly state that the section should "begin by discussmg killings by government forces or agents . . . [and] report instances and allegations of deliberate and illegal use of lethal force by the police or other security forces." Human rights groups have documented numerous instances where lethal force was used by the IDF against Palestinians who posed no imminent mortal danger. According to the Palestine Human Rights Information Center, for example, none of the 63 Palestinians killed by the Israelis from January to March were armed. In June, the Israeli human rights group B'Tselem issued a special report on the killing of Palestinian children by the IDF. This report notes that 33 children, 16 of whom were below the age of 14, were killed by Israeli security forces between January 1 and June 8, 1993, and that "in no case were the soldiers in a life-threatening situation, even according to official [IDF] spokespersons," In many instances soldiers killed fleeing Palestinians who were being sought for non-violent offenses such as writing graffiti, and in several cases they killed Palestinians, including children, who were neither armed, fleeing arrest, nor in the vicinity of any disturbances.
187
CRITIQUE 1993
Human rights groups are particularly concerned by the increasing number of killings by soldiers firing from rooftops or observation posts using long-range sniper rifles. By failing to report any of these facts in the discussion of extrajudicial killings, the State Department has seriously violated its own guidelines. Although the report does discuss one alleged extrajudicial killing carried out by the General Security Services (GSS), it does so in such a way as to create the impression that this was the sole, or at least the most serious, allegation of extrajudicial killing made by human rights groups, rather than just one example among many.
The discussion of extrajudicial killings by Israeli undercover units disguised as Palestinians is less forthright than it was last year. The number of Palestinians killed by undercover units is now attributed to "credible sources" rather than reported as fact. The report no longer mentions that a large percentage (between one-half and two-thirds in 1992) of Palestinians killed by undercover units were unarmed, even according to Israeli government accounts. The 1993 report deletes last year's reference to the fact that undercover units have in some cases killed bystanders or mistakenly identified persons, as well as the fact that even the Israeli government acknowledges that "some abuses have occurred." On the positive side, whereas last year's report merely repeated Israeli assertions that all allegations of abuse are investigated, the 1993 report now adds that, "These investigations rarely result in imposition of serious punishment. "
The report continues to exhibit a double standard in reporting violence committed by Israelis and Palestinians. The report mentions the number of Palestinians killed by Israeli soldiers and by settlers just once each, and not at all in the section on extrajudicial killing. By contrast, it mentions the number of Israelis killed by Palestinians in three different sections. The report fails to discuss several well-documented killings by Jewish settlers. The fact that all killings committed by Palestinians are discussed as extrajudicial killings, whereas only a small portion of killings by Israelis are even mentioned in this section is a reflection of the report's bias. The one improvement in the section on extrajudicial killings is that it now acknowledges "credible reports" of IDF "inaction" during settler attacks. However, this behavior was not restricted to the October- December period as implied in the report, but occurred throughout the year.
The report incorrectly states that there were no confirmed reports of "disappearances" in 1993. The State Department instructions indicate that discussion of this topic should cover not only cases of permanent disappearance, but also "disappearances which end with acknowledgement of arrest or official detention." The report itself acknowledges in the section on "arbitrary arrest, detention, or exile" that on the orders of a military officer any Palestinian may be detained for up to 12 days without family members, attorneys or consular officials being notified, and that this denial of notification may be extended for an indefinite period of time by a judge. By depriving detainees of access to counsel and families,
188
_ISRAELI-OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
this form of short-term "disappearance" enables Israeli authorities to extract confessions more easily under conditions of physical and psychological torture. Earlier State Department reports have mentioned this practice in the discussion of "disappearances," and future reports should resume doing so.
The section on torture, although steadily improving in recent years, still needs to be strengthened. The main improvement over 1992 is that the introduction to the report now mentions that Palestinians have been tortured in some cases, not merely "mistreated," although this claim is attributed to "credible sources" rather than stated in the State Department's own voice. The greatest problem with the State Department's discussion of torture is that it gives unwarranted emphasis to the spurious distinction between "torture" and what the Israeli government terms "moderate physical pressure." First, the report should point out that such distinctions are not recognized by international law. Article 1 of the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, to which Israel is a party, defmes torture as "any act by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a person" either to obtain a confession or as a means of punishment. Article 31 of the Fourth Geneva Convention prohibits the use of any form of "physical or moral coercion" to obtain information, and article 32 of the Convention prohibits any measure that causes physical suffering, including torture and corporal punishment. The report correctly points out that the International Committee of the Red Cross has declared that the Israeli practices described in the report violate the Geneva Convention. Whatever tenus the Israeli government may choose to describe these practices, they clearly constitute torture under international law and the report should state "as much.
The report should no longer carry the unqualified assertion that "Torture is forbidden by Israeli law." It would be more accurate for future editions to state that although "torture" is nominally forbidden by Israeli law, the 1987 Landau Commission report which authorized the use of "moderate physical and psychological pressure" on Palestinian detainees in the occupied territories has never been made public. Therefore, it is not possible to assess whether Israeli law actually forbids the use of torture. In any case, the use of torture as a means of interrogation, whether legally sanctioned or merely condoned in practice, is commonplace.
The discussion of torture could be strengthened in several other respects. The report devotes two paragraphs to detailing the procedures which the Israeli government claims to follow when investigating alleged instances of torture and mistreatment of Palestinians by the police, GSS and IDF. Yet without information concerning the sentencing of offenders, these-paragraphs are practically useless. The report should frankly state that it is not possible to evaluate the effectiveness of these investigations, since the government provides no information about the
189
CRITIQUE 1993
type of disciplinary measures taken. The paragraph describing forced confessions no longer indicates whether there were any cases in which a confession was disallowed because it was coerced. In 1992, the report stated that Israeli and Palestinian attorneys were unaware of any such cases. It would also be helpful for the report to note that an estimated 5,000 Palestinians are subjected to interrogation every year.
The account of deaths in detention is noticeably worse than last year's. The 1992 report noted that five Palestinians died in custody "either during the period of interrogation or shortly thereafter" and mentioned that in some cases "an aggravation of preexisting conditions (such as asthma or heart trouble) brought on by mistreatment during interrogation caused death." The 1993 report no longer recognizes any link between deaths in detention and the physical and psychological abuse of prisoners. This year's report merely states that human rights groups "claim" that in three of the six cases where prisoners died in detention, lack of prompt and adequate medical attention "aggravated" the medical conditions of the prisoners. The report mentions the case of Ayman Nasser, who died after being denied treatment for smoke inhalation for three days. The report should have added that Ayman Nasser died while undergoing interrogation that, according to his fellow detainees, included hoodings, beatings and sleep and food deprivation. The Danish pathologist who conducted an autopsy on Mr. Nasser concluded that his death was caused by the rupture of lung blisters "presumably due to irritating smoke and possibly influenced through beating on the chest." The report also mentions that one prisoner committed suicide, but fails to point out that this occurred while he was being held in an isolation cell without light, water, heat or drainage. In previous years several prisoners have committed suicide while confined in isolation cells, and the use of these cells was one of the major issues motivating a mass hunger strike by Palestinian detainees in 1992.
The section devoted to arbitrary arrest, detention, or exile is also less strong than in last year's report. The section has been rearranged so that many of the most serious abuses documented are not given sufficient emphasis. It opens with a dry recitation of statistics. The second paragraph is devoted to mentioning Israel's release of several hundred prisoners as part of the peace process. Neither of these first two paragraphs directly addresses the issue of arbitrary arrest, detention or exile. The 1992 report opened by noting that, "Any soldier may arrest without warrant a person who has committed, or is suspected of having committed, a criminal or security offense," It then describes the disparity between the rights accorded to those accused of ordinary crimes and those accused of security offenses. This paragraph is now buried in the middle of the discussion and no longer mentions that the vast majority of arrests are for security offenses, although it does now add that persons aged 12 and over are treated as adults.
190
_ISRAELI-OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
In the last two years, the reports have become less critical in discussing administrative detention, a procedure that allows any Palestinian to be jailed indefinitely without charge or trial, subject only to judicial review at the end of every six months. The 1991 report flatly condemned this practice, which violates the Fourth Geneva Convention as well as internationally accepted standards of due process. The 1992 report failed to criticize the practice but at least mentioned the number of Palestinians held in administrative detention at several points during the year. The 1993 report indicates only that 277 persons were held in administrative detention in October, compared to 502 in December 1992. This is misleading, for the report does not mention that more Palestinians were detained in December 1992 than at any other point in the year. In the future, the reports should indicate the total number of Palestinians subjected to administrative detention in a given year or at least give figures at several points during the year.
Another disappointing aspect of the 1993 report is the disparate treatment accorded to Israel's policies of transferring prisoners to facilities within Israel and of using deportation as a form of punishment. The discussion of prisoner transfer has been moved up to the third paragraph of the section, but the mass deportation of Palestinians to Lebanon is only mentioned at the very end of the section. Although both practices violate article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention, the report only makes this point with regard to the transfer of prisoners. This is typical of a pattern of highlighting and even criticizing apparently minor human rights abuses, while deemphasizing and refi"aining to comment on more serious violations. Moreover, the report fails to point out that the transfer of Palestinian prisoners to facilities inside Israel makes it difficult and often impossible for them to receive visits fi"om family and counsel. This problem was greatly exacerbated by the closure of the West Bank and Gaza in March, which made it impossible for residents of the occupied territories to obtain permits to visit prisoners in Israel for several months and difficult to do so thereafter.
The discussion of deportation fails to make several important points. First, the report does not state that Israel impeded the delivery of humanitarian relief to the deportees in Lebanon on several occasions. Second, the discussion does not mention that although Israel allowed the deportees to return after strong international pressure, it has explicitly reserved the right to carry out further deportations in the future. Finally, as already noted, the report neither criticizes Israel's deportation policy nor mentions that it violates international law.
The report's discussion of the use of excessive force has been greatly expanded from last year's, and in general this is a positive development. However, as in the past, the central shortcoming of this section is the State Department's reluctance to state that the chief cause of violence in the occupied territories lies in the repeated fashion in which Israeli security forces have sought out confrontations with the local population and used lethal force in situations where they are not in
191
CRITIQUE 1993
life-threatening danger. Both the old and new open-fire regulations that are uncritically discussed in the report clearly condone the use of deadly force in situations where Israeli forces are not in mortal danger and therefore are contrary to recognized principles of international law.
In order to put Israeli use-of-force policies into perspective, the report should have noted the contrasting response of Israeli forces to demonstrations by Palestinians and demonstrations by Jewish settlers. There were numerous instances during 1993 of Jewish settlers rioting, pelting soldiers and cars with stones, blocking roads and burning tires. On no occasion did the IDF open fire on Jewish demonstrators, despite the fact that Palestinians who engaged in the same acts are fi"equently fired upon with live ammunition or rubber bullets.
The discussion of freedom of speech and press fails to discuss the harassment of journalists by the IDF. On numerous occasions in 1993, journalists were arrested, beaten and in a few cases deliberately shot while covering disturbances in the occupied territories. Photographers and television cameramen were particularly likely to be attacked by soldiers and to have their film and equipment confiscated. Palestinian journalists were the targets of the great majority of these attacks. However, in January a US photographer was beaten and briefly jailed while photographing Shate refugee camp in Gaza, and soldiers threw a percussion grenade at an Israeli TV correspondent who was interviewing Palestinians in Hebron. The report should also have mentioned that the military frequently declared villages or refiigee camps to be "closed areas" off-limits to journalists. A number of journalists were detained for filming confrontations between Palestinians and Israeli forces in allegedly closed areas, even though no prior announcement of the closure had been made. The report also fails to mention that the Al-Zahara Press Service in Hebron was sealed off by the IDF in March and ordered closed for 6 months, or that the East Jerusalem journal Ma'a al-Nas had its license revoked in January for allegedly being fmanced by hostile elements. The ban was retracted after three months when the journal appealed to the High Court of Justice.
Perhaps the single greatest shortcoming of the report is its failure to mention Israel's policy of confiscating Palestinian land and promoting Jewish settlement in the occupied territories. The report only offers the single unelaborated statement that "land and water use" is one of several issues on which "Palestinians are treated less favorably than Israeli settlers." Until 1989, the State Department reports gave at least some indication of the adverse impact of Israel's settlements policy on the lives of Palestinians. The 1985 report, for example, stated that:
The taking of land by Israeli authorities for settlements, military use, and in connection with major road plans, and the reclassification of communal areas as state land, significantly
192
_ISRAELI-OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
affects the hves and economic activities of Palestinians. According to some calculations, Palestinians have been precluded from use of an area approaching 50 percent of the West Bank land and 15 percent of the Gaza Strip.
Those figures are even higher today, as land confiscations have continued. The economic impact of Israel's decision in March 1993 to close the occupied territories indefinitely was greatly exacerbated by the fact that Israel's exercise of control over land and water in the territories for the benefit of Jewish settlers has forced thousands of Palestinians to seek employment in Israel.
The 1993 report does contain much useful information on the human rights situation in the occupied territories. However, the report is seriously weakened by its failure to mention Israeli policies regarding Jewish settlement and confrol over land and water, by its understatement of violations by Israeli authorities and by its failure to criticize Israeli laws or policies that violate international humanitarian law standards.
193
CRITIQUE 1993
