JAPAN
The 1993 State Department report on Japan provides an accurate account of human rights conditions within the country. Regarding overall improvements, however, the report does not mention that recent policies toward human rights in Japan remain, for the most part, static. While Japan has tried to improve its international standing with the US and other Western governments by incorporating human rights concerns into its foreign policy, it has not expended the same amount of political capital on human rights concerns at home. The strong belief among Japanese citizens that they live in a homogenous society has often blinded them to the discrimination that exists within Japan.
In line with the historic change in government in July 1993, when a coalition of seven political parties replaced the 38-year reign of the conservative Liberal Democratic Party, human rights groups were hoping for an equally dramatic change in human rights policies. But this has not materialized, largely because those responsible for making government policy — the bureaucrats — have not changed. Proposals in the Diet for political redistricting, which would allow greater urban representation, may effect significant change on human rights policies in the fiiture.
Regarding degrading treatment or punishment, the report notes the police's use of physical violence to extract confessions from suspects in custody, including "kickings and beatings as well as psychological intimidation." However, it is also important to mention other common police tactics used to force confessions. In cases involving criminal accomplices, the police have been known to tell the defendant that his accomplice has already confessed to the alleged crime. If the defendant does not then also confess, the police threaten him with prolonged detention. It has been reported that police barter privileges such as food and meetings with family members in exchange for confessions. Also, there are no restrictions on the interrogation of suspects. Confessions weigh heavily in Japan's judicial system, and whether or not a defendant has confessed may affect the severity of his sentence.
On the issue of arbitrary arrest and detention, past country reports have consistently mentioned Japan's ongoing practice of "substitute detention," wherein a suspect is held in a police cell instead of an official detention house. Because no real separation is maintained between detention and interrogation authorities, the potential for prisoner abuse is heightened. Human rights groups have criticized this practice for years, but the Japanese government has done nothing to stop it.
As for the treatment of prisoners, the report fails to discuss "rigid solitary confinement." Under this directive, prisoners suspected of having the potential to disrupt order may be held in solitary confinement for years without any recourse.
194
_JAPAN
At the prison director's discretion, without court approval and without due cause, a prisoner may be prohibited from speaking or interacting with other prisoners and may be ordered to sit upright on his knees without moving for extended periods of time. Leaning against the wall, standing up, walking around and sitting on chairs is prohibited. As the Japan Civil Liberties Union (JCLU) pointed out in its 1993 report, "The practice of rigid solitary confinement is obviously in violation of Articles 7 and 10 of the [International] Covenant [on Civil and Political Rights]."
On religion, the country report correctly notes that freedom of religion is "provided for in the Constitution [under Article 20] and respected in practice," but it fails to mention the stream of lawsuits involving freedom of religion. These suits have challenged the government's participation in Shinto activities and its donations to Shinto shrines. These activities are in dfrect contravention of Article 20, which prohibits government involvement in religious affairs.
Perhaps the most glaring omission in the report concerns the issue of women's rights. On August 5, 1993, the Japanese government, under Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa, officially recognized the former Imperial government's involvement in one of the greatest human rights violations against women in Japanese history: the systematic, forced prostitution and mass rape of an estimated 200,000 women (including Koreans, Filipinas, Chinese, Indonesians, Burmese, Dutch and Japanese) from 1932-1945. Euphemistically known as ianfu, or "comfort women," these women were forced to have sexual intercourse "with tens to a hundred or more soldiers in a day," according to a report by the JCLU. In January 1992, Defense Agency documents were discovered showing that the military had supervised and controlled facilities for comfort services and gathenng comfort women. Yet despite this uncontroverted evidence linking the abuse to the imperial government, Japan's most recent human rights report to the UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women (presented on November 2, 1993) neglected to mention how the present Japanese government plans to redress this 13-year long violation of women's rights.
At present, there are two cases pending in Tokyo District Court — one brought by three Korean plaintiffs and the other by 18 Filipina plaintiffs — seeking compensation for these atrocities. A decision is not likely to be reached for many years, however. Furthermore, the Japanese Supreme Court's 1992 decision rejecting the clahns of Taiwanese plaintiffs who had been forcibly conscripted into the Japanese Imperial Army does not weigh in the comfort women's favor. Given the advanced age of the plaintiffs, a political solution would be more expedient and favorable, but does not appear forthcoming.
On the issue of children, the country report accurately states that the rights of children, in general, are adequately protected. However, the report neglects to mention that many school chilà-en are still subjected to corporal punishment by
195
CRITIQUE 1993
teachers. Despite being illegal, this practice is still prevalent in many schools, both public and private.
Regarding discrimination against minorities, the Bunrakumin, who were once considered Japan's "untouchables," are still discriminated against in employment, housing and marriage. Japan's Korean population, most of whom trace their roots in Japan to the pre-war colonial period, cannot obtain Japanese citizenship unless they "assimilate" — a sociological process that requires, among other things, that they adhere to official "suggestions" that they adopt a Japanese name. Despite the report's silence on ethnic minorities, it offers a refreshing review of Japan's asylum procedures, the first such review since 1991. Notably, the report mentions that only 200 persons have been granted asylum since 1981. Besides the special case of Indochinese refrigees who have been granted asylum under relaxed standards, according to a March 1993 Amnesty International report, Japan accepts only a few refugees a year.
In its discussion of worker rights, the report does not address the problem of death from overwork {karoshi). While the incidence of karoshi is on the rise, the courts have remained unsympathetic to the families of the deceased and have offered insufficient remedies as compensation for their loss. Finally, the report's statement that, "Anti-union discrimination ... in practice does not take place" is completely contrary to fact. The Japanese courts and labor commissions have recognized many anti-union discrimination practices. For example, when the government privatized the national railway system in 1986, the newly formed private Japan Railway refused to offer employment to thousands of former employees who were union members. Subsequently, in December 1993, the Cenfral Labor Relations Commission held that Japan Railway's action constituted an unfair labor practice.
196
