	KENYA
Generally, the 1993 State Department report on Kenya provides an accurate description of the human rights situation. In some instances, however, it fails both to depict the larger context into which the issues fall and to give enough illustrative examples to convey the magnitude of the problems. As a result, the report does not adequately hi^ight the degree to which the Kenyan government has institutionalized human rights violations.
In particular, the report fails to provide sufficient context or detail about the brutal ethnically-based fighting that has resulted in more than 1,500 deaths and more than 300,000 displaced persons since 1991. While the report provides the percentages of the largest ethnic groups in its discussion of ethnic clashes, it does not explain which groups are attacking each other, nor make the link between the violence and the ethnic make-up of the government itself
Kenya is made up of more than 40 different ethnic groups. Of these, the three largest are the Kikuyu (21% of the population), the Luhya (14%) and the Luo (13%). Smaller ethnic groups include the Kalenjin (11%) and the Maasai (1.5%). In the three provinces that have seen the greatest concentration of ethnic violence (Rift Valley, Western, and Nyanza provinces), the attackers have been primarily Kalenjin and Maasai, and the victims have tended to be Kikuyu, Luhya and Luo, although Kalenjins and Maasai have also been victims in counter-attacks by other ethnic groups. While the State Department report does correctly note that, "government officials are the most vigorous proponents of ethnically based attacks," the significance of these patterns of violence would have emerged much more clearly if it had also noted that President Daniel arap Moi is Kalenjin and tKat his Vice President, George Saitoti, is Maasai. Indeed, President Moi's cabinet is dominated by Kalenjin and Maasai members. The Kikuyu and Luo have been allowed only one representative apiece in the twenty-five member cabinet.
The report would also have benefited fi"om including more specific examples of the violence. Press reports have strongly indicated that an attack in October 1993 on the village of Enosupukia by 500 Maasai warriors, which left 20 Kikuyus dead and more than 30,000 displaced, was orchestrated by William ole Ntimama, Minister for Local Government and one of President Moi's most trusted cabinet aides. In fact, in an address to Parliament, Minister Ntimama defended the slayings and the expulsions, saying, "I had to lead the Maasai in protecting our rights" and expressing "no regrets over the events in Enosupukia." This important case is unfortunately omitted fi"om the report.
The report properly notes that the Kenyan government "sought to frustrate the hopes of the displaced wishing to return to their homes [and] harassed groups offering them legal or financial assistance," It does not, however, emphasize the problem nor describe the desperate conditions under which hundreds of thousands of displaced persons live. The report also fails to
197
CRITIQUE 1993
note that the Kenyan government has made Uttle or no effort to feed or house those who are unable to return to their land. As a result, thousands of previously self-sufficient farmers are now wholly dependent on relief organizations for food and shelter. A UN Disaster Management Team which visited the Rift Valley Province in May 1993 noted in its report that the displaced population has been living in "appalling conditions for up to one a half years [sic], with irregular supplies of food; no adequate shelter; no access to schooling for the children and only occasional access to basic health facilities." The National Council of Churches of Kenya currently spends $200,000 each month to feed an estimated 200,000 people in ten districts.
The wrenching displacement and attendant hunger suffered by so many Kenyans because of their ethnicity has had a profourld effect on the education of tens of thousands of children. In the Trans Nzoia District alone, the National Council of Churches of Kenya estimates that over 10,000 children have been displaced and are no longer in school. In Nakuru District, fifty-five schools catering to over 16,000 children did not reopen in September 1993 because of the violence. Furthermore, in cases where parents and volunteers have attempted to create makeshift schools in camps for displaced persons, the local government authorities have consistently closed them down. The report should have mentioned this issue in its discussion of ethnic discrimination.
One of the Kenyan government's most significant actions in 1993 was the establishment of three "security operation zones" in Molo (Nakuru District), Burnt Forest (Uasin District), and Londiani (Kericho District), allegedly to curb the ethnic violence in the hardest hit areas. The State Department report properly notes that within the zones, the Kenyan government "outlawed the possession of weapons, movement of livestock at night, and the publication of any information on the areas of violence without government consent." However, the report fails to cite the numerous grounds on which human rights groups have challenged governmental restrictions in these zones; this omission excludes some of the most compelling evidence of how badly the human rights situation in Kenya has deteriorated.
For example, the report does not explain that the security zones were not approved by a resolution of the National Assembly within the time frame stipulated by the Constitution. Their constitutional basis is therefore highly questionable. In fact, the creation of the security zones has never been approved by the National Assembly. Moreover, security personnel have been empowered to demand forced labor in the security zones, in contravention of the ILO conventions. The report should have included this significant fact in its discussion of forced and compulsory labor.
Furthermore, the government has severely restricted the movement of citizens within the security zones, as well as of those attempting to visit security
198
_KENYA
zones. The report minimizes the importance of this Hmitation by stating merely that, "Opposition MP's and domestic and international human rights figures were prevented from entering the areas, as were journalists." But the point is not that they were simply prevented from entering the zones; many of these people were actually arrested as they attempted to gather information about the security zones and provide assistance to their residents. For example, thirteen opposition Members of Parliament were arrested and charged with breaching the peace when they attempted to enter one of the areas on a fact-fmding mission. In October 1993, a reporter for the Nation newspaper was arrested and charged with having violated the regulation by entering one of the security zones. Human rights advocates and members of the clergy have also been arrested as they tried to enter the areas.
As in past years, the blatantly political use of the criminal process against opposition figures on such charges as rumormongering, sedition and incitement to violence continued during 1993, in a clear indication of official resistance to democratic reforms. Indeed, as the report notes, opposition MP's were arrested so frequently that in September 1993, the majority of MP's from one opposition party were out on bond at the same time. The report should also have mentioned the arrest of Abdoullah Sheik Ahmed of the Party of Independent Candidates (PICK), following a march by Muslims to protest the alleged desecration of a copy of the Koran. Police opened fire on the hundreds of demonstrators, resulting in numerous injuries.
Of particular significance are the arrests of Mirugi Kariuki, a well-known human rights lawyer, and Koigi wa Wamwere, the founder of "the National Democratic Human Rights Organization (NDEHURIO). Both are former political prisoners who had been jailed between October 1990 and January 1993 on treason charges that were eventually dropped. On September 18, 1993, they were arrested again, this time with several companions, while traveling in the vicinity of one of the security zones. Three of their companions were beaten the following day by police trying to exfract information regarding wa Wamwere and Kariuki. They were not released on bail until a month later, and wa Wamwere was rearrested on November 5, 1993, accused of having raided a police station to seize weapons. Although the report duly notes wa Wamwere's first arrest, it fails to condemn it in the State Department's own active voice, merely concluding in its section on arbifrary arrest, detention and exile that, "There is reason to believe that some of these prisoners are being held for their political beliefs, associations, or expressions." In contrast. Amnesty International, has stated that the "arrest of Koigi wa Wamwere and the others appears to be part of a pattern of harassment and arrests of critics of the government."
199
CRITIQUE 1993
Another example of the flagrant abuse of prosecutorial power can be found in the harassment of the Kenyan press corps. The report is very thorough and effective in its discussion of ^e de facto restrictions on free speech, providing several telling examples of "the many instances of government censorship of the press." The report should also be applauded for its strong statement that, "Freedom of speech is often breached by security forces acting without warrant and often undercut by overly broad judicial interpretations of antiquated sedition and libel laws."
Nevertheless, while the report mentions numerous arrests, seizures of printing presses and confiscations of newspapers and magazines, it fails to mention the violence and threatening surveillance tactics that have also been employed by security forces. For example, it could usefully have mentioned the April 8 attack on the Nairobi offices of Finance magazine by some three dozen men, who stabbed an editor in the arm, severely cut another employee, seized print-ready artwork, smashed the furniture and made off with a large amount of cash. The editor and publisher of Finance magazine, Njehu Gatabaki, was arrested at least three times in 1993 for his pubhshing activities. He was also subjected to continuous surveillance by officers of the Criminal Investigations Department (CID). While the report does mention that police raided Colourprint, the printer for Finance magazine, it should have noted that in the process of the raid, the police beat up three employees and detained the chairman's son for ten hours, transferring him from one police station to another and threatening to kill him.
Two other unrelated deficiencies in this report warrant brief remarks. First, in its discussion of arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, the report makes no mention of the numerous, credible reports that security forces regularly interfere with private correspondence, particularly mail addressed to human rights activists and lawyers. Second, in its discussion of the minimum age for employment of children, the report focuses too much on the formal wage sector, and ignores the growing number of street children who scrounge for money and work in the informal sector. In the last year, there has been an enormous increase in the number of street children who live in Nairobi's children's ghettos. The report makes no mention of this growing problem or its social and educational impact.
Despite these omissions, the 1993 report on Kenya presents a generally accurate picture of human rights conditions, touching on most issues of importance during the year. Despite some continued improvements, human rights violations in Kenya continue to pose a serious threat to the realization of full civil and political freedoms. Once again, the State Department largely succeeds in conveying this mixed picture with an appropriate degree of skepticism and detachment.
200
