CAMBODIA
The State Department's report on human rights in Cambodia does a good job of tracking the significant improvements in the human rights situation as well as the ongoing violations in 1993. The report points out that Cambodia made significant advances last year. The country held its first free elections in decades, with the participation of nearly 90% of voters; it adopted a new national constitution, establishing a multiparty liberal democracy within the framework of a constitutional monarchy; it repatriated the remaining refugees living on the Thai-Cambodian border; and it released all political prisoners.
The report, however, also addresses the grave human rights violations by both the State of Cambodia (SOC) and Khmer Rouge (KR) forces. In the months leading up to the election, SOC forces committed numerous acts of intimidation and political violence, mainly against rival parties — FUNCINPEC (the party of Prince Ranariddh) and the Buddhist Liberal Democratic Party (BLDP). The report notes that the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) documented the killing of 74 opposition party members during this period. It also points out that the KR carried out a violent campaign to destabilize the SOC government and prevent elections, detaining 43 UN personnel and killing eleven, and carrying out the massacre of 70 ethnic Vietnamese civilians.
Section 1 of the report, on respect for the integrity of the person, is balanced and thorough. However, the assertion that "there were no substantiated cases of political killings" in the latter part of 1993 is questionable. In addition, the report neglects to cover the subject of extrajudicial killings in the non-communist resistance zones, except to assert summarily that in these areas, "military officers regularly detained individuals accused of crimes and meted out punishment." More detail should have been included here to flesh out this assertion.
With respect to conditions in Cambodian prisons, the report points out that there were numerous reports of torture in Battambang Provisional Prison, including burnings and beatings of prisoners. While the report notes that UNTAC issued a warrant of arrest for Teng Seng, the chief of prison guards, who was convicted by a Cambodian court of aggravated assault and sentenced to one year in jail, this case is atypical.
The report should have focussed greater attention on the weakness of the Cambodian judicial system and the virtual absence of enforcement of any legal code. As stated in the 1993 report of the UN Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial, Summary or Arbitrary Executions, "The weakness of the judiciary and the impunity enjoyed by the perpetrators, as well as the climate of violence and terror still prevailing in the country, create an atmosphere favorable to the persistence of human rights violations."
40
CAMBODIA
Regarding the denial of a fair public trials the report asserts that, in accordance with the Paris Accords, no political prisoners were held by authorities in 1993. This, too, is questionable. There was no review of the prisoner release program carried out by UNTAC, and there is no reason to believe that such a program continues to exist today.
There is no reference in the report to the ineffectiveness of the "special prosecutor," a position created by Yasushi Akashi, head of UNTAC. The assertion that there "was no functioning judicial system" in KR-controlled and certain other non-Communist areas is accurate as far as it goes, but the comment could have been expanded to include government-controlled areas also. As noted by the United Nations Programme of Human Rights Activities in Cambodia, "At present no legislative framework, regulations or machinery for the enforcement of the rights enumerated in the 1993 Constitution exist."
On freedom of movement, the report is correct to emphasize the repatriation of over 300,000 Cambodians from refugee camps in Thailand, but there is no mention of their present situation. According to a report by Human Rights Watch/Asia, the refugees were promised land upon return, "but a shortage of mine-free land led to most receiving cash grants instead."
The discussion of the government's attitude to the investigation of alleged human rights abuses by international and nongovernmental groups states that 27 independent indigenous nongovernmental organizations carried out human rights activities in Cambodia in 1993, ranging from human rights monitoring to education. The report should have gone further, however, and assessed the overall effectiveness of these groups.
The report correctly emphasizes the severe problem of discrimination against ethnic Vietnamese, who were targets of numerous attacks by both the KR and the government. It describes in detail the killing of 18 ethnic Vietnamese in the village of Chong Khneas on the Tonle Sap lake in Siem Reap province. The report also notes the government's ambivalence toward this problem, pointing out that in the Chong Khneas incident police just 300 meters from the village did not attempt to intervene. This problem has continued since the elections. As noted in a report by Human Rights Watch/Asia, "Since the elections, over two dozen ethnic Vietnamese were murdered in attacks attributed to the Khmer Rouge, bringing the total number of killings to over one hundred since the beginning of the UN mission." In this regard, the report should also have covered the failure of the newly-promulgated Cambodian Constitution to expressly protect the rights of all ethnic minorities, such as the Viemamese, living in Cambodia. As an Amnesty International report pointed out, "The text of the Constitution provides human rights guarantees to "Khmer citizens' or 'Khmer people' and therefore, many people from ethnic minority groups who do not qualify for Khmer (Cambodian) citizenship are not covered by the human rights provisions in the Constitution."
41
CRITIQUE 1993
The discussion of worker rights in Section 6 notes that, although the 1992 Labor Law provides for the right to unionize and strike, "There is a wide gap between the provisions of the labor law and the reality of labor conditions in Cambodia today." hi fact, it is accurate to say that unions are virtually non-existent, and that collective bargaining does not currently exist in practice. Furthermore, while the Labor Law prohibits forced or compulsory labor, "there is inadequate inspection to enforce it." Also, although the Labor Law states that the minimum age for employment is 16, out of economic necessity, persons under the age of 16 years engage in a variety of jobs. The report also notes correctly that the government has not set specific health and safety standards to ensure workers' well-being.
42
