SOUTH KOREA
South Koreans have witnessed significant political changes in the last year, many of which can be traced to the inauguration of Kim Young Sam as president in February 1993. Long-suffering democratic activists have begun to see the first fruits of their sacrifices. They have also seen that a sympathetic president alone cannot make democracy sink deep roots in the absence of the abolition or reform of authoritarian laws. Indeed, serious human rights problems remain, and the 1993 report fails to convey this reality with appropriate forcefulness.
Reversing a trend of steady improvements in its reporting on South Korea, this year's report offers a flattering and prematurely optimistic assessment of the new administration's reforms and its human rights record. For the past several years, a significant sentence has appeared in the country reports on South Korea: "Democratization continued, but elements of the ROK's authoritarian past survive," This year, that phrase is absent, but its omission does not appear to be justified. The report glosses over numerous discrepancies between the government's professed human rights ideals and its actual practices, while dropping some of the language that underscored such discrepancies in last year's report. Moreover, the report omits information about significant cases and problems, thereby blunting the full force of the reported violations.
The report fmds much to praise in the early accomplishments of the new administration. Yet it is clear that while President Kim represents a positive force for change, he has not managed to consolidate democratic reforms or institutionalize human rights safeguards. The report tends to emphasize the change of personalities rather than the status of the machinery of democracy. It notes, for example, that President Kim "direct[ed] his aides to protect the human rights of suspects" and observes that the authorities "publicly promised to be lenient to the maximum extent possible under the law" if suspects turned themselves in. Without institutionalized reforms and protection s, however, such promises and directives can change whenever the personalities behind them change, with victims having no legal recourse to protest violations.
The report gives a great deal of attention to measures that have had litUe or no practical effect on human rights. It notes that "President Kim . , . implemented sweeping political and economic reforms," mentions "the fiindamental shift in attitude and policy of the Kim Young Sam administration" and heralds "two democratic, institutional reforms of an historic nature." These reforms involved the abolition of false-name bank accounts and the enactment of a government ethics law. They do not, however, address the myriad laws that exist to limit free expression or silence government critics. After praising Kim in its introduction, the report later acknowledges that the government "continued to use [the National
336
SOUTH KOREA
Security Law] to violate the freedoms of expression, association, and travel," that basic labor laws "fall short of international standards," and that other restrictive laws remain in effect, including the Law on Assembly and Demonstration, the Social Surveillance Law and election laws.
The continued existence and use of the National Security Law (NSL) is a prime example of South Korea's authoritarian legacy. The report mentions on several occasions that arrests and prosecutions under the NSL have declined but fails to note the continued concern of international observera over the use of the law. For example, Amnesty International has stated that the NSL is frequently used to silence government critics, while the UN Human Rights Committee has called the law "a major obstacle to the fall realization of the rights enshrined in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights."
Additional details about individual cases connected with the NSL would have sfrengthened the report and provided a fuller picture of the human rights situation. For example, the report mentions the arrest under the NSL of human rights activist Noh Tae Hun. It fails to mention, however, that the publications m his possession, which provided the ground for his arrest, are readily available in South Korea. Indeed, Amnesty International has suggested that Noh was arrested as a warning to him and other rights activists to curtail their activities. This allegation should have been mentioned in Section 4 of the report, which deals with nongovernmental human ri^ts organizations. Instead, that section says that, "There were no credible reports of government harassment." The report should also have noted here that Noh's lawyer, Yong Whan Cho, who was assaulted by police during Noh's arrest, is also a prominent member of the Lawyers for a Democratic Society, an important non-governmental human rigjits organization.
An even more serious case that is completely neglected by the report involves Kim Sam-sok and his sister, Kim Un-ju. They were arrested in September 1993 for reportedly contacting a Korean resident of Japan who was allegedly involved in a 1974 espionage case. According to his lawyer, Kim Sam-sok was stripped naked during his interrogation and sexually assaulted in order to force him to sign a confession. Kim's wife reported that his head was swollen, his face badly bruised and his neck and back injured. After two weeks of interrogation he reportedly attempted to commit suicide. His sister was also reportedly subjected to ill-treatment during her interrogation.
The report mentions the arrests under the NSL of people allegedly associated with the Socialist Workers League {Sanomaeng). It states that these arrests declined to about 10, compared with 65 in 1992, but Amnesty International reports that Sanomaeng arrests were in the dozens, including 15 people arrested for fomiing a chapter of the group in Kangwon province. The State Department should also have noted that members of Sanomaeng have declared publicly that they are committed to peaceftjl political activities and the formation of a legal political party.
337
CRITIQUE 1993
A further major area of concern is the number of political prisoners still being held in South Korea. Althougji some prisoners were released in amnesties in 1993, many of these individuals were already nearing the end of their prison terms, a fact the State Department neglects to mention. The report's estimate of the number of political prisoners is confusingly presented. At one point it puts the number of "people in jail for politically motivated acts" at "under 300" — a figure that appears close to the 300 estimated by Korean human rights groups and the 280 cited by Amnesty International. Elsewhere, however, the reports says, "It appeared that the number of political prisoners and detainees as defmed by international human rights standards numbered well under 100." Without explanation, this is confusing, and appears to represent an effort to minimize the scale of the problem.
The report is also deficient in its coverage of the treatment of long-term prisoners and prison conditions. While noting the release of six long-term, elderly political prisoners, it fails to mention that as many as 80 long-term political prisoners remain incarcerated, including two who have been imprisoned for more than 40 years, Kim Sun-myung, aged 69, and Ahn Hak-sop, who is 63.
Aside from questions about the political motivations behind the initial arrests of these prisoners, the report should also have dealt with the so-called "conversion" system that keeps these men in prison solely on account of their imputed political views. As a condition of their release, authorities demand that these prisoners sign statements renouncing their real or alleged political views. Prisoners continue to be held because they refuse to sign these "conversion statements."
Prison conditions remained "Spartan," according to the report, which then goes on to cite a lone dissident released from prison, according to whom conditions have improved significantly in recent years. The report should have sought a wider range of opinion. For example. International PEN reported serious concerns about writers Choi Il-bung, Hwang Suk-young and Park Ki-pyong (also known as Park No-h"ae). While in prison, Choi protested the censorship of his mail and the denial of books sent to him. According to PEN, Choi's head was shaved and his hands tied as punishment for engaging in a hunger strike. PEN also reports that Hwang was not allowed to write in prison and that Park, who reportedly suffers from kidney disease, was denied medicine.
Another case that should have been mentioned is that of Park Seok-jin, who was arrested in July 1993 and sentenced to 18 months in prison for making a declaration of conscience and deserting during his compulsory military service. In his statement, Park objected to serving as a riot policeman, which would have required him to help suppress civilian demonsfrations. Altogether, nine army conscripts were arrested in July 1993 after deserting and making similar declarations. In January 1994, after the preparation of this year's report, Park was reportedly denied access to some visitors, reading material and exercise after failing
338
SOUTH KOREA
to stand at attention when the prison director entered his cell. His family reported that Park was beaten by guards, tied up with rope and ankle chains and confmed to a punishment cell.
Released political prisoners, such as 71-year-old Lee Chong-wan, who spent 43 years in prison, are still monitored by the Social Surveillance Law. Lee must report regularly to a police station and is occasionally prevented from leaving his house.
In its commentary on the legal system, the report says blandly that, "There is a functioning system of bail." This assertion is misleading, for it appears to suggest that bail is routinely granted as a matter of right. In fact, detainees are released on bail only under special circumstances.
In the section on freedom of speech and press, this year's report notes that "Limits remained under the NSL on the expression of ideas that the Government considered Communist or pro-North Korean." However, it omits the important additional comment, included in the 1992 report, that the Government's defmition of such ideas "is so broad that it often includes persons who attempt to express nonviolently views which the Government opposes." Such omissions take on added significance when one reviews several years of State Department reports and finds that large chunks of text and numerous key phrases are repeated year after year almost verbatim.
Although censorship in South Korea has eased considerably, in October 1993 authorities reportedly pressured a television network to refrain from showing a documentary about the case of a political prisoner named Kang Ki-hun. The report notes an instance of what it interprets to be self-censorship, when the state broadcasting company (KBS) decided not to broadcast an interview with a former political prisoner, Im Su Kyung.
The report is also misleading in its comment that the South Korean security services conducted various forms of surveillance of political dissidents, including wiretaps, in the past. In fact, according to opposition leader Kim Dae Jung, the problem of wiretaps is "worse than ever." Testimony before the National Assembly in 1993 suggested that the National Security Planning Agency (NSP) , was operating as many as 5,000 wiretaps. Human rights activist Noh Tae Hun was told by his interrogators that his detention was prompted by information obtained from a wiretap on his lawyer's telephone.
Persecution of labor union leaders also continued through the application of labor laws that remain unchanged under the new government. The report mentions the arrest of union members charged under the Labor Dispute Mediation Act, which prohibits intervention in a dispute by any third party who has no immediate connection to a worlqjlace. But in the case of the arrest warrants issued for five labor leaders, including Dan Byung Ho, president of the Korean Trade Union Congress (KTUC), the report fails to provide the detail that would be
339
CRITIQUE 1993
required for a fuller picture of how the labor laws can be applied. In Dan's case, the report states that the KTUC assisted the Hyundai Group Labor Union Association "in holding coordinated collective efforts." Amnesty International reports, however, that Dan had visited trade unions in the Ulsan area, the site of a dispute involving workers and management of the Hyundai group, and apparently gave lectures about the dispute and about the conduct of wage negotiations. Such peaceful activities are generally considered to be within the scope of legitimate labor union activity.
The report does mention the recommendation of the International Labor Organization to the Korean government that it bring its labor laws up to international worker rights standards. It fails, however, to convey the forcefulness of the ILO's opinion that "the ban on third party intervention in the settlement of disputes constitutes a serious restriction on the free function of trade unions." The ILO called on the government to repeal the ban.
340
