	KUWAIT
The summary conclusion of the 1993 report on Kuwait is brazenly noncommittal: "Although Kuwait showed some progress in human rights in 1993, its overall human rights record was mixed." A more comprehensive and less partial review would say that Kuwait's record was poor and that the future outlook was not encouraging. In presenting a sanitized version of the last year's events, the report shows little concern for accuracy. Often, it comes close to offering an apologia for the government's misdeeds and using wording that appears to have been borrowed from official Kuwaiti government statements.
The single greatest setback for human rights in 1993 was the governmental order in August for the dissolution of all independent Kuwaiti human rights organizations. The report mentions this event several times but repeatedly mischaracterizes it, distorting the facts and seeking to minimize their significance. According to one typical passage, "The Government banned all unlicensed nongovernmental organizations in August, thereby eliminating some organizations that had been engaged in human rights work," This suggests misleadingly that the ban on human rights groups was incidental to a broader set of prohibitions, and that only "some" human rights groups were affected. In reality, the government has long prohibited any "unlicensed" associations, and Kuwait's human rights groups were the sole target of the 1993 ban, which made all — not "some" — of them illegal. Moreover, this particular ban was final and not subject to judicial review; it was also buttressed by a threat from the Minister of Social Affairs to implement it by force. These latter aspects are not noted in the report, which also wrongly claims that the government had not previously interfered with the work of the preeminent human rights group, the Kuwait Association to Defend War Victims (KADWV).
To appreciate the implications of the ban, it is necessary to keep in mind Kuwait's recent history. Since the liberation from Iraqi occupation, the Kuwaiti government has been unwilling to take the measures needed to curb official abuses and improve its poor human rights record, or to implement reforms that would enable individuals to assert rights claims via the courts with a realistic prospect of success. In that context, independent organizations campaigning for human rights have performed a vital ftinction in assisting the large disenfranchised elements of Kuwaiti society (stateless Bidoon, all women, Kuwaitis with second-class citizenship, non-Kuwaitis, prisoners and detainees, etc.).
By failing to address the context in which the ban occurred or to point out its real sigjiificance, the report disguises the grievous setback that it constitutes for human rights. The organizations affected had worked for human rights and democracy according to international norms and had done nothing to warrant banning. The most prominent of the six, the KADWV, had particularly
201
CRITIQUE 1993
distinguished itself through its humanitarian endeavors as well as its human rights advocacy, working to secure the release of Kuwaitis detained in haq and to mitigate the sufferings of those harmed by the Iraqi occupation and subsequent Gulf War. These were problems that the Kuwaiti government had proven unable or unwilling to resolve.
The government did not cite any instances of wrongdoing by the banned groups, choosing to justify its ban on the grounds that their operations were technically illegal. This was true, of course, for the simple reason that the goverrmient had arbitrarily refiised to grant them official permits to operate, which are required of all Kuwaiti associations. Not wishing to infringe these licensing requirements, the human rights groups had applied unsuccessfully for permits, continuing to operate while they waited for them to be issued. Having tolerated these technically "illegal" activities since the 1991 liberation, the government's sudden crackdown in August 1993 can only have been motivated by hostility to the groups' objectives. The ban was effectively a declaration of war on human rights and democratic freedoms, and the State Department report seems to be tacitly approving the ban on human rights advocacy by representing it as relatively innocuous. This misrepresentation can hardly have been accidental.
In other respects, the patterns noted in the 1992 Critique generally persist in the 1993 report, although some of last year's critical comments are acknowledged.
The discussion of Kuwait's criminal justice system contains many misleading formulations and omits a number of relevant specifics. The result is an unjustifiably favorable portrayal of the system's operations. Disguising the government's inaction, the report states that the Kuwaiti authorities "agreed to begin investigating the cases of long-term detainees. " A more neutral way of expressing this would have been to say that the government had delayed for two years remedying the situation of detainees held since liberation. The report notes that one of the perpetrators of the extrajudicial killings that followed liberation was brought to justice — with no mention that this is the notorious Farhat case, where only protracted international pressures and embarrassing publicity finally caused the government to allow the accused civilian police official to be tried for his heinous crimes. According to the report, "There were no reported cases of permanent disappearances." This wording is disingenuous, since the Kuwaiti government knows that the families of "disappeared" persons may be either outside the country or too frightened to file formal reports of "disappearances" to the same police or security forces who were responsible for the abductions in the fu"st place.
The report should have noted that one obstacle in the way of prosecuting those responsible for post-liberation killings has been the government's reluctance to allow Physicians for Human Rights and US Army experts to examine the remains of execution victims. The report says that the ICRC has access to all places of
202
_KUWAIT
detention, but there is no mention of the fact that the poUce routinely spirit away prisoners on days when the ICRC visits. The report asserts that Kuwaiti prison conditions "do not threaten life" — as if that meant they were worthy of commendation — rather than making the more appropriate assessment of whether they meet minimum international standards.
Thus, the report says that the ICRC "monitors prison conditions," without asking whether the Kuwaiti government has been willing to respond to ICRC criticisms or shown any interest in improving conditions that the report admits "frequently threaten health." Confessions and evidence obtained through torture are said to be "excludable," but this presents as fact what is for the most part only a theoretical principle. The report goes on to assert vaguely that in State Security trials, "defense lawyers occasionally sought exclusion on the basis of torture," and notes that in the trial of the alleged, would-be assassins of former President George Bush, the judge ruled against excluding the defendants' confessions after a court-ordered medical examination. The report should also have noted that, at the time of their trial, two of the defendants still bore obvious marks of the torture that they said had been used to extract their confessions. There is also no mention of the allegations of torture of six Iraqis and ten Palestinians detained since liberation and sentenced to death by the State Security Court for assisting the Iraqi occupation; the claim by these sixteen defendants that their confessions had been extracted under torture did not receive full consideration by the court. In general, the report's references to the prevalence of torture are disturbingly vague. It claims that "far fewer cases were reported in 1993 than in 1992" — but does not say whose figures are used to substantiate this claim. There is a similar vagueness about the numbfer of persons in detention, which is said to have decreased by 30 percent since 1992. There is also no mention of the continued detention of defendants who have been acquitted or had the charges against them dropped. The report claims that in security cases the four-day limit on detention without charge "has occasionally been ignored." It would have been more candid and accurate to state that the limit is often violated.
The section on arbitrary interference with privacy again understates the gravity of abuses in Kuwait, stating that there is "occasional surveillance of individuals and communications," when in fact such surveillance is commonplace, and has been discussed in the Kuwaiti parliament. Restrictions on fi-eedom of speech and the press are minimized by the suggestion that only newspapers need to be licensed. In fact, all media and any printed matter, including brochures or posters, require prior authorization fi-om the Ministry of Information. It misrepresents the prosecution of the newspaper Al-Qabas to say that it was "charged with publishing military secrets," without mentioning the fact that these "secrets" had already been published in the official gazette of the armed forces, Humat al-Watan. The report indicates that the censorship department is primarily
203
CRITIQUE 1993
concerned with moral issues like pornography; materials on political topics may also be censored. The report does not candidly address the restrictions on freedom of association, and fails to mention the fact that public assembly is currently restrained by an unconstitutional law promulgated by the ruling family while parliament was suspended. The report is also inaccurate in stating that professional and other groups can operate and maintain international contacts without government interference.
The report refers to the Kuwaiti parliament's review of decrees issued by the Amir during the long period when parliament was suspended. It should also have noted that the review of this large volume of unconstitutional legislation has placed a heavy burden on the parliament, as was doubtless intended, and has detracted from its ability to address other urgent issues.
As in previous years, the report understates the Kuwaiti government's harsh and vindictive treatment of aliens who have the misfortune to be from countries whose leaders supported Iraq during the occupation. For example, the report acknowledges that such aliens were "especially subject to harassment and arrest at [police] checkpoints," but then adds, "as were other people without valid Kuwaiti residency visas." This additional phrase obscures the fact that these aliens were targeted solely because of their nationality, and not because of any visa problems. The report takes at face value the government's assertion that its policy is "aimed at changing the demographic balance to reduce Kuwait's overall reliance on foreign workers," which puts a benign gloss on the expulsions of Palestinians and other Arabs from countries that supported Iraq. There has been talk of trying to reduce the foreign presence to no more than 50 percent of the population, but the non-Kuwaiti segment of the population has been allowed to swell to close to one million, far more than the 650,000 people who could claim to be Kuwaitis, There has been no general policy of reducing the number of foreigners, whose numbers have increased in relation to the percentage of Kuwaitis. The report gives no specifics to explain its contention that "economic pressure" has made Gazans leave Kuwait "voluntarily," In fact, to encourage them to depart, the Kuwaiti government has not only denied them employment but also subjected them to sizeable fines for each day they remain in the country. When their savings are exhausted, they have no choice but to ask to leave Kuwait, although their decision to depart in such circumstances can hardly be called "voluntary," Finally, with regard to the stateless Bidoon, the report continues to minimize their Kuwaiti connections, making the vague and unsubstantiated assertion that only "some" had longstanding ties to Kuwait.
In the section on children's rights, new this year, the report mentions only in passing the plight of children compelled to live in the deportation center with their parents, and does not suggest that this presents any rights problems. It also makes no reference to the sufferings and hardships of children of families with the
204
_KUWAIT
"wrong" nationality or nationality mix. For example, since the liberation, Kuwaiti women married to Bidoon or to Arabs from countries that did not join the anti-Iraq coalition have suffered badly. Since Kuwaiti nationality only passes through the father's line, these children are non-citizens, and may, like their fathers, be deprived of vital rights and treated as deportable aliens. In addition, even if they manage to remain in Kuwait with their mothers, these children may be harmed by the separation of their families, since many of the Arab husbands in such families have either been expelled from Kuwait or precluded from returning.
Giving a false impression of progress, the report claims that the Kuwaiti govemment "closed illegal recruitment agencies for domestic servants," obscuring the fact that all were illegal but only a few were closed. This is hard to reconcile with a claim made elsewhere in the report that in 1993 the govemment "began to regulate recruitment agencies and close down unscrupulous ones." The report is a little more candid and accurate when it comes to the deplorable situation of Asian maids, pointing out the gulf between official reassurances that the maids' plight is being addressed, and the actual reality of their situation. The report helpiully illustrates this point by contrasting the actual evidence presented at a trial for the murder of a Filipina maid and the court's finding that her Kuwaiti employers had "unintentionally" murdered her. Despite these positive features, the report should have given greater prominence to the fact that domestic workers have absolutely no protections under Kuwaiti labor law. Reference to this fact is buried toward the end of the report, under the mbric of the prohibition on forced or compulsory labor, where it will hardly be noticed. The general hardships that workers face in Kuwait are understated. Tucked away inconspicuously is the comment that, "Kuwaiti labor laws do not protect most foreign workers well." This should have been a topic sentence, worded more clearly to stress that foreign workers are in fact largely unprotected.
The report makes no critical appraisal of the statements by the Amir and Crown Prince to the effect that they favor political rights for women. But since the govemment has done nothing concrete in this area, these absfract professions of support for the enfranchisement of women should not be taken at face value, In a puzzling statement, the report asserts that Kuwaiti women are subjected to sexual harassment if they are dressed in Westem fashions, as are "foreign women," If the latter phrase means Asian maids, the report should say so e?q)licitly; as powerless women, they have indeed been subjected to serious abuses and sexual exploitation. The report also seems to celebrate the achievement of a Kuwaiti woman who is said to have been elevated from Director of Political Affairs in the Amiri Diwan to an undersecretaryship in the Ministry of Higher Education. If it were acknowledged that this woman is Rasha al-Sabah, a member of the royal family, the magnitude of her "achievement" might have been assessed more realistically.
205
CRITIQUE 1993
The State Department's 1993 report on Kuwait more closely resembles a public relations exercise, designed to render palatable the United States' alliance with the ruling oligarchy, than an impartial examination of the human rights situation. Throughout, it minimizes governmental rights abuses. Two years ago, it might still have been reasonable to make allowances for the turbulent conditions that followed Kuwait's liberation. But this is no longer appropriate. The Kuwaiti government has now had ample time to restore order and demonstrate its preparedness to undertake needed reforms. Rather than doing so, it has demonstrated a disinclination to investigate and punish past abuses or to undertake reforms that will cure the systemic problems that lead to new violations. Through its ban on all independent human rights activity, the Kuwaiti government has revealed its impatience with criticisms of its authoritarian and repressive ways. Kuwait's record of abuses may pale in comparison with such neighbors as Iraq or Saudi Arabia. However, by international human rights standards, the Kuwaiti rights picture in 1993 was much bleaker tiian it was in the previous year. It is a pity that the State Department report should have engaged in an effort to disguise this grim reality.
206
