LEBANON
The State Department's report on Lebanon maintains that Israel "exerts control" in southern Lebanon, while "pervasive Syrian influence over Lebanese politics and Lebanese decisionmakers lay at the root of the... unwillingness [of the Lebanese government] to engage Damascus." It goes on to claim that the "Hariri Government was able to restore public confidence, stabilize the economy, and launch a program to reconstruct the economy's infrastructure." Such generalizations set the tone for what essentially is a vague and evasive presentation of two key questions that will ultimately determine both the nature and the very survival of the Lebanese polity.
It is no secret that the Lebanese claim to sovereignty and independence remains at best hollow. Outright Syrian domination of every facet of public life has effectively reduced Lebanon to another Syrian province. Disagreements among the Lebanese ruling troika (the Maronite president, the Shi' a speaker of parliament and the Surmi prime minister), for instance, are solved only in Damascus. The leader of the labor unions was "invited" to visit the Syrian capital for "consultations" with Syrian officials on a strike by the Lebanese General Confederation of Workers (CGTL). Indeed, Lebanon's need for Syrian tutelage and advice is so dire that, according to a report published by a research center in Beirut, Lebanese officials visited Damascus 126 times between January and May 1993. An editorial that appeared in the Beirut AaxXy L'Orient-Le Jour on the occasion of Independence Day on November 22, 1993, aptly summarizes what the majority of Lebanese citizens feel about their country's "special" relationship with Syria. "The nature of the relations with Damascus," the editorial states, is "neither the fruit of a national will nor of a consensus which was arrived at freely... [It is] a forced marriage."
Israel's occupation of its self-proclaimed "security zone" in southern Lebanon continues to infringe on the country's desire to live at peace within secure borders. Despite repeated UN'resolutions, the Israeli government persists in violating "the principles of international law regarding the protection of human rights, in particular the Universal Declaration of Human Rights," as well as "the relevant provisions of international humanitarian law as contained in the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, and the Hague Convention IV of 1907."
The Hrawi-Hariri government has not only failed to resist the occupation, but has also turned a blind eye to the kidnappings and harassment of southern Lebanese by the South Lebanon Army, which acts as a surrogate of the Israeli Defense Forces. The government appears determined to keep alive the longstanding maxim that "Lebanon's strength is in its weakness." Indeed, it is this attitude of benign neglect that prompted southern Lebanese to revolt in the late
214
LEBANON
1960s and early 1970s, and became one of the root causes of the country's devastating civil war.
The report's blithe optimism about socio-economic development is misleading. Monetary stability cannot be considered an end in itself, and should not be confused with socio-political stability. In 1975, Lebanon had one of the strongest currencies in the world and what many considered a thriving economy. But beneath the veneer of success lay deep-rooted cleavages, brought about by government neglect and insensitivity toward the widening gap between the haves and the have-nots. These cleavages precipitated one civil war and may yet precipitate another. The government's obsession with reviving Beirut's role as the financial center of the Middle East and its blindness to the myriad social problems in the country, the increasing income disparities and the near-obliteration of the middle class should not be lauded.
One indicator of the government's failure to restore confidence in Lebanon's stability has been its inability so far to convince Lebanese emigrants to repatriate the estimated $30 billion in deposits they hold outside the country. Similarly, private foreign investment has not been forthcoming and the long-promised aid packages from Western donors and multilateral agencies have been slow to materialize. Meanwhile, whatever goodwill the government has generated in its infancy is slowly dissipating amidst mounting evidence of internal disarray, emphasis on big business and mega-projects and the lack of a social policy.
Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri himself is implicated for his near-dictatorial ambitions and governing style. No line separates Hariri the private businessman from Hariri the prime minister. This dualism permeates every level of government: the Minister of Justice is Hariri's personal lawyer, the governor of the Central Bank is his personal stockbroker, the first vice-Govemor of the Central Bank is one of his personal economic advisors, and the President of the Council for Development and Reconstruction, as well as many other hi^-ranking goverrmient officials, are employees in his various enterprises. The Prime Minister forced his own plan for the reconstruction of the destroyed commercial center of Beirut upon the landowners and the businesses previously located there, and became a principal shareholder in Solidere, the company he established for that purpose.
Fears that Hariri's private interests are guiding government policy were also voiced in December 1993, when he attempted to push through the cabinet a draft bill that would have given Future Television, a company of which he is the sole shareholder, a monopoly over satellite broadcasting. Under pressure. President Hrawi refused to sign the bill into law until it was amended to limit satellite broadcasts to state television pending enactment of an audio-visual media law.
The report is notable for the lack of analysis of many controversial bills that parliament passed during 1993, even though they were debated in the local press for several months. For instance, articles 18 and 35 of the law instituting the
215
CRITIQUE 1993
Constitutional Council, passed on June 24, 1993, have further eroded the rule of law in Lebanon by abrogating article 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. This gave citizens appearing before a court in contentious cases the right to invoke the inapplicability of legal provisions that contradict the Lebanese Constitution and/or the international conventions to which Lebanon is a parly.
The report's discussion of the government's record on prison overcrowding, arbitrary arrests and freedom of expression, on the other hand, is a marked improvement over previous years. It is less hesitant and provides sufficient factual information to give an accurate picture of the autocratic tendencies of the Hrawi-Hariri administration. In the section on arbifrary arrests, for instance, the report does a commendable job in maintaining that all of the groups that were subject to the army's campaign of arbitrary arrests in 1993 "were at odds politically with the Syrian and Lebanese regimes and Syrian policies in Lebanon." Still, despite these improvements, the discussion could be made more relevant in three ways: (1) by incorporating pertinent material and data from studies performed and/or cited by different human rights and non-govemmental organizations; (2) by referring to objective legal standards laid down in the Lebanese constitution and the UN covenants; and (3) perhaps more importantly, by drawing conclusions from these widespread abuses about the absence of the rule of law in Lebanon today.
According to official statistics issued in December 1993 by the Prison Department of the Ministry of the Interior, 23 prisons are currently in use in Lebanon. All of them lack heating and adequate sanitary facilities. In some, up to 68 inmates use the same shower, while as many as 45 must share a single toilet. In the Baabda prison for women, more than 55 women with infants occupy two rooms (23 X 16 feet), with no backyard for walks, no visitors' quarters or vocational training. The report fails to mention that no independent monitoring of these prisons is allowed, that detainees are not permitted access to family members or to a notary public for the purpose of appointing a lawyer, as required by law,
Similarly, the government has attempted to stifle dissent by imposing its will on the media. A 1993 report by the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) describes the crackdown on the Lebanese media, once renowned as "the parliament of the Arabs," under the Hrawi-Hariri administration. The State Department report does note that on May 12, 1993, for instance, the government suspended the influential daily al-Safir for one week, ostensibly because it leaked a confidential Israeli working paper presented to the Lebanese delegation at the peace talks in Washington. Yet it fails to mention that most observers, including the paper's editor-in-chief, Talal Salman, insisted that the real reason behind the suspension was the paper's outspoken criticism of Saudi Arabia's human rights record and its negative assessment of the Lebanese government, which Salman described as "a collection of Hariri's employees and business associates." For the record, Prime Minister Hariri, a billionaire who made his fortune in Saudi Arabia, is a naturalized
216
LEBANON
Saudi citizen and a personal friend of Saudi Arabia's King Fahd. Furthermore, according to the CP J report, the suspension of al-Safir followed earlier closures of media outlets and coincided with new efforts by the government to regulate the country's private television and radio stations.
In April the offices of the Independent Communications Network (ICN), one of the government's most vocal critics, were sealed by order of the public attorney of the Beirut Court of Appeals, after the station accused the Prime Minister of buying up the property of Christians in an attempt to "Islamicize" the country. The government charged ICN with broadcasting news that "undermine[s] national unity and disturb[s] public security." ICN was owned by Maronite millionaire businessman Henri Sfeir, widely viewed by local journalists as a demagogue who used the station to further his own political ambitions.
While the State Department report describes the attack on ICN, it fails to mention that at least one TV station, al-Manar, which is the voice of the militant Islamic Hizb-Allah, did stand up for ICN. "We don't agree with Mr. Sfeir's politics," said Shaykh Khudr Nur al-Din of al-Manar, "but we believe ICN was closed as a warning and because it is weakest politically. We support ICN because it expressed the fears of Lebanon's Christians." The report also fails to link the suspension of al-Safir, discussed earlier, to the editorial it published on April 30, 1993, insisting that ICN was closed for "political reasons."
The report is weak in its treatment of the question of the Lebanese displaced as a result of the civil war, who constitute between 20 and 22% of the total population. It states that "hundreds of families received keys to their homes and began to repair them," but does not compare the number of returnees wiA the total number of the displaced, thus avoiding the conclusion that at the present rate it could take up to 20 years for the entire displaced population to be resettled. More important, by blaming the slow pace of resettlement on "financial constraints and [the] lingering insecurity felt by the displaced," the report reduces the government's role to that of a hapless spectator in a matter of vital concern to every Lebanese.
As in 1992, the report's treatment of Palestinian refugees in Lebanon remains seriously deficient. Rather than using the issue to highlight human rights abuses in areas outside the legal authority of the Lebanese government, the report should have dealt with the Palestinian question in Lebanon in a separate section, including an analysis of the conditions under which the refugees live and the government's policy toward their presence and resettlement in the country. Palestinian refugees in Lebanon face not only discrimination in employment, but also constant harassment by state security, Syrian security and certain militias. Their civil and political rights remain uncertain. Infighting among the Palestinian factions in particular has created a state of increasing insecurity in the refugee camps. The government, while condemning violence on all sides, has failed to take any meaningful action to stem it,
217
CRITIQUE 1993
The report could have cited numerous independent studies of conditions among the refugees. According to the annual report of the US Conmiittee for Refugees, the United Nations Relief and Welfare Association (UNRWA) estimates that about 4,000 Palestinian families live in imsatisfactory, makeshift shelters, and need assistance for adequate housing. The proportion of refugees receiving special hardship assistance, 11.8%, is the highest for any of the areas in which UNRWA operates. The report fails to state that a decision by the Ministry of Labor to freeze the granting of work permits to foreigners has had a negative impact on Palestinian employees, notably among those working as paramedics in hospitals throughout Lebanon. No special consideration was given to the dire economic circumstances in which most Palestinians have found themselves, especially in the aftermath of the Gulf War. There is no legislation permitting Palestinians residing in Lebanon to form their own unions.
The report remains weak in addressing the status of women. Lebanese society, while traditional, is open enough for a more substantive investigation of abuses against women. Last year's report raised the issue of the "crime of honor" conmiitted against mimarried, sexually active women or wives who commit "adultery." This year, it is completely ignored, even though it remains one of the main concerns of Lebanese women activists. According to the Lebanese Penal Code of 1943, the male killer of a wife, sister or mother can remain free from prosecution if he can prove that he committed his crime in response to an "illegitimate sexual relation" by the victim. Despite public opposition to this provision and intense lobbying by local women's groups, the Minister of Justice has avoided introducing any draft amendments to the Penal Code, and has not even addressed the issue in any public forum. Furthermore, the government refuses to ratify the international conventions banning discrimination against women.
The report is similarly weak in its discussion of children's rights. It should, for example, have referred to recent works by UNICEF and certain NGOs highlighting the plight of the wartime and post-war generations of children in Lebanon, as well as the Lebanese government's reaction, if any. In the same context, one NGO survey of the condition of children in prison found that in mid-1993, 57 children were sharing prison facilities with adults. By the end of the year, the figure had risen to 78. In six of the seven prisons surveyed, children shared cells with adults. Only one of these children had been tried and convicted, while the others had been waiting for months, or in one case for as long as two years. Although Law 119 of 1983 made it illegal to detain minors with adults, the Prosecutor General issued a decision in 1985 authorizing the detention of children in three main prisons for adults, in Roumieh, Tripoli and Beirut. Prison officials in the central prison at Roumieh decried the decision and emphasized that they did not have the adequate facilities to deal with juvenile delinquents. Credible reports abound of sexual abuse and violence against these children; one child prisoner who
218
LEBANON
was transferred to a rehabilitation home told his social worker that he preferred to die rather than go back to jail.
The report blames the lack of adequate facilities for the rehabilitation of delinquents on "limited financial resources." It is no secret, however, that such facilities once existed in the Baabda district, but that these have been converted into a police academy. Pressure on the ministries of the interior and of justice to reclaim the facilities for juvenile delinquents has been fiiiitless. Meanwhile, the so-called rehabilitation home operated by a local NGO, ¿'Union pour la Protection de I'Enfance au Liban, is in fact a rented floor of a school in Beirut and is not at all adequate for rehabilitation purposes. The home accommodates some 27 children aged 11 -17 in one dormitory room with a single toilet and a sink. For its part, the Ministry of the Interior is counting on NGO funding for its plans to convert a section of the Roumieh prison into a facility for juvenile delinquents. This solution, however, is opposed by the NGOs, which insist on special juvenile centers far removed from the prison enviroimient.
In its discussion of worker rights of association, the report talks of "credible allegations that the Labor Minister helped sway electors." This is an understatement. In the summer of 1993, the Labor Minister publicly declared that the "freedom and rights of labor will be better protected with only one union by sector," and only one union chapter in each of Lebanon's five provinces. The minister also prepared a draft law binding labor to a single union structure, a measure that was publicly denounced by union leaders as direct government interference in independent union activities.
Having failed to convince the unions of the "benefits of integration," the minister followed the old adage of "divide and rule." He attempted to gain control of the CGTL from within by licensing 17 new unions whose membership would presumably be more favorable to government interests. The minister also arbitrarily decided to cancel the elections of some unions, such as that of the tobacco growers in South Lebanon, on the pretext that the ministry did not have enough employees to supervise the elections.
Most independent observers of Lebanese affairs, whether local or foreign, expect the human rights situation to deteriorate fiirther while Lebanon remains in the Syrian orbit, and as long as Prime Minister Hariri continues to rely on the Saudi-Syrian axis and on the success of his economic policies for his political legitimacy. Prosperity and human rights are not mutually exclusive, and Hariri's attempts to recapture Lebanon's past economic success should not come at the expense of fundamental liberties. Beyond its ethnic dimension, Lebanon's civil war was in essence a social revolt by a multi-confessional majority that lived on the margins of society and benefitted little from the country's economic "miracle." It would be tragic if the current leadership in Lebanon fails to leam from the country's not-so-distant past. Unfortunately, the 1993 State Department report ignores the
219
CRITIQUE 1993
ílindamental shortcomings of the social contract between government and governed in Lebanon. The effect of this lack of substantive analysis is to give the report a certain disjointed and diluted quality, at a time when a strong message is needed to draw the attention of the Lebanese authorities to the serious threats to human rights that exist in their country.
220
