	LIBERIA
The 1993 report does a good job of assessing the comphcated situation in Liberia. Yet while there were minor improvements over last year's report, there were some substantial disappointments as well. The report's major flaw was the failure to assess adequately the posture and actions in this multi-party conflict of the Economic Community of West African States Cease-fire Monitoring Group (ECOMOG). In addition, the report failed to mention that both ECOMOG and the Interim Government of National Unity (IGNU) were unable effectively to police the territory that they collectively controlled. As a result, the Armed Forces of Liberia (AFL) and the United Liberation Movement for Democracy in Liberia (ULIMO) committed a variety of human rights abuses without impediment. As was the case in last year's report, these flaws again prompt a concern of bias in favor of ECOMOG. This concern is additionally warranted given the report's tone and language.
There were two minor improvements over the 1992 report. The first was the use of more accurate topic sentences in the section on respect for civil liberties. In last year's report, topic sentences (such as, "There was no official press censorship in Monrova") were at times flatly contradicted by the paragraph that followed. The improvement in their accuracy is a welcome development. The 1993 report also acknowledged the serious refugee situation in its introduction. However, it should have provided additional details, such as the fact that fully half of Liberia's citizens are either refugees or have been internally displaced. Jhe report should also be commended for its thorough discussion of prison conditions, in accordance with the revised State Department instructions for preparation of the Country Reports.
The report's primary failure was its inadequate assessment of ECOMOG's position in the Liberian conflict. When ECOMOG forces entered Liberia in 1990, it marked the first time that a coalition of Afiican countries had ever intervened militarily in another country. As such, the UN and others have watched the ECOMOG operation closely as a possible model for regional conflict resolution. Similarly, the collaboration of the UN Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) with ECOMOG is the first time that a UN peacekeeping operation has worked together with regional peacekeepers. When the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL) attacked Monrovia, in October 1992, ECOMOG was essentially forced to accept assistance by AFL and ULIMO forces, both of whom have dismal human rights records. This alignment transformed ECOMOG's role in the Liberian conflict. As Africa Watch noted, ECOMOG "is considered by many to constitute a warring faction. Its role has changed from peacekeeping to peace enforcing, and its rules of engagement now are more aggressive . . . [they can] attack targets that might contribute to a threat against them." In this regard, the report should have also
221
CRITIQUE 1993
mentioned the allegations — which apparently have been confirmed by the United States government — that ECOMOG is either directly arming or facilitating the arming of ULIMO and AFL. Last year's Critique criticized the 1992 report for failing to assess the impact of ECOMOG's transformation from a neutral peacekeeping force to an active participant in fighting the NPFL. That criticism remains valid for the current report,
The failure to link abuses by the AFL and ULIMO to ineffective policing by ECOMOG and IGNU was another major flaw in the 1993 report. The State Department's instructions require the report to note the government's ability and willingness to prevent or punish killings by forces under its nominal control and by politically motivated private groups. As the report notes, AFL and ULIMO squads in Monrovia executed civilians, as well as targeting members of the NPFL. These squads also roamed certain sections of the capital city looking for members of the Gio and Mano tribes, whom they would torture and kill. ECOMOG and IGNU were also unable or unwilling to prevent AFL and ULIMO from repeated acts of looting in Monrovia and the surrounding area,
ECOMOG and IGNU did, at times, attempt to assert control over AFL and ULIMO. For instance, IGNU ordered the arrest of five ULIMO fighters who had stormed the Monrovia City Court in April, And in March ECOMOG forces attempted to disarm ULIMO. Instances such as these should have been noted in an evaluation of the ability of IGNU and ECOMOG to police territory under their control.
The report's assessment of ECOMOG's involvement in the bombing of civilians, including hospitals and humanitarian aid convoys, is inadequate. The report's cursory description leaves the impression that these bombings were of a limited nature and caused no significant harm. In fact, they caused substantial damage. According to Amnesty International, "hundreds of civilians died when ECOMOG forces bombed and sfrafed towns and villages in NPFL areas." Africa Watch noted that the "civilian population in NPFL territory has become terrorized by the bombing, and often panic at the mere sound of jets," Ironically, these bombings turned civilians away from ECOMOG and increased support for the NPFL. The report should have taken note of this phenomenon.
Worse yet, the report completely fails to note that ECOMOG bombed hospitals and humanitarian convoys, in violation of medical neutrality. For instance, Phebe Hospital was attacked on March 10, and the F.J. Grante Hospital in Greenville on March 18. Humanitarian relief convoys were also attacked, including a convoy from the non-governmental Médecins sans Frontières. These attacks, which were noted by various media, should have been included in the report. In addition, the report should have noted that ECOMOG has apparently failed to conduct a thorough investigations into the bombings by its aircraft.
222
_LIBERIA
The inadequate descriptions of ECOMOG's role in the conflict, as well as the general tone of the report, indicate a bias towards ECOMOG. This is particularly unfortunate given that the same criticism applied to last year's report. Human rights abuses committed by ECOMOG were often referred to as mere allegations, while acts by the NPFL and others were presented as statements of fact, Similarly, the report contends that "the ECOMOG peacekeeping force maintained a commendable record and policy against unlawful behavior." Yet in the very next phrase, the report acknowledges that ECOMOG fighters had killed civilians. In this regard, the report should have noted the December killings, allegedly by ECOMOG forces, of three dock workers who were suspected of stealing.
Like its predecessor, the 1993 report fails to adhere to the State Department instructions by neglecting to mention all of the resolutions passed by the UN in relation to Liberia. It should, for example, have mentioned Security Council resolution 813 of March 1993. The report also should have noted that the July peace accord had no human rights guarantees, and no provisions for investigations of prior human rights abuses or breaches of humanitarian law. Moreover, it could have noted that the United States favored a human rights component in UNOMIL's mandate. Finally, the report should have noted that a number of those appointed to the five-person Council of State and the 35-member transitional parliament had histories of involvement in human rights abuses. These individuals included the notorious NPFL commander Isaac Mussah, as well as two ULIMO nominees — George Duch, who was reputedly linked to killings during the civil war, and Jenkins Scott, who was closely associated with the repressive polioies of former President Samuel Doe.
The report should have also indicated the effect upon civilians of the repeated interference by all parties with humanitarian relief efforts, especially given that it did report on the attempts by different factions to exploit relief operations for military purposes. In August, for instance, the UN sought to stop private relief agencies fi"om delivering food from the Ivory Coast, thereby threatening 220,000 refugees.
Two fmal, minor criticisms of the report should also be registered. First, its discussion of the full complexities of the Liberian conflict would have been enhanced by mentioning'that ULIMO had split into three splinter groups, while fighting also flared between rival factions within the NPFL in October. Second, the section on press freedom would have benefited from mention of several cases in which members of the press were either assaulted or detained and interrogated by ECOMOG and IGNU forces. Similarly, the report should have mentioned the threats made against Gabriel Williams, managing editor of The Inquirer, by a group claiming pro-ULIMO sympathies.
223
CRITIQUE 1993
