SRI LANKA
The 1993 report on Sri Lanka is generally fair and thorough. With the single exception of refugee repatriation, it omits none of the major human ri^ts concerns raised by non-govemmental human rights organizations and presents the reported violations accurately. It treats even-handedly abuses by both governmental and rebel actors, acknowledges some improvements in the government's human rights policies without attributing undue significance to them, and reports statistics that are generally consonant with those provided by independent monitoring groups. It also makes a realistic appraisal of abuses committed by the opposition Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE). However, in line with the State Department's revised instructions for preparation of the Country Reports, the report on Sri Lanka includes abuses by the LTTE in its general discussion of political and other extrajudicial killing. This confiises the actions of government forces and non-govemmental insurgents and blurs the important distinction between international human rights law and humanitarian law.
For all its detail, the report leaves the reader with a somewhat fi-agmented impression of the hmnan rights situation in Sri Lanka. It does not attempt to illuminate the relationship between the incidents and trends that it covers or to draw out the historical, political and social logic behind these events, although this is essential to a proper understanding of conditions in Sri Lanka and the future prospects for human rights.
The State Department notes approvingly the decline of incidents in the most serious categories of human rights abuses—extrajudicial killings, disappearances, torture and arbitrary arrests and detentions. The major monitoring NGOs are in agreement that 1993 witnessed an appreciable reduction in the niunbers of such violations reported. The report gives prominence to the mid-year assassinations of President Ranasinghe Premadasa and chief opposition leader Lalith Athulathmudali, although it does not discuss their larger significance from a human rights standpoint.
The discussion that follows focuses on six areas in which the report is deficient: the institutionalization of political violence; the impunity of government forces implicated in human rights abuses; military operations affecting civilians; large-scale arrest and detention sweeps; refugee resettlement; and emergency regulations. In each of these areas, the report should have provided better context and conveyed more fiilly the scope and gravity of the abuses.
It is necessary to view the reported improvements in the himian rights situation with some caution and restraint, given the continuing high level of political instability and violence, as highlighted by the assassinations of Lalith Athulathmudali and — 10 days later — his rival and the alleged mastermind of his murder. President Premadasa. Sri Lanka's extraordinary history over the last 10 years, of hopes repeatedly raised only to be dashed, must lead any sober observer
341
CRITIQUE 1993
to draw only very tentative conclusions from the changes over the course of a single year.
This chronic political instability is a separate and distinct issue from the ethnic conflict that forms its backdrop. Nonetheless, the free hand that the security forces have been given to counter insurgencies — both the ongoing LTTE conflict in the North and East and the now-suppressed conflict with the Sinhalese Janatha Vimukhti Peramunk (JVP) in the South — has greatly enhanced the role of these forces in targeted political violence against opponents of the government. Political gangsterism has frirther destabilized the political situation and eroded the protection of fundamental rights. Violence and intimidation, long an element of Sri Lankan political culture, were in effect institutionalized under Premadasa. As a result, the Sri Lankan polity is thoroughly contaminated, threatening not only the exercise of political rights per se, but also the rule of law on which a system of human rights protections must be founded.
The 1993 report observes in passing that, "Action to bring to trial security force members accused of exfrajudicial killings remained stalled." It fails, however, to convey either the scope or the continuing implications of the underlying problem of the impunity enjoyed by government and security officials accused of participation in human rights violations.
The report appropriately cites the transfer of jurisdiction of the Mahilanthani case, in which soldiers accused of massacring 35 Tamil villagers were made to stand trial in the civil courts, from a predominantly Tamil to a predominantly Sinhalese venue. It also cites one notorious case of failure to prosecute, involving the "disappearance" of 32 high-school students from Embilipitiya in 1989. It fails, however, to mention other notable instances of impunity, such as the flagrant and widely reported case of former police Deputy Inspector General Udugampola. Udugampola gained notoriety for his own role in "disappearances" and killings during the suppression of the JVP rebellion (including the murder of a prominent lawyer), as well for his allegations of widespread police involvement in death squads. Udugampola returned to Sri Lanka from India, where he had been evading arrest, only to enter into an arrangement with the government. After withdrawing his allegations, he was promptly appointed to a senior administrative position.
The report is rightly critical of the generally inadequate performance of the Presidential Commission on Inquiry into Involuntary Removal of Persons. However, it does not tackle in a systematic fashion the response to abuses of executive authority by official bodies charged with examining human rights issues. Although laced with references to the work of the Human Rights Task Force (HRTF), the report does not adequately discuss this group beyond describing it in general terms as a "quasi-independent government body" charged with monitoring detentions. In fact, the HRTF has been criticized for its failure to assume the
342
SRI LANKA
expanded investigative responsibilities conferred on it by the Supreme Court's interpretation of its mandate.	'
The report notes that Premadasa's assassination and the succession of President Dingiri Banda Wijetunga have resulted in a noticeable relaxation of outri^t government intimidation of opponents and a general lifting of the repressive atmosphere. It shies away, however, from drawing any deeper conclusions about the significance of these events. Although the report alludes obliquely to Premadasa's role in the continuing pattern of systematic human rights abuses, it fails to capture the extent of his culpability as an instigator and director of the violence. Premadasa's passing leaves untouched the system that produced him, and Sri Lanka's institutions of executive authority remain just as vulnerable to gross manipulations in the name of public order. The lawlessness of the law enforcement authorities has become a problem of chronic and systemic proportions, and there continues to be no effective judicial check on abuses. The cumulative consequences of this continuing impunity pose the single most formidable obstacle to reliable enforcement of human rights standards in the fiiture.
The sudden escalation of armed conflict in the North in the autumn of 1993 is occasion for great concern over humanitarian law violations. The report does note that "fighting reached new levels of intensity in the 4th quarter, as both sides launched major offensives" and accurately recoimts Navy and Air Force attacks against unarmed Tamils, notably the machine-gurming of at least 35 civilians crossing Jaffna lagoon in January. Historically, the eruption of fiill-scale armed conflict in the North has been the occasion for widespread suffering on the part of the civilian population. Because the peninsula is under occupation by the LTTE and is effectively sealed off from the rest of the country by the government's defense perimeter, it tends to receive less attention fix)m international observers and from domestic human rights NGOs. The comparative brevity of the report's treatment of war-related human rights issues reflects this bias.
There were several waves of abductions and detentions of Tamil males in Colombo in the second half of 1993, in the wake of Premadasa's assassination and military setbacks for government forces in the North. While the report notes the emergence of a "parallel system of secret detention" in Colombo and the concomitant round-up, detention and torture of "dozens of suspected LTTE sympathizers," this phenomenon appears to be of even greater magnitude than the report suggests, and extends to other major towns in the South besides Colombo. Thousands, not "dozens," of individuals have been arbitrarily detained or arrested in these operations. Over the course of three days in October, more than 1,000 people were reportedly taken into custody in Colombo alone. The report uncritically refers to these detainees as "suspected LTTE sympathizers." It does not make sufficiently clear that, whatever the security pretext, the basis for detaining these mdividuals has been their ethnicity.
343
CRITIQUE 1993
The continuing repatriation of Sri Lankan Tamils from the Indian state of Tamil Nadu raises a series of serious human rights concerns. The report gives these short shrift, noting only: "During 1993 nearly 7,000 of [the 70,000 Sri Lankan Tamils in Indian refiigee camps] returned to Sri Lanka. The UNHCR operated freely in Sri Lanka, supporting government refiigee relief efforts in the north and east and fimding transit camps for persons returning from India." The report fails to mention, let alone discuss, such issues as the overcrowding in transit camps for repatriates unable to return to their home areas because of security conditions or infrastructure collapse, and the security risks facing repatriates who are able to return to their home areas, including arrests, abuse and harassment by government security forces, military assaults and threats from the LTTE. The repatriation problem is of course two-sided; the Indian government has been accused of forcible repatriation and is certainly pressuring Sri Lankan Tamils to leave the camps in India.
Inasmuch as significant numbers of repatriates are unable to return home, the resultant influx of refiigees has swollen the population of the internally displaced in Sri Lanka and severely taxed the resources of the government to provide for their basic needs. Residents of UNHCR camps in the Northeast face a variety of hardships, including forced labor at the hands of police and froops in government-controlled areas and restrictions on movement in LTTE-controlled areas. It is hardly accurate for the report to say that "UNHCR operated freely" when the camps are administered by the Sri Lankan government, UNHCR carmot effectively shield residents from abuses, and UNHCR operations are helping to undergird a repatriation policy with grave human rights implications.
Repatriates who can be resettled face particular combat-related risks in the Northeast, especially where the resettlement is coercive. Resettlement is an active military policy, forcing repatriates to return against their will, and at great risk, to areas of intense recent conflict. Although continued repatriation efforts pose the possibility of large-scale human rights violations, a number of Western governments, including Switzerland, are preparing repatriation programs for Sri Lankans denied asylimi. Most human rights monitoring organizations oppose any repatriation, even to the South of the country. The report's complete silence on this issue is disturbing.
Finally, the largely cosmetic changes to Sri Lanka's longstanding emergency regulations (ER) have not appreciably diminished their function as a legal pretext for government human rights violations. The revisions to the ER prohibit secret detention and require the publication of all official places of detention, as well as monthly visits by magistrates, notification of detentions and the provision of lists of names of detainees to magistrates. The report correctly refrains from attributing any great significance to these changes, observing that "compliance with the revised ER is still far from complete, due to the lack of any
344
SRI LANKA
effective enforcement mechanism," and adding that the changes in the ER "have been largely observed in the breach." These remarks are generally in accerd with the conclusions of the major human rights organizations.
One matter of special concem for non-govemmental human rights monitors in Sri Lanka is the impact on the right of free association of the ominous NGO regulations promulgated under the ER at the end of 1993. The report notes that, "The law imposed financial reporting requirements on all NGOs, but as of the end of the year it was not clear what additional practical effect the new law would have on NGO's operating in Sri Lanka." However, these "financial reporting requirements" are much more onerous than the report makes them sound, since they include disclosure of information regarding disbursements as well as the names and addresses of donees. The new regulations define NGOs broadly, although they appear to exclude human rights NGOs. Their intent appears to be intimidatory rather than regulatory. The regulations, which are based on the recommendations of the Presidential Commission of Inquiry into NGOs established by Premadasa in 1990, threaten a far-reaching clampdown on future NGO activity in the future.
345
CRITIQUE 1993
