LITHUANIA
The State Department's 1993 report continues its comprehensive coverage of Lithuania's quest for a viable independent and democratic path of development, Lithuania was the first Baltic republic to proclaim its restored independence on March 11, 1990. The Soviet Union recognized Lithuania's independence on September 6, 1991, shortly after the failed coup of August 19-21. Lithuania then entered the UN and the 51-nation CSCE. On May 14, 1993, Lithuania gained membership in the Council of Europe along with Estonia,
Political reforms accelerated after Vytautas Landsbergis, Chairman of the Supreme Council, lost a referendum on May 25, 1992, on his proposal for a strong presidency. CSCE observers adjudged as free and fair the parliamentary elections of October 25 and November 15, which also brought also approval of a new Constitution and a restored parliament, the Seimas. The Lithuanian Democratic Labor Parly (LDLP) won a majority of 73 out of the 141 seats in parhament. The LDLP is the successor to the Communist Party of Lithuania, which had broken away from the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in 1989. LDLP leader Algirdas Brazauskas had led the breakaway as First Secretary of the Lithuanian Communist Party. The most popular politician in Lithuania, Brazauskas was appointed acting president by the Seimas, replacing Landsbergis, Brazauskas was popularly elected president on February 14, 1993, receiving 60% of the vote. Parliament approved the President's nominee, Adolfas Slezevicius, to be Prime Minister in March 1993.
The State Department report, while detailed, has a number of weaknesses. It gives inadequate background on the economy, as well as on Lithuania's relations with its Polish minority and with Russia, and the controversy over the rehabilitation of war criminals. It is also insufficiently attentive to a number of civil and political rights, most notably the rights of minorities.
The disruption of Soviet trade patterns and the weakness of the new market sector caused a continued deterioration in the sphere of economic and social rights. The Lithuanian government could not bring about an economic turnaround in 1993 despite the LDLP's majority and the disunity among its main opposition parties. Low inflation rates associated with tight-money preparations for the introduction of the new currency, the lita, on June 25 began to give way to higher monthly rates of six to seven percent by year's end. Industrial production fell by about 50% in 1993, troubled by the continued non-competitiveness of state-owned enterprises and the high costs of fuel imported from Russia at world market prices. A little more than a third of state production had been privatized by late 1993. Consumer goods were high-priced for thé domestic market and shoddy by foreign market standards. The Ignalina nuclear power plant is an obsolescent health hazard.
224
LITHUANIA
yet its rebuilding is not ftmdable at present. Improper nuclear waste disposal and illicit trafficking in nuclear materials compounds the plant's threat to public health and security.
Despite workers' freedom to organize, bargain collectively and strike, new independent trade unions still struggle for membership against opposition from state enterprises. Official unemployment figures of around 1.5% concealed much hi^er real rates: more than 10% of employees worked part time, or not at all while on forced leave. Real wages bottomed out at an estimated 32% of 1989 levels, with food costing over two-thirds the average salary. The largely privatized agricultural sector struggled to collect food payments, obtain credit and compete with imports, which the government eventually limited, along with e)q)orts. Economic dislocations and failures planted the seeds for the possible future erosion of democracy and human rights in Lithuania. In this environment, the sense of alienation, political apathy and public distrust of politicians and parliament grew dramatically.
Judicial and legal reforms continued, though marred by occasional reports of police brutality. The scarcity of qualified registered attorneys impairs the rule of law and commerce and undermines suspects' right to counsel from the time of arrest. Organized crime grew almost unchecked in 1993. Gangs extorted payments from businesses and fiirther corrupted the governmental bureaucracy. It is criminal gangs, rather than the government, that have posed the most serious threat to the ri^it of free expression. Gangsters threatened and burned the house of a journalist specializing in organized crime, Vytas Lingys, deputy editor-in-cfeief of the daily Respublika, and then murdered him on his way to work. Organized crime threatens the very basis of Lithuanian democracy, infiinging directly on the civil and economic rigjits of thousands of people, often with the connivance of venal or underpaid government officials.
In response to the crime wave, the government extended the limit on preventive detention pending formal charges from 72 hours to two months. A check on the procedure is provided, however, by the requirement that a detained suspect be brought before a court within 48 hours of arrest for a ruling on the legality of the detention. There is no guarantee that this procedure, which the report depicts as "potentially open to abuse," can effectively curb the "Mafia." Hence the rising clamor for lifting the ban on privately owned guns, waived only for hunters.
The Constitutional Court, active since September, rules on issues of constitutionality on official, not private appeals. In its fifth case, the Court found unconstitutional parliamentary rules harming new post-election factions. (The ruling stemmed from an appeal against the banning of three new ri^t-wing factions.) Efforts to prosecute pro-Soviet Communist leaders, KGB officials and military officers implicated in the violent attacks on the television tower and the parliament building on the night of January 12-13, 1991, when Soviet troops killed
225
CRITIQUE 1993
14 protestors and wounded 120 others, ran up against the lack of a signed extradition treaty. One suspect who did not get away, however, was the former Soviet General Ginutis Taurinskas, head of paramilitary training at the time, alleged to have collaborated in the conspiracy to overturn Lithuania's nationalist government. Lithuanian agents arrested Taurinskas, who had been in hiding, just before he collected a Russian passport with which to make good his escape.
Questions of citizenship and naturalization lack the saliency in Lithuania that they have in the other two Baltic republics. Unlike them, Lithuania has a strong indigenous majority, with 80.6% ethnic Lithuanians in the population of 3,751,000. Ethnic minorities include 9.7% Russians, 7.1% Poles and smaller proportions of other ethnic groups. Some of these non-Lithuanians arrived as part of the massive population transfers organized by the Soviet Union, which contravened Article 49 of the Geneva Convention as regards the rights of inhabitants of occupied territories. Because of their strong majority, ethnic Lithuanians did not fear extinction as did the smaller indigenous majority populations of Estonia and Latvia. As a result, the Lithuanian Supreme Cotmcil passed an interim citizenship law on November 3, 1989, which gave the option of citizenship ~ without the minimum residence or language requirements stipulated in Estonian law and Latvian draft law — to all permanent residents of Lithuania who registered their assent to citizenship within a two-year period. Fewer than two percent of non-Lithuanians remained non-citizens.
The Supreme Council replaced the interim law with the law of December 10, 1991, in effect December 11. This recognized as citizens those who had been citizens of Lithuania before June 15, 1940 and their children and grandchildren, as well as those who became residents between January 9, 1919 and June 15,1940 and their children and grandchildren, as long as they were residing in Lithuania on December 10, 1991. Most children bom of at least one Lithuanian citizen gained Lithuanian citizenship, as well as children bom in Lithuania to stateless parents. Emigré and exiled former Lithuanian citizens living abroad, and their children, gained the right to apply for Lithuanian citizenship, even if they are already citizens of another country, under an amendment to the citizenship legislation passed on December 7, 1993.
For others, citizenship law stipulates a naturalization procedure requiring ten years' residency; a knowledge of spoken and written Lithuanian; knowledge of the basic provisions of the Constitution of Lithuania; being stateless or renouncing citizenship in another state; and swearing an oath of allegiance to the republic. Given the relatively small numbers of non-citizens left in Lithuania, the government would have risked little in omitting the language requirement and instead offering free courses in Lithuanian.
Among those excluded from citizenship because of ineligibility for naturalization are persons who have committed crimes against humanity or acts of
226
LITHUANIA
genocide and persons who took part in criminal activities against the RepubUc of Lithuania. By withholding citizenship from previously convicted criminals, Lithuania is effectively adding an additional ex post facto punishment to that imposed by the criminal law, which would violate Article 15 of the ICCPR, to which Lithuania acceded in 1991. By withholding citizenship from those addicted to alcohol or drugs, Lithuania may be administering what Human Rights Watch/Helsinki has called "an especially cruel, arbitrary, and utterly unjustifiable" punishment that would violate Article 7 of the ICCPR. The ban on addicts discourages them from seeking needed treatment, as does the ban on those infected with "especially dangerous infectious diseases." The fact that these limitations affect only a small fraction of the total non-ethnic Lithuanian population does not remove the question of conformity with human rights standards.
The report should have done more to explain the recent improvement in relations between the Lithuanian government and the country's Polish minority. On September 4,1991, after the coup attempt in Russia, the Lithuanian government and parliament suspended elected local government councils in the heavily Polish Salcininkai and Vilnius (rural) districts and the Russian-settled town of Snieckus (now called Visaginas), charging that the councils had been in league with the Moscow coup plotters. This action affected not only alleged coup plotters; the local public's rights to non-discrimination and representation were in fact violated. All replacement administrators sent in to govern the affected areas were ethnic Lithuanians.
In a return to due process, elections were held on November 22, 1992. Because voter turnout was below the requisite 50%, a new round of elections was held on February 14,1993, with some run-offs to follow. Insufficient voter turnout in Visaginas voided the elections there a second time. Relations with the Polish minority have since improved. The government has encouraged minority cultural life, supported pre-university education in minority languages and recognized the equal status of the minority language at all state levels of administration where there is a concentration of a given minority. There is religious freedom. Polish representatives in recent years have championed the claims of ethnic Polish residents to ownership of land that they or their families once owned around Vilnius city. Polish representatives continue to lobby for higher education in Polish.
According to the report, "Government rehabilitation of over 50,000 persons charged with anti-Soviet crimes during the Stalinist era led to reports in 1991 that some people alleged to have been involved in crimes against humanity during the Nazi occupation were also benefitting from this rehabilitation." As the Critique also commented last year, considerable pressure from abroad was needed to get the Prosecutor's Office and court to reconsider any of the rehabilitations. The rehabilitations of two people suspected of crimes against humanity were overturned in 1992, with four more cases pending on appeal to the Supreme Court. Acting
227
CRITIQUE 1993
President Brazauskas told a delegation of Holocaust specialists from Israel at the end of 1992 that he was ready to review pardons issued to Nazi collaborators by the Landsbergis government, and to work with Israeli Nazi-hunters in the effort to screen the more than 50,000 pardons issued to individuals convicted for resisting the Soviet occupation. Since 1991,1,500 applications for pardon have been turned down, with another 1,500 pending. The screening has continued under the 1990 rehabilitation law. The law forbids the issuing of pardons to anyone involved in killings and acts of genocide against Lithuanian Jews. By 1992, the Prosecutor's Office had revoked just one of 27,000 pardons it has issued; "We cannot review every pardon," said the official in charge of screening applications. The Supreme Court has revoked five of the 25,000 pardons it issued. During 1993, the Supreme Court decided on four more armulments and received appeals from the Procurator General to cancel the rehabilitation of three more war criminals convicted by the Soviets and recently rehabilitated.
On September 8, 1992, near the end of the presidency of Vytautas Landsbergis, Russia and Lithuania reached an agreement on troop withdrawals by August 31, 1993. The number of former Soviet troops had gone down to about 19,000 by mid-December, 1992, from some 35,000 at the beginning of the year. Just before midnight on August 31, the deadline for withdrawal, a train carrying the last Russian garrison troops crossed the frontier. With only small detachments left behind to close bases and ship out ammunition, Lithuania became the first Baltic republic to be cleared of Russian troops. By year's end about 18,000 remained in Latvia (15,000) and Estonia (3,000), a total of more than 130,000 having been withdrawn from the whole Bahic region. The question of Russian troop and supply movements across Lithuania to Russia's isolated Koenigsberg enclave, and its possible demilitarization, remained to be resolved, as did the matter of pensions of retired service personnel, and the provision of medical supplies for them. Lithuania and Russia have so far managed to resolve most of their outstanding differences, and should be able to continue doing so, barring an ultra-nationalist takeover in Moscow.
To sum up, the State Department report describes in helpftil detail Lithuania's rapid progress, despite a difficult legacy and grave economic decline. The report's findings largely uphold President Brazauskas's characterization of Lithuania to the UN General Assembly as a democratic state resting on the rule of law, where no distinction is made among individuals according to their nationality, religion or political convictions. Some questions about human rights remain for the relatively few residents excluded from citizenship; for the ethnic minorities in certain matters of cultural rights; for the Poles especially, over the issue of property rights; and for those — regardless of ethnicity — who seek the truth in the political rehabilitation proceedings. Lithuania shares a number of lingering problems with other former Soviet republics. Support for the government is still lukewarm, and
228
LITHUANIA
there are occasional signs of nostalgia for the past. As President Brazauskas told the General Assembly on September 28,1993:
Nostalgia for the past is still alive in most of the post-Communist countries when the authoritarian state ensured the minimal needs of the people at the expense of their freedom. If joint efforts are not taken in time their nostalgic feelings for the long socialist past could divert the development of some states into a direction undesirable for all of us.
Future State Department reports would do well to be attentive to such latent threats to human rights in Lithuania and other parts of the former Soviet Union.
229
CRITIQUE 1993
