	LATVIA
The 1993 State Department report on Latvia describes the human rights situation in helpful detail. On the other hand, it lacks analysis of some of the disturbing implications for human rights and social peace of recent legislation on the rights of non-citizens. Once again, the year under review did not see the Latvian government live fiilly up to the challenge of reconciling Latvia's obligations to uphold the equal rights of all persons with the country's aspirations to reassert and protect its nationhood.
The report's breadth of coverage is useful during these times of great change in Latvia's domestic and international orientation. Latvia declared its renewed independence from Soviet rule on August 21, 1991, during the Moscow coup attempt. The Soviet Union recognized the independence of Latvia and the other Baltic states on September 6,1991, and in 1992, Latvia joined the UN and the CSCE. During 1993, the country continued the task of setting a post-Soviet domestic course toward reform and recovery. The elections of June 5-6 replaced the old Supreme Soviet, elected in 1990, with a restored 100-seat Saeima. Two of the eight winning parties in the single-list elections — Latvia's Way with 36 seats and the Farmers Union with 12 — formed the governing coalition.
The most important shortcoming of the 1993 report is its failure to evaluate in detail recent legislation pertaining to the rights of minorities and citizens and its conformity with international human rights standards. This Critique considers also the conflicting pressures on the Latvian government to make its laws both more and less inclusive, and suggests some ways to reconcile Latvian nationhood and human rights.
Individual rights are proclaimed in the Constitutional Law of December 10, 1991, "The Rights and Obhgations of a Citizen and a Person." Those rights were generally respected in 1993. On the other hand, the report notes "recurring allegations of corruption among police and security forces" and of police brutality. The protection of the rights of military personnel remains inadequate. Grossly substandard prison conditions endanger especially the health of juveniles and leave them unprotected from attacks by other inmates. Although the courts are showing signs of independence, as in the registration abuse cases cited below, reform of the Soviet-era legal system remains in its early stages. The report might also have added that organized crime threatens people's persons and possessions.
The media are free, diverse, struggling financially, and on occasion must resist official pressure or respond to libel suits. In the area of freedom of association, the Latvian government banned the Latvian Union for the Protection of the Rights of Veterans, the Association of Russian Citizens and the Union of Communists in 1993 for being "subversive." No constitutional court exists to test the conformity of this ban with the 1991 Constitutional Law and international human rights standards.
207
CRITIQUE 1993
There are no prisoners of conscience in Latvia, Criminal procedural law continues, however, to vest extensive powers of detention in the prosecutor's office. Under its interpretation of those powers, the prosecutor's office had detained the former first secretary of the Latvian Communist Party, Alfred Rubiks, since his arrest on August 23, 1991 on charges of alleged participation in conspiracies against the Latvian state, Rubiks remained in jail through 1993 and his trial began at year's end. The report omits questions as to the conformity of such proceedings with the accused's rights of due process, among them the provision under Article 9 (3) of the ICCPR that "anyone arrested or detained on a criminal charge shall be . . , entitled to trial within a reasonable time or to release." (Latvia acceded to the ICCPR in 1992.)
The Latvian economy is showing signs of recovery associated with a firm new currency, the lots, and relatively low irrflation. However, shortages of ftmds cripple agriculture and hamper the rehabilitation of social and health services. The transition from central planning and state ownership to a market system and private enterprise, together witti the redirecting of foreign economic relations, has brought rising unemployment and widespread poverty, especially among pensioners. The report notes the rights of labor to unionize, bargain collectively and strike. Its expanded coverage of women's rights accurately notes that women face mounting pay and job discrimination, in violation of the Constitutional law of 1991. Women's protection against domestic abuse remains inadequate.
A delegation from the UN Commission on Human Rights visited Latvia from October 27-30, 1992, and its report serves as a useful reference point in evaluating progress in human rights during the year that followed. The delegation found that Latvian laws on citizenship and related matters were generally in conformity with international law a finding that is reconsidered below. However, the UN found a sense of insecurity among resident non-citizens owing to uncertainties about their rights and prospects, and this continus. At issue are rights under laws governing registration, language use and citizenship.
A registration of citizens and residents began in the spring of 1992 and lasted until June 1993. This process was marked by abuses in the form of many unjustified denials of registration to non-citizens. By 1993, registration had been denied to some 150,000 residents, in violation of the provision that only active-duty Russian military personnel and their families were to be denied regisfration. After considerable international confroversy, including a blistering report by Human Rights Watch/Helsinki, the government dismissed the head of the Department of Immigration and Citizenship.
Language law in Latvia protects multilingualism in education and culture, but requires the mastery of Latvian in all schools. If carried out to the letter in the near terra (so far not the case), this could mean staff cuts in Russian schools or their complete closure: only five to seven percent of school principals and their deputies
208
_LATVIA
can meet the demand of fluency in Latvian. Prior law guaranteed the right to education in the Russian language. However, on March 31, 1992, parliament eliminated that guarantee; the Law on Languages now simply says that citizens of non-Latvian origin "have the right to education m their native language," but with no guarantee of state support. This prompted the Russian Foreign Ministry to express its dissatisfaction on the demotion of the Russian language. President Guntis Ulmanis has offered assurances that the government has no intention of leaving Russian speakers (40% of the population) without secondary school teaching in their language.
The language law requires that non-speakers of Latvian acquire a proficiency in that language sufficient to enable them to carry out their professions, and to deal with the public where required. Police officers must learn Latvian, As of 1993, the law had not been stringently applied. It puts pressure on the government, however, to avoid discrimination in employment by augmenting language-training facilities. The need for improved language training, apart from questions of the willingness of non-Latvian speakers to leam Latvian, is given special urgency by the naturalization requirements in pending citizenship legislation.
Voting rights in the 1993 elections were denied to approximately 700,000 adult residents from the roughly 34% of the population who are non-citizens. This disenfi"anchisement, caused by a delay in citizen law reform and the naturalization of immigrant residents, reflected the legislative response in 1991 to a radical decline in the proportion of ethnic Latvians as a result of the massive deportations and immigration that took place under the Soviet regime. Ethnic Latvians numbered 75.5% of the population in 1935, but after occupations, deportations and imposed immigration, the figure had fallen to only 52%, according to the 1989 census. It has since risen to 53.5% of a total population of about 2,576,000 in January 1993. Latvians are the minority in all seven largest cities, and make up only a third of the inhabitants of the capital, Riga. The disenfranchisement of non-citizens raises questions about the compatibility of Latvian laws with the country's extensive obligations under the international human rights agreements it has ratified or otherwise affirmed, as well as under its own Constitutional Law.
The authors of the draft citizenship law, contained in the Supreme Soviet resolution of October 15, 1991, sought to "liquidate the consequences of the Soviet Union's occupation and annexation of Latvia" and renew the legal rights of citizens of the Republic of Latvia, by reinstating the citizenship law of 1919. They intended to guard against a shift in the balance of political power to those who came to Latvia during the Soviet occupation. (Paradoxically, despite this widespread distrust of Russians, there was considerable support for independence in 1990-1991 among Russian-speakers.)
209
CRITIQUE 1993
Subsequent draft citizenship laws proposed in the newly elected Saeima in 1993 have differed in their specific naturalization requirements. All of the draft laws since 1991 have followed the same principle of legal continuity with the preoccupation citizenship law of 1938. The 1991 draft automatically extended Latvian citizenship to persons who were citizens on the date of the Soviet invasion — June 17, 1940 — and their direct descendants who registered before July 1, 1992. This excluded about 34% of the total resident population, of which Russians (part of the minority segment of "Russian speakers") also make up 34%. Aliens could acquire citizenship if they qualified for naturalization under rules to be established by law under the new Saeima.
The November 1993 draft citizenship law, based on a draft submitted by the Latvian Way Party, emerged from parliamentary debate and international scrutiny for passage in the spring of 1994. It affirmed the right to citizenship of those who were citizens of the Republic of Latvia as of June 17, 1940 and their descendants, including children of mothers or fathers who were citizens when the child was bom and stateless orphans of unknown parents. In its naturalization prerequisites, the 1993 citizenship bill tilted toward the exclusionary side of compromise between zero and no option. True, it reduced the residency requirement to ten years from the 16 stipulated in the 1991 guidelines. But residency requirements are not the main cause of exclusion. The law set the language requirement as proficiency in conversation and waived it for persons older than 65. Applicants must display a basic knowledge of the Latvian Constitution, have a legal source of income, be stateless or renounce their previous citizenship, and swear an oath of loyalty to the Republic of Latvia.
The most confroversial addition to the 1991 guidelines was the provision for naturalization quotas, to be set by the Cabinet of Ministers with the Saeima's approval. The proposal for such quotas, which has generated great uncertainty, may not survive fmal passage. On the other hand, citizenship law without quotas may not survive the popular referendum it is likely to undergo. With or without quotas, Latvia has taken the principle of legal succession from the pre-occupation Baltic states further than either Estonia or Lithuania. Alternate drafts submitted to parliament in 1993 were even more exclusionary than the draft proposed by Latvia's Way.
The Latvian public has not been made aware of the possible international repercussions of the citizenship law, such as admission to the Council of Europe. President Ulmanis, Prime Minister Valdis Birkavs and the cabinet must reckon with public opinion, which tends to oppose liberal citizenship laws even more than the government professes to do.
Against charges of ethnic discrimination, the government cites the fact that 30% of ethnic Russians in Latvia are citizens. It can also point to the legal and practical protection of the religious and cultural rights of mmorities. The
210
_LATVIA
government estimates that 400,000 non-Latvian citizens of Latvia had the right to vote in 1993, one fourth of all citizens of Latvia. Language and residence and other prerequisites not specifying ethnicity are stipulated in the 1993 draft citizenship law before the Saeima. These requirements do not mark a direct violation of the international human rigjit to citizenship, which is very much left to the states of the world to define. But the possibility of quotas, as well as the unequal rights of non-citizen residents, keep the issue of discrimination to the fore.
The discriminatory aspect of quotas is accentuated by sections 1-4 of Article 11 of the draft law. That article waives quotas, and therefore puts at the head of the line descendants of the indigenous Latvians or Livs and their spouses, whether the applicants are residents or intend to be such; immigrants as of June 1940 and their descendants (other than those entering under the Latvia-USSR Bilateral Assistance Pact of October 6, 1939); and persons forcibly brought to Latvia during the German occupation and their descendants residing in Latvia.
Article 11 would also naturalize, outside quotas, persons married to Latvian citizens for at least five years and resident in Latvia for at least three, and those found by the Cabinet of Ministers to have rendered special services to the Republic of Latvia. For the first time, birth on Latvian soil brings an advantage, but only over others subjected to the quotas. These quotas evoked objections from the European Community on human rights grounds, and correctly so.
The lack of citizenship brings with it legal disadvantages. For example, non-citizens may not take part in local elections. They are excluded fi"om occupying state positions, barred fi"om setting up new political parties and from owning land (although they may lease land and own buildings on it). Non-citizens are entitled to fewer privatization vouchers than citizens. They may not own firearms, and they must spend hard currency to buy re-entry permits.
The UN and CSCE missions to Latvia in 1992-1993 rejected claims by Russians and others that Latvian law in force at the time violated human rights. At the same time, they strongly urged the settlement of what a UN resolution termed "unresolved issues" affecting tìie rights of non-citizens in Latvia and Estonia, through more inclusive legislation for both humanitarian and political reasons. The United States has made no charge of human rights violations, and the report is noncommittal on the matter. But quotas, if retained in final law, together with inequalities in non-citizens' rights, increase the discriminatory aspects of citizenship law, in violation of Latvian constitutional principles and of the letter and the spirit of the 1965 International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, as well as Article 2 of the ICCPR and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
The requirement of competency in spoken Latvian remains a barrier to naturalization. According to the 1989 census, only a quarter of non-citizens speak
211
CRITIQUE 1993
the language, and there is widespread anxiety over the language requirement and the possibility that the language examination might be administered unfairly.
The 1993 law bars the naturalization of persons convicted for attempting to undermine or overthrow by unconstitutional means the independent and democratic Republic of Latvia; persons who now serve in the ranks of the military, internal security forces or security agencies of a foreign country; and secret informers or agents of a foreign power. The report fails to analyze the human rights issues created by the more controversial disqualifications for citizenship in the 1993 draft law. By excluding from citizenship the approximately 60,000 retired former Soviet military and security personnel and their families — or up to 200,000 persons in all — Latvia appears to be punishing individuals for their past political associations. This is in violation of Article 22 of the ICCPR. Further, by withholding citizenship from previously convicted common criminals, Latvia is effectively adding an additional ex post facto punishment, which would violate Article 15 of the ICCPR.
A Russian-conducted poll in Latvia showed that 69% of Russians there wanted Latvian citizenship. Preliminary results of the registration of 1992-1993 showed that 96% of over 600,000 registered non-citizens desired Latvian citizenship. The political challenge will be to find a reasonable middle ground between the nationalist desire to overcome the legacy of Soviet occupation and assert Latvia's nationhood, and the fulfillment of Russian-speakers' claims to equality. The potential for further protests and rising tensions is considerable, and these tensions are augmented by the continued presence of Russian forces in Latvia. President Boris Yeltsin and other Russian government leaders have linked the withdrawal of Russian troops to an end to alleged violations of the rights of the Russian-speaking minority. There has also been some rash Russian talk about "ethnic cleansing," an entirely inappropriate use of the term. In fact, Russian forces have been drawn down from 57,000 troops when withdrawals began in 1992, to fewer than 30,000 by the fall, about 15,000 by the end of 1993 and about 7,000 near the end of March 1994.
Foreign assistance may well be needed to build housing and other facilities in Russia for returning officers and their families, and thus remove a material obstacle to withdrawal. In addition, the Latvian government should carry out recommendations by both Human Rights Watch/Helsinki and the Saeima Human Rights Committee and establish procedures for reviewing and appealing decisions of the Citizen and Immigration Department. Urgent measures are needed to help and encourage the Latvian government to expand free language instruction, and to strive to shepherd a quota-free citizenship law through the test of a possible referendum. Policymakers in Latvia and Russia should be urged by their friends abroad to see that the interests of both countries are served by social peace. This can be advanced by removing legal discrimination against non-citizen residents and
212
_LATVIA
by setting reasonably accessible requirements for citizenship naturalization that uphold internationally recognized human rights. The 1992 UN mission, as last year's Critique noted, recommended that the law on citizenship be passed promptly, with a cap on the language requirement at age 50; that the criteria for registration as residents be clearly worded so as to avoid being arbitrarily applied; that non-Latvians should not be excluded from the privatization process; and that all incitement to ethnic strife should be banned. Those recommendations have been partly heeded and partly ignored. They remain timely.
213
CRITIQUE 1993
