MOROCCO
An examination of Morocco's human rights record in 1993 leads to the inexorable conclusion that what the government appears to have given with one hand, it has taken away with the other; what it has given officially, it has withheld unofficially. While progress undoubtedly has been made, Morocco has not come as far as it would have the world believe. In some instances, the State Department report has captured and conveyed this sleight of hand; in others, it has not.
The report at times overestimates the extent of progress in Morocco, and nowhere more so than in the case of the "disappeared." These are the hundreds of political prisoners, many of them Western Saharans, who have been abducted over the past 30 years by Moroccan security forces and held incommunicado before vanishing. Their whereabouts have never been accounted for by Moroccan authorities. The State Department report is correct to say that no new "disappearances" were reported in 1993. However, the fact that persons are still being held without acknowledgment by the government constitutes a continuing abuse that cannot be glossed over. Amnesty International has reported that as many as 500 individuals remain unaccounted for. This failure on the part of the Moroccan government must be seen as evidence of a continuing official sanctioning of the tactic of "disappearance," and an implied threat that it may be used again in times of crisis.
Another example of the report's unwarranted optimism is the case of the release, by royal pardon, of Noubir Amaoui and Driss Laghnimi, two labor leaders convicted of e?q)ressing antigovemment views in the press. Although the report accurately discloses that a third labor leader, Ahmed Belaichi, was still being held for a similar offense, it failed to report that within 24 hours of the release of Amaoui and Lahnimi, 24 members of the Moroccan Workers Union were arrested for allegedly "interfering with the rights of others to work." The report should also have commented on the fact that the royal pardons were only granted after the first round of parliamentary elections, Morocco's first in nine years.
On the issue of the elections themselves, the report indicates that in the second round the opposition parties lost ground amidst popular claims of election fraud. But it fails to mention the alleged arrest and torture of 47 persons for protesting election fraud, as well as the reported stabbing of an opposition party member just prior to the June vote.
Appropriately, the report does not overstate the significance of the first election of a woman to the Moroccan parliament, for in general women's rights still lag far behind those of Moroccan males. However, in its comments on the 1993 modifications to the Code of Personal Status, which governs the civil status of Moroccan women, the report fails to address the practical effects of the
246
MOROCCO
modifications on women's rigiits although, in fairness, it may yet be too early to draw any firm conclusions about these changes. For example, the report points out that the modifications now permit a wife to divorce a husband who announces an intent to take a second wife, and grants a wife unspecified allowance rights based on the husband's income. Actual allowance awards should be monitored in the future to assess whether this modification gives Moroccan women an enforceable right or merely an illusory one.
In many cases, low-ranking officials act to disallow in practice rights that are granted in theory under Moroccan law. The widespread impunity enjoyed by such officials suggests governmental sanction, a point apparently lost on the State Department. The report does, however, note some specific instances of restrictions, such as the blocked distribution of two editions of Le Monde that allegedly contained reports casting doubt on the fairness of the Moroccan elections, and the questioning of a British journalist who was reporting on the trial of Mohammed Tabit (see below). In addition, the editor of the French language monthly Al yisjoj was refused permission to leave Morocco by officials at the Rabat airport, with no explanation. On October 21,1993, the reporter and writer Abdelkader Chaoui was forbidden from leaving Morocco by police officials for the fifth time. Soukaina Oufkir, daughter of a general executed in 1972, was denied a passport without explanation by Moroccan authorities.
The case of Mohammed Tabit provokes more questions about official Moroccan governmental policy than it answers. Tabit was arrested, tried, convicted and executed on hundreds of charges of rape and assault, allegedly perpetrated over a period of years while he was a member of the police force and Commissioner of a Casablanca precinct. The State Department report hints at the possibility that Tabit may not have received a fair trial, but accepts his guilt at face value, notwithstanding the fact (ignored by the State Department) that the trial was closed to the public and the press after the second day. Also, certain governmental officials were removed from their posts without comment, allegedly in connection with the Tabit affair. Finally, the fact that Flametta Rocco, a British reporter covering the trial, was harassed in Casablanca and had her notes confiscated at the airport, raises doubts as to whether the Tabit trial was designed as a public relations exercise to distract attention from more widespread abuse and corruption within the police forces. The report's failure to dig deeper into this area, and its eagerness to accept the official government line, is particularly regrettable in this case.
The report fails to mention any activity in Western Sahara in 1993, restricting itself to a historical summary of the sovereignty issue that has afflicted the country since the withdrawal of Spanish forces in 1975. However, the situation in Western Sahara during 1993 deserves comment on several fronts. First, the long-anticipated referendum on the future of the territory did not lake place, as expected, in 1993. Political maneuvering continued to take place, with concurrent widespread
247
CRITIQUE 1993
reports of hundreds of people of Sahrawi origin having been arrested and harassed on suspicion of supporting Western Saharan independence from Morocco. It should come as no surprise that Moroccan forces would react in such a fashion, given the repeated strong statements by the Moroccan government that it considers Western Sahara to be "irrevocably" part of Morocco. The situation in Western Sahara appears to be another example of Morocco's tendency to show one face to the world — in this case allowing for the possibility of a UN-sponsored referendum on the future of the country — while doing what it can locally to guarantee the outcome it desires.
Second, in the context of Western Sahara, the report should have addressed the issue of the hundreds of Sahrawis who "disappeared" after being arrested by Moroccan security forces between 1975-1988. In addition to those unaccounted for, hundreds of former "disappeared" continue to suffer restrictions on their movement and freedom of speech. The report's complete lack of coverage of these issues is, to say the least, puzzling.
248
NICARAGUA
The State Department's 1993 report continues the trend of improved reporting on human rights violations in Nicaragua. At the same time, however, it still retains some of the indications of bias that have undermined the objectivity and credibility of previous years' reports on this country. This bias is particularly apparent in the report's discussion of the Nicaraguan Supreme Court and the Tripartite Commission on political violence.
The situation in Nicaragua is fractured, complex and riven by political polarities, as the report acknowledges in its introduction. As it remarks elsewhere, "Nicaragua is so polarized that few can agree on the facts, much less the interpretation of the facts. " In view of this, it is disturbing that the report should be marked by questionable assertions and gross generalizations that are not, or cannot be, substantiated. One example is the assertion that, "Non-Sandinista appointees [to the courts] are widely considered by Nicaraguans to be more impartial than their Sandinista counterparts." Another is the comment that, "There were reports in February that EPS [Sandinista Popular Army] members targeted women for rape during field operations in the Central Zelaya region...." But in the next sentence the report adds that, "However, it was not possible to obtain independent verification of these complaints." If such was the case, the assertion should either have been omitted altogether, or the source cited and its credibility evaluated.
The political situation in 1993 remained complex and highly charged. Although the civilian government is headed by President and Commander-in-Chief Violeta Chamorro, of the Union Coalition (UNO), operational control of the armed and security forces remain under the same military leadership as the previous Sandinista government. The UNO legislative bloc, however, broke with the President and at the end of 1993 most of its parties continued to boycott the legislature. The Sandinista party, by contrast, largely supported the government position in the legislature during 1993. The situation is fiirther complicated by the existence of armed groups which operate outside of the law: re-armed former contra rebels (recontras) and re-armed former Sandinista army soldiers (recompas). These two groupings have on occasion joined forces in armed opposition to the government. Lastly, additional confusion arises as a result of the tendency to identify the Sandinista party with all individuals, within or outside of government, who had any affiliation with the prior government.
Past reporting by the State Department has only served to muddy these waters. Certain principles of responsibility should be acknowledged and adhered to. As the elected government, the Chamorro administration must accept responsibility for the acts of its armed forces; however, neither the armed forces nor the Sandinista party leadership are necessarily answerable for the acts of individual former Sandinista army soldiers. Indeed the army and police should not simply be equated with the Sandinista party, since the former operate independently of the
249
CRITIQUE 1993
party structure and indeed have acted in direct opposition to the latter's interests. The bias evident in the State Department's reporting manifests itself in a tendency to run together all "Sandinista" elements, and impute responsibility to "Sandinistas," when in fact the ultimate authority and responsibility must reside with the elected civilian government.
The 1993 report is more even-handed than its predecesssors in its treatment of violence by and against those supporting the Sandinista cause, and by and against former members of the Nicaraguan Resistance (NR). Past reports have ignored the violence against Sandinistas and downplayed extra-judicial killings by recontras. For example, the 1992 report listed the alleged murder of 59 former members of the NR, without mentioning the many Sandinistas killed during 1992 for political reasons. In contrast, the 1993 report commendably notes violence against Sandinista peasants, giving as examples the particularly egregious murders of members of the Wenseslao Espinoza family by associates in their Sandinista cooperatives, and of Juan Dâvila and his two yoimg daughters, as well as violence against unidentified peasants by recontra groups. The 1993 report also deals with the abduction by recontras of government officials including Sandinista party leaders (although this might more properly have been included in the section on violations of humanitarian law, rather than as a case of "disappearance"), and pro-Sandinista kidnappers' retaliatory hostage-taking of government officials and nine journalists, most of whom worked for pro-Sandinista news media. The report also notes that, in violation of humanitarian law, the EPS used excessive violence in internal conflicts against both recompas and recontras.
Nonetheless, the report still demonstrates an anti-Sandinista bias. While highlighting the particular number of demobilized NR combatants killed during 1993 and since the Chamorro Government came to power in 1990 (50 and 215 respectively), the report makes no effort to identify the total number of individuals affiliated with the Sandinista cause who were killed during the same time periods. Local press reports, as well as research by the Nicaraguan human rights organization CENIDH, estimate the number of pro-Sandinista individuals killed in politically motivated attacks since 1990 at about 200, approximately the same number as the report gives for demobilized RN combatants killed from 1990-1993.
Likewise, when discussing the work of the Tripartite Commission on postwar violence (composed of the civilian government, the Catholic Church and the Organization of American States' International Support and Verification Commission), the State Department focuses on the Commission's February 1993 report to President Chamorro and its emphasis on violence against demobilized RN combatants. In its introduction, the report briefly mentions the Commission's two subsequent reports to President Chamorro in 1993, but fails to provide details or to acknowledge that the third report focuses on Sandinista victims.
250
