	MEXICO
The State Department report on Mexico concludes that human rights violations declined noticeably in 1993, but is silent about the precise methodology utilized to reach this conclusion. In reality, neither the contents of the report nor the actual record substantiates such a conclusion. The report consistently acknowledges the occurrence of certain egregious human rights violations, ignores other violations and concludes on an optimistic note by emphasizing government reform efforts — the same approach used by the Mexican government when it is questioned about violations. The report presents attempted government reforms as wholly positive, with no discussion of their effectiveness. Critical analyses by independent human rights organizations are barely mentioned. In general, the report's extremely uneven substantive emphasis fails to convey the full dimension of the human rights problem in Mexico.
The report correctly identifies diverse and widespread human rights violations, as well as the persistence of impunity for the perpetrators; however, the fundamental weaknesses of the 1992 report are repeated. The report again fails to explain why high levels of egregious violations and impunity persist in the face of allegedly strong government efforts to reduce both. One explanation is that the report over-emphasizes such efforts, which are, in fact, insufficient to rectify serious human rights problems. The report unquestioningly accepts government efforts as credible and reliable, including the activities of governmental human rights commissions and reforms in the office of the Attorney General (PGR). Furthermore, the report omits or gives only cursory attention to certain important cases, incidents and topics.
The structure of the report reflects an ongoing US policy of muted criticism of human rights matters, designed to avoid potential harm to the US-Mexico bilateral relationship and US interests in Mexico, while encouraging fiirther improvement. This approach leads to a persistant tension in the report: statements praising Mexican government efforts are often contradicted by descriptions of continuing egregious human rights violations and impunity. The result is a cognitive dissonance that runs throughout the report.
The Mexican government bears full responsibility for all human rights violations committed in Mexico and for the failure of the Mexican justice system to prosecute violators. Civilian governments sometimes lack sufficient power to confront security forces on human rights matters, but as last year's Critique pointed out, Mexico's entrenched Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) cannot credibly make such a claim. The PRI government's failure is largely the result of design or omission, but not incapacity.
The report fails to substantiate- its conclusion that the Salinas administration has succeeded in curbing human ri^ts abuses. Quantifiable evidence may be difficult to obtam, but ample documentation, from non-
235
CRITIQUE 1993
governmental organizations and the press, casts significant doubt on the report's conclusion. The report makes occasional references to human rights NGO's, but includes only statistics published by the government-appointed National Human Rights Commission ( CNDH), without any critical analysis. Over 100 Mexican NGO's publish periodic reports, yet none are cited.
Claims for the effectiveness of the CNDH, which the report cites as the centerpiece of the Mexican government's efforts to curb human rights violations and official impunity, must be evaluated on the basis of its record. The CNDH has no prosecutorial powers, and, as the 1992 report observed, it must rely on "the pressure of public opinion and the accuracy of its investigations to induce compliance with its recommendations to state and federal authorities to investigate and prosecute transgressors." Despite repeated expressions of support from President Salinas, a majority of the CNDH's recommendations have been ignored or only partially implemented. According to the report, by the end of 1993, only 268 of 624 recommendations had been fully implemented. The CNDH also issues recommendations to government agencies regarding cases that are not police-related (for example, proper treatment in government healthcare facilities), suggesting that the proportion of fully implemented recommendations in cases involving beatings, torture and other serious human rights violations is even lower.
With respect to prosecutions resulting from CNDH recommendations to the PGR during the same three-and a one-half-year period, the report states, without any analysis, that 82 people have been arrested and 20 tried, convicted and sentenced to prison terms averaging over five years. These figures reflect an arrest rate of less than two per month; a conviction rate of less than one-fourth of all arrestees; and an average of one conviction every two months. Such rates are extremely low in light of the widespread nature of violations in Mexico, and their overall deterrent value is questionable.
Critics of the CNDH's effectiveness, including the Lawyers Committee, have pointed out its failure to make recommendations concerning compensation for victims; its support for the creation of state-level human rights commissions, which have impeded the independent monitoring of human rights investigations (discussed below); its failure to complain when persons accused of torture by victims are charged only with lesser crimes by prosecutors; its excessive bureaucratization with over 600 employees; and its equivocal recommendations in politically sensitive cases, such as the 1991 murder of a striking worker at the Ford Motor Company.
The report recognizes discrepancies between CNDH claims that torture complaints declined in 1993 and those of unspecified independent human rights organizations that "torture remained at historic levels or even increased," but concludes only that the "magnitude of the problem is significant." The report fails to mention that one principal source, for the discrepancies is that the CNDH expressly limits its findings of torture to cases in which the torture is well-
236
_MEXICO
documented and strong physical evidence exists. Independent groups also accept credible claims of torture that are more difficult to document, especially where the torturer chooses a technique designed to leave few marks on the victim. For example, the report states that torture methods have included beatings, asphyxiation and electric shock, but makes no mention of several other widely reported methods, such as the forcible introduction of carbonated water into the victim's nose (tehuacanazo), forcible submersion in water and food deprivation. These omissions are an example of the State Department's failure to credit reports by non-govemmental sources.
The UN Committee Against Torture has, in fact, relied on information from non-govemmental groups to reject claims by the Mexican government based on CNDH reports that torture was declining. In late 1992, the Committee criticized the government's inadequate efforts and took the unusual step of directing the Mexican representative to present a new report in 1994. The State Department should explain its reasons for relying on the CNDH to the near-exclusion of other human rights entities.
The report cites with approval the creation of state-level human rights commissions, without any analysis or discussion. By the end of 1993, 29 of the 30 states (Aguascalientes was the lone exception), as well as the Federal District, had created human rights commissions, which were authorized by the federal constitutional amendments enacted in January 1992. Independent human rights monitors report that the performance of these state-level commissions is variable and in all cases susceptible to local political pressure. Some states only established commissions after considerable delays. The report fails to provide any information on the state human rights commissions by which their respective performances can be judged. This is a significant omission.
The state of Puebla offers an example of what may be expected from the state human rights commissions. The state congress enacted legislation to create a commission in December 1992, but did not name a president and two assistants until July 1993. Press reports indicated that Puebla Govemor Manuel Bartlett Diaz (formerly a member of President Salinas' cabinet) had personally selected the three commission members without consulting independent human rights organizations or the political opposition, causing considerable constemation among these sectors. The new commission president tried to assure the "public that the body would function autonomously and professionally, but then also announced that its advisory panel would be directed by Governor Bartlett.
The report ignores or mentions only superficially, limitations created by the 1992 constitutional amendments. These amendments ensure that the CNDH and all state commissions possess no prosecutorial authority and that their respective mandates exclude electoral and labor law violations. Furthermore, investigations are limited to violations reported within one year of their alleged
237
CRITIQUE 1993
occurrence, and final sentences by courts and administrative tribunals cannot be challenged by actions of the governmental commissions. Also, the CNDtTs jurisdiction has been reduced to issuing recommendations to federal agencies and reviewing the recommendations of the new state commissions. In effect, the Mexican government replicated a weak national institution at the state level, and diminished the authority of the original national body. It chose to expand a bureaucratic structure with questionable effectiveness, instead of taking decisive measures to end police and military abuse, ensure that prosecutors do their jobs and guarantee that the courts dispense justice. The addition of state commissions merely adds another layer of bureaucracy and further delays investigations and possible prosecutions.
The report implies that public awareness of human rights concerns increased in 1993, in part, as a result of government efforts. In fact, decentralization of authority over human rights investigations probably has had an adverse effect. With investigatory information now arising in virtually all the states as well as the Federal District, the press and human rights advocates based in Mexico City will have greater difficulty in monitoring governmental human rights investigations. Previously, the CNDH had been a convenient centralized source of information. Now, inquiries and complaints must be taken to the state capitals.
The report dso cites reforms to the office of the Attorney General as a strong government effort to end the "culture of impunity" surrounding the security forces. However, neither the actual record nor the contents of the report substantiate such a claim. The report mentions a few specific cases where members of the Federal Judicial Police, which is subordinate to the PGR, were arrested for involvement in murder cases, but specifies only one instance of reform in the office of the PGR — its ending the practice of hiring police auxiliaries.
In January 1993, President Salinas appointed Jorge Carpizo, the president of the CNDH, to be the new federal Attorney General. Carpizo was placed in the curious position of heading the government agency that had most often dragged its feet in complying with CNDH recommendations. Over the following twelve months, Carpizo dismissed numerous personnel of the PGR and the Judicial Police. Over 300 officers of the Judicial Police were dismissed, including 70 commanders. Carpizo deserves credit for dismissing many individuals with poor records; however, the fundamental impact of such firings on the roots of corruption and human rights violations is questionable. Some of Carpizo's predecessors undertook similar housecleanings without any significant longterm impact.
The report makes only a brief mention of the May murder of Catholic Cardinal Juan Posadas Ocampo in Guadalajara, which revealed the extent to which corruption pervades Mexican police institutions. The chief of the state police in the state of Jalisco, a high-level member of the judicial police in the state of Baja California Norte and the chief of police in Mexico City were fired and charged with
238
_MEXICO
links to Posadas' assassins, alleged drug traffickers. The cardinal's murder also prompted a government crackdown on drug trafficking.
Some critics charge that the crackdown was merely intended to clean up an international embarrassment for President Salinas at a time that the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) was being hotly debated in the United States and Canada. The Mexican government has a history of launching showy investigations and purges of law-enforcement agencies after embarrassing narcotics-related scandals. Mexican police sources contend that protection sold to high-level traffickers reaches beyond police commanders and into the civilian world of national politicians and business leaders, none of whom were touched by Carpizo's crackdown in 1993.
After the Posadas murder. President Salinas decided to concentrate the battle against drug trafficking in a new autonomous agency, the National Institute to Combat Drugs (INCD). The PGR has oversi^t authority over the INCD but its director is named by the president. Significantly, the PGR has relinquished control over the Judicial Police, the investigative police and its anti-narcotics squad to the INCD. This move would indicate that the goverrmient has concluded either that the Judicial Police require a wholesale restructuring, or that the PGR is incapable of cleaning up the Judicial Police, or both. Whether this measure will be more effective than its predecessors remains to be seen.
Human rights advocates and other critics of Carpizo's performance in
1993,	questioned a number of his decisions, including support for a new law increasing the permissible length of preventive detention of persons suspected pf organized crime links, and the return of police roadblocks to federal highways, which had been previously eliminated to end widespread police extortion. Carpizo was also criticized for his reluctance to disclose the names of dismissed members of the Judicial Police and the criminal charges, if any, brought against them, and for his failure to pursue vigorous prosecutions of all former police members allegedly guilty of human rights violations. In September, Carpizo's handpicked liaison with human rights organizations resigned and publicly alleged that corruption and the lack of will to uphold justice had made it impossible for her to continue her work.
The report mentions that the armed uprising of the Zapatista Army of National Liberation (EZLN) which began in the state of Chiapas on January 1,
1994,	"called attention to serious discontent with the human rights and economic situation", but provides virtually no information about the "situation" to which it refers. The report does not mention the human rights violations committed in Chiapas during the conflict. Mexican and international human rights organizations have documented summary executions, torture, forced disappearances and unlawfiil detentions by Mexico's security forces. In addition, Mexican sources noted cover-ups of human rights violations, including complicity by the CNDH and other government representatives. Documented abuses committed by EZLN combatants
239
CRITIQUE 1993
included the taking of civilian hostages, the murder of at least one hostage, using civilians as shields during combat and destroying non-military targets.
The egregious human rights violations committed by the security forces in Chiapas are consistent with previously documented violations in Chiapas and other parts of the country. For example, during 1993, Mgr. Samuel Ruiz, the Catholic bishop of San Cristóbal de las Casas) and the Centro de Derechos Humanos Fray Bartolomé de las Casas (the Human Rights Center) denounced violations against several Mayan communities. Senior military officers responded by accusing Ruiz and the Human Rights Center of spreading "odious lies" about the military, "obstructing justice" and "defending criminals." The CNDH took the side of the military and accused the Human Rights Center of interfering with a police investigation. Independent human rights organizations from Mexico and the United States investigated the accusations against Ruiz and the Human Rights Center, concluded that they were unfounded and substantiated the accusations against the military.
After the EZLN revolt began in January, numerous high-ranking Mexican government officials accused Ruiz and other Catholic clerics of being behind the rebellion. Ironically, the Mexican government subsequently turned to Ruiz for help in meditation efforts with the EZLN, after the government's initial response to eliminate the rebellion by force failed and generated graphic media reports of human rights violations by security forces. The 1994 report should discuss such violations and the government's attacks on critics such as Bishop Ruiz and the Human Rights Center.
The persecution and murder of gay men and the failure or lack of appropriate police investigations also warrants more attention in next year's report, especially with respect to Chiapas. Independent human rights organizations report that as many as 25 men have been murdered in Tuxtla Gutiérrez, the Chiapas state capital, since 1991. In February 1994, press reports indicated that the former coordinator of police forces for the state had been arrested on charges of arms trafficking, kidnapping and murder, and was implicated in the gay murders. Government officials now attest that he was never arrested. In April 1994, the state governor appointed an independent investigator in response to a CNDH recommendation. The State Department should report next year on the status of the investigation.
The report states that the Mexican government permits domestic and international human rights groups to operate "without restrictions or official harassment." This sanguine assessment ignores the unsubstantiated accusations endured by Ruiz, the Human Rights Center and others. The report does not mention that the Center for Border Studies and Human Rights Promotion (CEFPRODAC) in Reynosa, Tamaulipas, and its president, Arturo Solis Gómez, were targets of an intimidation campaign by state authorities in 1993.
240
_MEXICO
CEFPRODAC reports on human rights abuses in the region bordering south Texas, which are often linked to drug trafficking and related corruption in the police and prison systems. CEFPRODAC has often identified the Judicial Police as the prime violator of human rights in the region, but in 1993 it reported that most of the serious cases of police torture and abuse of which it became aware in 1993 involved state and local police in the border cites of Matamoros, Reynosa and Rio Bravo. CEFPRODAC also reported that abuses in prisons remained at high levels. The state Attorney General and the Director of Prisons responded by accusing CEFPRODAC of "protecting criminals." The PRI and two other allied political parties accused Solis and CEFPRODAC of being spies for foreign interests because CEFPRODAC had received charitable contributions from the Ford Foundation and other US-based philanthropic institutions. Solis, who is also a journalist, received anonymous death threats.
The report briefly mentions the case of Victor Clark Alfaro, director of the Binational Human Rights Center in Tijuana, Baja California Norte, who was the target of governmental attacks in 1993 after he published a report entitled Torture and Corruption: an Endemic Malady. Efforts to discredit Clark by the police and government of Baja California Norte involved officials up to Governor Ernesto Ruffo Appel. Clark was even indicted by the state Attorney General on charges of libel and defamation, based on a complaint by the Attorney General's chief bodyguard, whom Clark had identified as responsible for selling identification cards of the state judicial police to drug traffickers. Prosecution of the case was suspended in the face of an international campaign on Clark's behalf
The report does not mention that most human rights monitors believe that they are under constant government surveillance, including telephone wiretaps. The government's failure to dispel this concern has contributed to significant self-censorship, which was exacerbated after electronic listening devices were found in the government's own CNDH offices in 1991. Some monitors also have reported receiving "friendly warnings" fi-om government acquaintances advising restraint in investigating certain subjects or cases. Others have reported threatening messages on their answering machines and thefts of files.
The report's description of "significant restrictions" on speech and press freedoms is generally accurate; however, it conveys an unwarranted tone of optimism in referring to certain "signs of change between the Government and the press," For example, the government practice of paying the press to run government-produced materials as news was not barmed as the report states; instead, only unrecorded payments were banned. Such a ban may impose some measure of restraint on government agencies; however, as the report correctly indicates, some agencies simply ignore the ban altogether. Journalists who accompany President Salinas on domestic and international trips are now required to pay their own expenses, but are still under intense pressure to soften their
241
CRITIQUE 1993
reporting in exchange for access. The president's office continues to decide who may travel with him, and press requests to create self-selected coverage "pools" have been declined. On at least one occasion in 1993 —a trip to Austin, Texas — the president violated his own rule on not covering press expenses, offering the post facto justification that the members of the press entourage were all invited guests.
The report states that the selling of two government-owned television stations "will provide significant new competition in national television media." This erroneously creates the impression that a diversity of viewpoints may soon be available, beyond what the pro-government, privately-owned Televisa network currently provides. The sale of two extensive media packages will likely lead to greater commercial competition for advertising time, but not necessarily greater diversity in programming. The first package, which included a total of 90 TV channels, was sold to a consortium headed by an individual who has stated publicly that he strongly favors the government's political and economic programs, and that the primary role of television, is entertainment. The second package, which included 62 TV channels, was sold to Televisa, which now controls approximately half of all television channels in Mexico. Each package was valued in the hundreds of millions of dollars, which precluded all except the wealthiest corporations and individuals from bidding. Bidding was to have been on a competitive basis, but Televisa was reported to have begun purchasing equipment for its new stations months before the public bid was even announced, leading to allegations that the bidding was rigged. The Mexican press reported that government officials discouraged submission of several potentially competitive bids.
The report fails to mention a significant effort undertaken in 1993 by Attorney General Carpizo, which was ostensibly intended to prosecute journalists involved in the drug trade, but in fact produced little factual evidence and appeared aimed at intimidating critics. In early May, Carpizo revealed that his office was pursuing a significant investigation of what he termed "narcojoumalists." Carpizo made repeated public accusations about the existence of such narcojoumalists, which increased after the murder of Cardinal Posadas in late May. In mid-July, three print journalists were indicted; however, all drug-related charges were later dropped by the courts for lack of evidence, and Carpizo's accusations subsided.
The report's coverage of elections is excessively optimistic in describing in some detail electoral reforms enacted in 1993, while downplaying protests and claims of fraud by opposition parties. The report accurately mentions claims of electoral fraud in the states of Nayarit, Guerrero, Baja California Sur and Yucatán, but fails to mention several others. Furthermore, election victories continue to be susceptible to post-election negotiations between the PRI and opposition parties, notwithstanding electoral reforms and actual election results, as in the state of Yucatán.
242
_MEXICO
The report's claim that PRI victories in 1993 provoked "only scattered protests" is inaccurate. Strong protests of fraud occurred in virtually every state where elections were held. In the state of Mexico, the opposition protested electoral results in 40 of 121 state municipalities. Alleged electoral violations included last-minute changes of polling places, threats, vote-buying with private and public monies, violation of polling secrecy, failure to verify voter credentials, ballot-box stuifmg, the operation of polling places by PRI members and improper herding of voters to the polls {acarreo). The state of Michoacán began the year with opposition party members occupying 38 town halls across the state in protest of elections held in the fall of 1992. In Puebla, 18 town halls were occupied at the beginning of the year. In San Luis Potosí, the opposition protested alleged shaving of polling lists, the use of invalid voter credentials, improper replacement of polling authorities, delayed opening of polling places, and illegal campaigning by the PRI and improper herding of voters to the polls. In Coahuila, the opposition denounced a PRI victory as the product of the dirtiest elections in the history of the state. The State Electoral Commission deliberately used non-indelible ink to mark voters' fingers. In Guerrero, 14 town halls were occupied by protesters from the opposition Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD) after October's elections and widespread election-related violence resulted in the deaths of at least nine members of the PRD and one police officer.
In some instances, peaceful political protests were met with violence by police or government officials, which contradicts the report's blanket assertion that the Mexican government "permits demonstrations by a broad range of political groups." In Nayarit, for example, press reports indicate that Governor Rigobeito Ochoa, whose entry into his official offices in the state capital of Tepic had been blocked by protesting PRD members since his disputed election in July, ordered indiscriminate police attacks on protesters during a two-day period. On October 17, the police chased protesters throughout the city for at least three hours. Dozens were beaten and targeted with tear gas, including the offices of El Sol de Tepic, a daily which had written critically of Ochoa. On October 18, the police attacked PRD followers who had sought refuge on the grounds of a Catholic church. Several people were beaten and more than a dozen were detained without warrants, including the parish priest.
In Puebla, Governor Bartlett had the state's security forces forcibly remove most of the protestors who had occupied town halls across the state. In this atmosphere, PRD protesters in the town of Coxcatlán marched to the home of the mayor, where he was meeting with eight other elected PRI officials from the region. The protesters were met with gunfire which killed two elderly protesters and wounded 12 others.
243
CRITIQUE 1993
The report's emphasis on the electoral reforms approved in 1993 is not warranted, given continued electoral violence, protests and post-electoral deals. In Mérida Yucatán, the PRI's mayor-elect apparently agreed to step down in exchange for the National Action Party (PAN)'s ending its protest of the gubernatorial election results. In Baja California Sur, the PAN's national leadership probably was willing to override protests of the gubernatorial election results by the state leadership as part of a secret arrangement with the PRI. In February 1994, PRI members admitted that the 1993 reforms had been weak and frequently violated by the PRI.
Fully one-third of the report is devoted to a discussion of worker rights. Yet this fails to describe serious distortions and limitations of the rights to freedom of association, collective bargaining and acceptable working conditions. A significant portion of the text is dedicated to merely reciting substantive and procedural aspects of Mexican labor law and conveying factual information about specific cases and situations. The report fails to identify clearly violations of worker rights, thereby creating the erroneous impression that few such violations occurred.
Mexican workers are given no reasonable opportunity to form independent unions and bargain collectively. Independent unions constituted by their members, who meet and vote to decide issues of direct concern to them are practically nonexistent. Mexico suffers from a govemment-confrolled system of officially sponsored and manipulated unions which often take steps antithetical to the best interests of the workers they claim to represent. The majority of unionized workers are members of "official" unions imposed upon them and run by imposed leaders (known as charros). Such unions are subservient to state interests, while the rank and file are required to pay union dues without having input into union actions. The collective bargaining system even allows union leaders to negotiate confracts without the approval of the membership. The report only briefly mentions criticisms that have been raised concerning union regisfration requirements. In fact, such requirements keep unions under governmental confrol and prevent the establishment of autonomous unions. Only groups that have joined union confederations affiliated with the PRI, such as the Confederation of Workers of Mexico (CTM), and the Regional Confederation of Workers of Mexico (CROM), or are supported by a corporation, win legal registration.
In the last eight years, the Labor Ministry has granted charters to only a handful of independent unions, and then only after protracted litigation. Only one independent union (a seamsfresses' union) did not have to resort to such litigation as a result of significant public pressure on the Labor Ministry. At the local level, registration must be obtained from local conciliation and arbifration panels, composed of government, corporate and "official" union representatives. Registration can often be delayed for years. The Labor Ministry continues to exert
244
_MEXICO
tremendous influence over a union's activities after extending official recognition. For instance, any strike that does not have the ministry's authorization is expressly illegal, regardless of any underlying circumstances. Faced with an illegal strike, companies frequently call in riot police to break up picketing workers,
The persistence of widespread human rights violations in Mexico and the impunity with which they are committed contradict the stated commitment of President Salinas and the Mexican government to improve human rights practices. Respect for human rights will improve in Mexico only with stronger measures backed by the requisite will at all levels of the Mexican government, beginning at the highest. The record demonstrates that despite substantial international attention to Mexico's human rights practices in recent years, that will is lacking. Dismissals and prosecutions of some human rights violators have taken place, but not in sufficient numbers.
A credible government response to the problem of impunity is of critical importance. The Mexican government must address this central problem directly through effective reforms to the justice system. The creation of parallel, nonjurisdictional structures, such as the federal and state human rights commissions, carries inherent opportunity costs in terms of improvements to existing legal institutions.
Consistent with US obligations under domestic and international law, as well as the Clinton administration's stated commitment to human rights, the State Department should improve its human rights reporting on Mexico. All reporting should be as accurate and objective as possible, and not subject to foreign policy concerns. Finally, the US government should press human rights concerns with Mexico at every available opportunity.
245
CRITIQUE 1993
