	BURMA
The State Department's 1993 human rights report on Burma, like its predecessor, is appropriately critical of the present deplorable human rights situation in that country. As in 1992, the report provides an extensive catalog of human rights violations in Burma, replete with illustrative examples. As a general matter, the report provides an accurate account of human rights abuses in Burma. However, it does contain some deficiencies that should be addressed in subsequent reports.
While the report deals quite effectively with individual instances of human rights violations, it fails to address in a discrete fashion the more systemic or institutional problem that defines the way in which the ruling State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC) abuses human rights. This is the tendency of the Burmese authorities to seek refuge behind formal legalistic arguments to justify continued violations. A good example of this abuse of legal process is the Burmese government's explanation of its refusal to accept the results of the May 1990 elections — that it needed to scrutinize the expense accounts of the winners, and that, because of the absence of a Constitution, no positions existed for those elected to take up. Similarly, the Burmese government has taken the position that it is proper to arrest its citizens for pro-democracy activities, since such activities are effectively proscribed by Burmese law, Finally, in its dealings with the international community, the Burmese government has paid lip service to human rights principles by, for example, acceding to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child — while at the same time forcing children into porterage for Burmese Army operations.
The introduction to the 1993 report states in general terms that, "There was no marked increase in the level of human rights abuses in 1993 ..." This is a somewhat misleading statement, given the litany of abuses contained in the pages that follow. The report notes that the government has successfully intimidated the Burmese people. However, it should also have added that although there may not have been a marked increase in the level of human rights abuses, the existing level of abuses in Burma remains unacceptably high.
The report's discussion of the number of "disappearances" and the number of detentions in 1993 is not particularly illuminating. It merely states that the number of "disappearances" was "little changed from the previous year." In this connection, it should be noted that the 1992 report only stated that the number of "disappearances" was "relatively low." Similarly, the report asserts that there has been a decline in the number of detentions, without describing, even in the most general of terms, the extent of this decline. Such broad statements are meaningless where arbitrary detention and abduction are the norm. In order for this kind of
37
CRITIQUE 1993
observation to be meaningful, the report should attempt to provide some estimate of the number of "disappearances" or detentions in relation to prior years.
The report flatly states that there were no confirmed reports of summary executions of civilians in 1993, This assertion is problematic, in that it appears to contradict the statement elsewhere in the report that "credible sources reported many deaths among those impressed for forced labor and porterage," It also nms counter to the report of the UN Special Rapporteur on Human Rights in Myanmar, which contains several references to summary executions of civilians by Burmese troops. This inconsistency suggests that the State Department views the officially sanctioned killings of political prisoners or other political targets separately from the random murders of civilians by troops engaged in operations. Future reports should attempt to provide a broader treatment of all types of summary or extrajudicial killings.
Similarly, the report deals separately with the torture of political prisoners and the ill-treatment of persons by the Burmese Army. It states that there were no reports in 1993 of the torture of political prisoners. But this overlooks the ill-treatment of both innocent civilians and prisoners by the Burmese Army. These abuses include forced porterage, physical abuse in retaliation for attempted escapes and sexual assaults. Future reports should address the issue of torture not only in the context of political prisoners, but more broadly in terms of the conduct of all governmental entities generally. It should be noted, in this connection, that the State Department's own instructions for preparing the Country Reports suggest that the report on torture should include all instances of misbehavior by police or military entities, including officially sanctioned conduct or conduct that was simply the result of poor supervision.
As in 1992, this year's report states that, "There was no nationwide pattern of violence directed specifically against women." Yet the same section acknowledges the "consistent pattern of reports alleging rapes of ethnic minority women in border areas by Burmese soldiers." This pattern of rapes is similarly noted in the UN Special Rapporteur's report. This widespread and continuing pattern of sexual assaults by Burmese troops, while perhaps not rising to the level of a national campaign against women, is certainly a serious matter, and is of sufficient magnitude to suggest that the Burmese government is willing to overlook such abuses by its troops.
The violent campaigns of the Burmese army against ethnic minority groups are also mischaracterized in a separate context, in the report's discussion of the use of force and violations of humanitarian law in internal conflicts. The section's opening statement that, "The Burmese Army has battled diverse insurgencies for more than four decades in conflicts that have resulted in widespread human rights violations" is altogether too neutral in tone, given the
38
_BURMA
essentially defensive nature of much of the fighting by ethnic groups and the extreme brutality of government counterinsurgency campaigns.
The section on children's rights correctly notes that the Burmese government has taken certain steps for the "survival, protection and development of the country's children," including the adoption of the so-called National Program of Action. In addition, the Burmese government has withdrawn two reservations made by it upon its accession to the Convention on the Rights of the Child. In this regard, the report simply notes, somewhat limply, that it "remained unclear whether the Government intended to give the [National Program of Action] the political impetus needed to ensure the interministerial cooperation and resource allocation required to make it a success." The report fails to point out that where able-bodied men are not available, the Burmese Army abducts children to be used as porters in its counterinsurgency operations. This continuing abuse of children strongly suggests that the Burmese government's commitment to the welfare of children does not extend much beyond public pronouncements.
Finally, the report acknowledges that the Burmese government continues to forcibly relocate large numbers of civilians, often to areas wholly unsuited to human settlement. However, it goes on to say that unidentified "experts" agree that these relocations may serve legitimate national development objectives. What the report fails to note is that forced relocation is more often than not simply part of a larger military strategy to cut off anti-government insurgents from their sources of supply and to destroy links between insurgents and their local sympathizers.
39
CRITIQUE 1993
