MALAWI
As Malawi moved from authoritarian government toward democracy during 1993, the country's previously deplorable human rights situation improved significantly. The end of one-party rule brought many notable gains, including toleration of political dissent, the freeing of all political prisoners, a general amnesty for exiles, the disbanding of the paramilitary Malawi Young Pioneers, greater independence of the judiciary and increased freedom of movement. However, some of those improvements were incomplete, and additional problems persist. In general, the 1993 State Department report depicts this situation accurately, and with commendable even-handedness.
The report also warrants praise for calling attention to the mistreatment of common criminals, an issue often overlooked by human rights monitors who focus on the treatment of political prisoners. Similarly, the report's coverage of anti-Asian discrimination commendably expands criticism of Malawi's human rights record into an area that is usually neglected elsewhere.
The report's shortcomings include the following: insuificient attention to abuses in early 1993, especially in areas where the situation improved after the June referendum; a tendency to understate election-related abuses; a reluctance to assign explicit blame for many violations; an unwarranted implication that human rights abuses came to an end in December 1993; insufficient detail on the Malawi Young Pioneers; and inadequate critical analysis of Malawi's judicial reform. The report also should have mentioned that the referendum was held only because of intense internal and external pressure. Taken together, these shortcomings in a generally good report tend to underemphasize the responsibility of the Malawian government for past abuses, and to underestimate continuing threats to the recent improvements.
The report's first weakness is to play down — or omit altogether — 1993 abuses in some areas which improved in the latter part of the year. For example, the report twice uses the phrase "in the past" to describe practices that ended only in 1993, including trials of capital offenses in traditional courts and the ruling party's monopoly over the news media. The phrase "in the past" downplays the human rights violations committed during early 1993.
Similarly, the report accurately describes the unprecedented flourishing of non-government newspapers after June 1993, but insufficiently documents the restrictions on press freedom earlier in the year. For example, during the referendum campaign, media outlets provided access only to the governing Malawi Congress Party (MCP). Press freedom is a particularly significant issue in Malawi, because accusations of intimidation of journalists began to resurface in early 1994 and those accusations have been directed at other parties as well as the MCP,
230
_MALAWI
In Malawian prisons, conditions improved and political prisoners were released by the year's end, but torture and other abuses continued to occur in 1993. Amnesty International has reported at least one case of inhumane punishment in Blantyre's Chichiri Prison as recently as August 1993. Both Human Ri^ts Watch/Africa and the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment report that before his June 1993 release, opposition politician Chakufwa Chihana was denied medical treatment, fed poorly, forced to engage in heavy labor through illnesses, kept in a tiny cell and physically tortured. The report's section on torture mentions no such incidents.
The section on freedom of movement fails to mention the arrests and detentions, shortly before the June referendum, of many exiles upon their return to Malawi (although this abuse is mentioned in the introduction). While the section appropriately praises eventual improvements, it disregards this serious curtailment of freedom of movement during 1993.
The report minimizes the extent of government harassment of the opposition during the referendum campaign. It states that officials "grudgingly granted freedom of assembly" during the campaign, and that "'[pjressure groups' (i.e., parties in waiting) began to hold public rallies, ... in spite of instances of MYP intimidation of multiparty supporters, police manipulation of rally permits, and arbitrary detention of opposition activists." These statements fail to convey how extensively the Malawian government blocked fundamental freedoms around the time of the referendum, engaging in physical attacks, beatings, arrests (for such activities as wearing a political t-shirt), and death threats — and then granting itself immunity for any crimes committed during the campaign. The report should have described these events frilly.
The second main weakness of the report is its failure to blame President Banda and the MCP explicitly for the human rights abuses over which they presided. During Banda's 30-year rule, thousands of Malawians were killed and more arrested and tortured, with the president himself and his senior echelon of officials consistently implicated. There is no reason for the report to avoid implicating them. Instead, for example, in its discussion of arbitrary arrest, detention and exile, it describes the dismal pattern of abuses during early 1993, but fails to assign responsibility (although it does appropriately blame the police in other instances). As its predecessor did, the 1993 report avoids any mention of officials below Banda, such as John Tembo, who employed the notorious Malawi Young Pioneers for repressive purposes and was referred to in Western media reports as the "power behind the throne" during the final phase of Banda's rule. This subtle tendency to soft-pedal criticism of the Banda government is consistent with the previous two years' State Department reports, both of which pointedly counterbalanced criticism of Malawi's human rights abuses with praise for its "economic achievements." In a country where annual per capita income is $230
231
CRITIQUE 1993
and the minimum daily wage is 70 US cents, such a mitigating argument is absurd as well as inappropriate.
The report provides insuiFicient detail on the Malawi Young Pioneers, who were supposedly disbanded by the Army in December 1993. The initial purpose of the MYP was rural development, but the group quickly became a paramilitary outfit more heavily armed than the Army itself and operating outside of any law. The MYP and the Mozambique National Resistance (Renamo) guerilla movement are reported to have cooperated closely, with Renamo forces operating out of MYP camps during the 1980s. The report should have mentioned that the MYP were accused of a wide array of human rights abuses, such as beating those who did not attend MCP rallies and forcibly collecting party contributions, and that the MYP were almost universally feared and despised. Probably the most significant role of the MYP in recent years was to act as an intelligence organization, spying on the conversations and private opinions of Malawian citizens in their villages and workplaces.
The report may have spoken too soon in stating optimistically that, "Intimidation by the Youth League and the MYP . . . disappeared entirely in December when the Army moved to disarm the MYP." The MYP's fearsome reputation may help to exaggerate the rumors of its continuing vitality. Nevertheless, in early 1994 the group remained a potential threat. When the Army sought to disband them, many armed Young Pioneers are said to have fled into Mozambique for sanctuary in Renamo camps, where they reportedly remained under the control of John Tembo. Many of the MYP's arms have not been accounted for. At least part of the responsibility for this threatening situation lies with the Malawian government, which failed to abide by an earlier agreement to disarm the MYP in September 1993. And whatever the true extent of the remaining threat from the MYP, its removal does nothing to diminish the main recent source of intimidation against Malawian villagers, which is the MCP's youth wing.
The report omits various other significant human rights violations, several of which involved election-related acts of harassment. The section on freedom of religion should have noted that the government prohibited four clergymen from speaking in public shortly before the election, an incident reported by Human Rights Watch/Afi-ica, In its discussion of arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home or correspondence, the report fails to note that the government threatened to curtail drought relief food aid to villages that voted against single-party rule. In the area of worker rights, the report's statement that "government intervention [in labor unrest] was limited" ignores the High Court ban on a general strike called by opposition parties in December,
The report also understates problems with Malawi's "traditional courts." It does cite some of the abuses associated with these courts, such as limited representation for the defendant and sole jurisdiction over capital offenses. It fails
232
_MALAWI
to note, however, that the traditional courts have jurisdiction over all political offenses, and that many of their presiding officers lack legal training (as the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights and other observers have reported). The insufficiency of representation in the traditional courts is worse than the report implies: no lawyer may appear in these courts without permission from the Minister of Justice, who has not granted such permission in more than 20 years. These procedures were in effect until October 1993, and remained in law at the end of 1993 despite the suspension of the traditional courts. In addition to these abuses. President Banda had been known to influence judges by "predicting" the outcome of pending trials.
As in 1992, the report does not adequately describe the brutality of prison conditions in Malawi. It does state, appropriately, that overcrowding and poor treatment continue to be of concern despite improvements during the year. However, both Human Rights Watch/Africa and the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture have voiced these concerns in much greater detail, and future State Department reports would benefit from a more thorough descriptive treatment of prison conditions to back up their general assertions. As noted above, the report also errs in ignoring some reported incidents of torture during 1993.
The report additionally fails to mention many of the repressive laws that remain on the books in Malawi, despite the substantial improvements in both laws and govemment actions. The report does note continuing restrictions on freedom of the press, but other repressive laws remain as well. The laws of continuing concern include:
•	The Censorship and Control of Entertainments Act, which gives widespread banning powers;
•	The Protected Flag, Emblems and Names Act, which makes it an offense to say or write anything that is "calculated to or liable to insult, ridicule or show disrespect to the President or national emblems;"
•	The Preservation of Public Security Act (and Regulations), which allows the prohibition of publications deemed prejudicial to public security and allows administrative powers of house arrest;
•	Section 46 of the Penal Code, which gives the Minister of Justice the power to ban publications in more or less the same terms as those enjoyed by the Censorship Board under the Censorship Act;
•	Section 49 of the Penal Code, which gives the police powers to intercept any package suspected of containing a banned publication;
•	Section 60(a) of the Penal Code, creating the offense of "false news," remained in force during 1993 and was only repealed later;
•	Section 64 of the Penal Code, relating to unlawful societies, has been amended but not repealed. The Minister no longer has absolute discretion
233
CRITIQUE 1993
to ban a society, but may still do so under certain circumstances, such as when a society is aimed at "subverting or promoting the subversion of the Government or any officer thereof;"
•	Section 71 of the Penal Code, which restricts freedom of assembly;
•	The Malawi Broadcasting Corporation Act, which allows for direct intervention of the responsible Minister in the editorial content of the MBC or any other radio station.
Amnesty International has also noted that Malawi's new Bill of Rights may allow unacceptable derogations from basic human rights in certain situations under the Interim Constitution, which was to remain in force until May 1994.
Since its independence, Malawi has been a repressive single-party state, marked by flagrant governmental disrespect for human rights. Despite tremendous improvements during 1993, significant concerns remain, such as the possible resurgence of the MYP, still deplorable prison conditions, the intimidation of journalists and other limitations on press freedom. Limitations on freedom of the broadcast media are particularly important, given Malawi's high illiteracy rate. Next year's State Department report should also pay attention to the inadequate independence of the judiciary, the volume of repressive laws still on the books, and possible derogations from basic rights under the Interim Constitution. As Malawi approaches democracy, these are crucial issues. Particularly because many present opposition leaders (especially in the UDF party) are former MCP politicians, a clear break from the past is necessary if the present reforms are to be entrenched. After decades of repression, Malawi badly needs to build a human rights culture, and continued close attention to its progress will be required.
234
