_NIGERIA
dissolved.... The two political parties are hereby dissolved. All processions, political meetings and associations of any type in any part of the country are hereby banned.
As the new military regime only took office in the middle of November, it is admittedly difficult to assess current conditions for human rights in Nigeria except to look at Gen. Abacha's early actions, and these have not been promising. Despite appointing the well-known human rigjits activist Olu Onagoruwa as the new Attorney General, the government promptly went ahead and passed ten sweeping decrees which, among other things, suspended parts of the Constitution, barmed political parties, and contained the ouster clauses that have long been characteristic features of military rule in Nigeria. In addition to dissolving the elected legislatures, Abacha promised in his inaugural address that a Constitutional Conference would be established to "determine the future constitutional structure of Nigeria." After early delays, on April 22, 1994, the Abacha government announced an electoral timetable that included the inauguration of the Constitutional Conference on June 27 and the lifting of the ban on political activity on January 17, 1995. It remains to be seen whether the military government will honor this timetable.
Last year's Critique pointed out that the State Department's frequent references to rights guaranteed by the 1989 Constitution gave the impression that this Constitution had the effect of law and was enforceable. The report this year corrects that defect, admitting that, "Questions of which constitution, if any, was in effect are largely irrelevant. All three governments derived their authority, directly or indirectly, from military power."
With regard to other important human rights, the strong tone of this year's State Department report is to be commended. The report notes candidly that "Nigerian's human rights record worsened in 1993." It condemns extrajudicial killings by Nigerian police in more forthright terms than in previous year, and notes that police are "seldom held accountable for the use of excessive, deadly force or the death of individuals while in custody." In addition, the report specifically questions the militaiy government's "willingness to investigate extrajudicial killings when the victims are nonmilitary." Extrajudicial killings in Nigeria have been a major concern of local and international human rights organizations for several years; however, despite this increased attention, the government has failed to take steps either to provide better training to the police or to prosecute those who violate the law.
In 1993, two local human rights groups, the Civil Liberties Organisation (CLO) and the Constitutional Rights Project (CRP), released damning reports detailing human rights violations committed by the Nigerian police (The Nigerian Police and Individual Liberties dxíá Human Rights Practices in the Nigerian Police,
255
CRITIQUE 1993
respectively). The State Department report commendably notes some of the most egregious instances of torture and abuse by Nigerian police, although others might also have been mentioned.
The report once again rightly expresses concern over the deplorable conditions in Nigerian prisons. It indicates that a government task force formed in October 1992 had freed more than 4,000 prisoners in order to alleviate prison congestion. While this may be true, it is a pitifrilly inadequate response, given the magnitude of the problem. Of the 4,000 released, many had never been convicted of a crime. In fact, between one third and one half of the estimated 65,000 prisoners have never been convicted of any crime. The government should either prosecute those awaiting trial within the three months required by law or release them. Furthermore, prisoners who remain in custody, whether they have been convicted of crimes or not, still face unsanitary conditions without proper medical care or sufficient food.
The report should have noted that the CLO reported in 1993 that the military government was once again making use of the Ita Oko Detention Camp, located on an island off the Nigerian coast. This detention facility was allegedly closed down after a CLO report in 1988 revealed dangerous conditions there. According to the CLO, approximately 250 people who were arrested during the July pro-democracy demonstrations were detained at Ita Oko.
The CRP, meanwhile, reported that it secured the release of eight prisoners on October 11, all of whom had been detained for over two years without trial. Four of the eight had been detained since 1987. Another of the eight. Sale Yaro, told the CRP that at one point he was placed in a cell, refused food and forced to buy his own drinking water.
The year included a barrage of arbitrary attacks by the government against human rights and pro-democracy activists. The report's account of these abuses is far from complete. In addition to the arrests mentioned in the report, Femi Falana was also arrested in April and released a day later. Shina Loremikan, the publicity secretary for the Committee for the Defence of Human Rights (CDHR), was arrested in April after complaining to security officials about the harassment of some of his colleagues. Wale Shittu, Femi Adenuga and Emma Nweke, all staff workers at the CLO headquarters in Lagos, were arrested on July 7 and released on bail several weeks later. In addition, CLO workers Innocent Chukwuma and Emma Edigheji were detained in Kano. In August, according to Africa Watch, the government arrested another group of pro-democracy campaigners. This group included Festus Okoye (a CLO official in Kaduna), Salihu Lukman (a Kaduna member of the Campaign for Democracy), Titus Mann (a CLO official in Jos), Dr. Onje lyewado (CLO member in Jos), Daniel Adamu, Professor Toye Olorode, Nnimmo Bassey (a CLO member in Benin City), Adebayo Ojo (a CDHR member in Ilorin) and Joseph Akinlaja.
256
_NIGERIA
Dr. Beko Ransome-Kuti, arrested in July, was picked up by police again on October 1 along with his daughter Nike. The two were detained for three days after being charged with unlawfol assembly and disturbing the peace. Also on October 1, the police arrested several other pro-democracy activists, including Chima Ubani (a CLO official and secretary of the Campaign for Democracy).
The report properly notes the Babangida government's campaign against the press in 1993, which resulted in numerous arrests and .the closure of media houses. It fails to mention, however, the March 3 arrest and brief detention of two editors of Newsday, Martin Oloja and Bukar Zarma, following the publication of an article alleging that Babangida was behind a campaign to extend military rule. Although the report notes that Chris Okolie, publisher of Newbreed, was arrested in April, it fails to note that Okolie was arrested again on May 12 and detained for several weeks, according to the Committee to Protect Journalists.
In June, the BBC reported that Alhaji Yakubu Abdul Aziz, editor of the government-owned New Nigerian, resigned in protest over the government's pressure on the newspaper's editorial policies. According to the BBC, Abdul Aziz objected to the government's insistence that the paper should publish an editorial calling for the cancellation of the June 12 elections. Africa Watch reported that Yinka Telia, Abuja correspondent for The News, was arrested on June 22. In addition, the State Department did not mention a BBC report that security police raided the home of a BBC reporter. Sola Odunfa, on November 17 and arrested his wife because Odunfa was not at home. Odunfa's wife was released 18 hours later.
Throughout 1993, the Nigerian government continued to pay lip service to international human rights bodies, including those of the United Nations. The UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination agreed in September that Nigeria's report failed to comply with the committee's guidelines, although it did welcome Nigeria's renewal of a dialogue with the Committee. The UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances did receive notes verbales from Nigeria's Permanent Mission to the UN in Geneva. The Working Group continued to investigate three disappearances stemming from the May 1992 riots, however, because it did not consider Nigeria's responses to have clarified the cases. Finally, Nigeria failed to make any response at all to inquiries from the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention. The report failed to take account of any of these developments, thus failing to comply properly with the State Department's instruction that "special attention is to be paid to reports by the various UN human rights mechanisms." This shortcoming is evident not only in the case of Nigeria, but also in a large number of the other Country Reports.
257
CRITIQUE 1993
