UZBEKISTAN
The 1993 State Department report on Uzbekistan is generally excellent and is an improvement over its predecessor. First, this report is more extensive, covering several important issues in greater detail than before, such as freedom of expression and assembly and the ri^t to a fair trial. Second, the 1993 report provides a more thorou^ analysis, making clear the continued pattern of human rights abuses since 1992, such as the public beatings of opposition activists and the failure to investigate or prosecute their assailants. Third, tiie report provides a great deal of specific information on individual cases of abuse, such as the denial of the right to a fair trial for political opposition figures. Through such illustrative examples, the report provides an understanding of the kinds of human ri^ts abuses that are now pervasive in Uzbekistan.
It might have been usefiil, however, to provide supplemental information on several points. The report correctly notes that Uzbekistan has made little progress in its transition from an authoritarian Soviet legacy to a more pluralistic democracy. It also notes that the government's observance of human rights moved backwards compared to 1992. Uzbekistan's human rights record falls short even in comparison to other states in the former Soviet Union. The Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), one of the international bodies charged with monitoring human rights in Europe and the former Soviet Union, has reported receiving more complaints of violations in Uzbekistan than in any other CSCE nation. Uzbekistan refiised visas to representatives of Helsinki Watch, becoming the first CSCE nation to do so since the Soviet Union lifted its ban on human rights observers in 1987.
The severity of human rights violations in Uzbekistan came to the attention of the United Nations as well. The report's section on arbitrary detentions failed to note, however, that the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention of the UN Commission on Human Rights recently conducted an inquiry into claims that two members of Birlik, the most potentially powerful opposition group, had been arrested and detained for nonviolent opposition activities. Although the government of Uzbekistan was informed of the Working Group's procedure and given 90 days to respond, it failed to do so. In September 1993, the UN body concluded that the detentions of Bobur Shokirov and Khazratqul Khudaiberdee, of the opposition Milli Majlis group, were arbifrary and contravened Articles 9 and 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Articles 9 and 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
Although the report provides some background on the government's justification for its policies, it might have been helpfiil to say more, since the government's arguments shed some important li^t on the nature of the abuses
406
UZBEKISTAN
themselves. The report correctly notes that the National Democratic Party of Uzbekistan is the dominant political party and that it is controlled by President Karimov. It also notes that the government justifies its repressive human rights policies by invoking the specter of Islamic fimdamentalism and the civil strife that has befallen neighboring Tajikistan. In an August 1993 interview, President Karimov gave a telling response to a journalist who asked him to comment on reports that referred to him as a "supporter of strong power": President Karimov replied, "I am also called a dictator , , , . I am prepared to pay any price for the sake of stability and peace of the people, who I am sure support me."
The Uzbek government was relatively tolerant of the opposition before the country gained its independence in 1991. Between 1989 and mid-1992, activists were able to distribute some publications, ejq)ress their views in the official mass media and to hold meetings and peacefiil demonstrations. In June 1992, however, the formerly Communist government of neighboring Tajikistan was forced to enter into roundtable discussions with opposition forces, and the failure to reach power-sharing arrangements led to widespread civil strife. Since that time, fearing that he too might be forced to negotiate with his political opponents. President Karimov has aggressively tried to suppress those forces he perceives as threats to his political control.
As the report appropriately notes, the rights to association and fi"eedom of expression have been the most severely harmed. Based on the pattern of repression in 1993, it seems clear that President Karimov perceives the greatest threats to his control to emanate from the'democratic opposition and from political groups based on a common ethnic or religious identity. In addition to the suppression of Birlik, Erk and the Islamic Renaissance Party, which is well-described in the report, the government has suppressed smaller regional groups, with various forms of harassment and unfounded prosecutions. Among those suppressed was Adolat, or Justice, an Islamic group banned in 1992. In 1993, it became clear that Adolat's leader, Khakimjon Satimov, who had been imprisoned in 1992, was convicted on fabricated criminal charges. A Lawyers Committee report on freedom of ^sociation in Uzbekistan also notes harassment of the Samarkand Movement, a group based in the nation's Tajik minority. In 1993, the Uzbek parliament also closed down Dostyk Touy, journal of the Kazakh minority. Despite having a circulation of only 17,000, the journal was closed because of its "poor interpretation of the government's policies." As Abdurakhim Pulatov, one of the leaders of the opposition group Birlik, pointed out, President Karimov's fear of an Islamic fundamentalist takeover may well be a self-fulfilling prophecy. By silencing the democratic opposition so successfully in 1993, the Uzbek government has paved the way for extremists.
The report gives appropriate emphasis to how the rights of expression and association are violated in practice. It is important to point out, however, that many
407
CRITIQUE 1993
rights are not only violated in practice but also by existing Uzbek law, The report correctly notes that the right to assembly is not guaranteed; Article 57 of the Uzbek Constitution bans secret societies and political organizations with ethnic or religious bases. The Law on Public Organizations, adopted in February 1991, also violates the right to assembly by narrowly defining "association" to mean only those organizations registered with the government. This restriction allows for the tight control of fi-eedom of association throu^ a government-controlled registration process.
It is noteworthy that not a single independent human rights organization has yet been able to register legally in Uzbekistan. While the Uzbek Society for Human Rights tried to register in February 1992, the government was able to thwart its registration by delaying the processing of the group's founding documents and later by intimidating its members.
In detailing violations of press freedom, the report fails to note government harassment of foreign as well as Uzbek joumahsts. As in 1992, several foreign journalists were arrested or detained. Reporters Sans Frontières reported that a Dutch journalist was arrested for meeting with a member of the Erk group and that a Russian photographer was detained because he attempted to take pictures at the Pulatov trial. The report should have included reference to these cases.
While Uzbekistan's human rights violations have provoked significant concern among human rights organizations and intergovernmental bodies, the government has gone to considerable lengths to paint the picture of a modem state doing its utmost to ensure fundamental rights. This kind of "disinformation," which often characterized the former Soviet Union's approach to human rights, continues to be central to Uzbekistan's policies. For instance, while all genuine opposition groups have been quashed, at least two govenmient-sanctioned "opposition" parties have been created and registered. Although it has been impossible for any independent human rights organizations to register, a government-sponsored human rights group has been created and expeditiously registered. Although the government has repressed all organs of an independent press, it recently announced the creation of a fond to support the press. The stated purpose of the fimd, to which the government has given one billion mbles, is to assist the press to overcome financial, material and technical distribution problems. Despite repeated examples of denial of the right to a fair trial and of the fabrication of criminal charges against political opponents — both of which are well-described in the report — a new law on the court system took effect in November 1993, proclaiming the independence of judges, the openness of proceedings and equality before the law, regardless of race, nationality, language or religion. In the information vacuum that the Uzbek government has created, cynical disinformation of this kind further subverts an accurate perception of reality.
408
UZBEKISTAN
In summary, the State Department report describes succinctly and accurately the deteriorating human ri^ts situation in Uzbekistan, detailing its de facto dictatorship by President Kariinov and its fierce suppression of dissent. The report demonstrates clearly that far from creating stability, Uzbekistan's present human rights policies are likely only to foster instability in the friture.
409
CRITIQUE 1993
