VENEZUELA
Venezuela began its fourth successive year of economic and political turmoil in 1993 recovering from the second of two failed military attempts to overthrow the government of President Carlos Andrés Peréz. Constitutional guarantees were suspended after the November 27, 1992 uprising and fully restored only on January 18, 1993, leading to scores of serious human rights abuses in the course of the seven weeks during which the government sought to round up the rebels. Widespread social unrest and public protests over increasing poverty and crime, the economic restructuring policies of the Pérez government, official corruption and deteriorating public services all culminated in the removal of Pérez himself from office in May on charges of corruption. Protests and human rights abuses by the security forces diminished somewhat as Ramón Velásquez replaced Pérez as Interim President and guided the nation to national elections in December. Rafael Caldera, the 77-year-old founder of COPEI, Venezuela's Democratic Christian party, led a number of smaller parties and independents under the Convergencia alliance and was elected president with 30% of the vote.
The 1993 State Department report, like its immediate predecessor, presents a generally accurate and well-documented description of continuing serious human rights abuses in Venezuela, including "arbitrary and excessively lengthy detentions, abuse of detainees, extrajudicial killings by the police and military, the failure to punish police and security officers accused of abuses, corruption and gross inefficiency in the judicial and law enforcement systems, deplorable prison conditions, a lack of respect for the rigiits of indigenous people, and violence and discrimination against women." The report draws heavily on the work of the Venezuelan Program for Action and Education in Human Rights (PROVEA), a highly respected Venezuelan human rights organization, and cites frequently a comprehensive analysis of Venezuela's human rights problems prepared by Amnesty International in November 1993.
However, the report continues to suffer from a number of the problems noted in last year's Critique. It is at times too general, overlooks important events, fails to focus on the reasons for the ongoing impunity enjoyed by the security forces, and omits entirely a coherent analysis of the human rigjits violations that followed the November 27, 1992 coup attempt, the ramifications of which reached deeply into 1993.
The failure to address the aftermath of the November 1992 coup attempt is the report's most glaring weakness. The report does address some aspects of the human rights abuses committed by the government in the wake of the coup attempt, but in somewhat summary fashion spread across several sections, thus diluting the full effect of the government's response to the political unrest. The report should
410
VENEZUELA
have focused on the circumstances surrounding the kiUing of 26 civiUans by security agents on November 27, 1992; reports that the National Guard and Metropolitan Police summarily executed six rebels after the security forces stormed and recaptured a radio station seized earlier by coup forces; and the death of El Nacional reporter Virgilio Fernández, who was killed by a soldier while sitting in his press car covering the fitting near the La Carlota airport in Caracas. No judicial investigations have been initiated into any of these cases.
The report should also have followed up on reports from PROVEA and others that 18 persons arrested after the coup attempt were tortured during detention. One of the victims was 51 -year-old Miguel Antonio Bervis, a university professor and human rights activist who was arrested without a warrant on November 28, 1992 by a group of hooded men identifying themselves as military intelligence (DIM) agents. He was handcuffed, blindfolded and transported to a local headquarters of the Interior Ministry intelligence police (DISIP) and later to a military barracks. He was beaten during interrogations about his activities and for refusing to provide the address of a colleague sought by the DIM agents. He was then taken to a site on the Orinoco River where agents repeatedly forced his head under water and attempted to asphyxiate him. The agents threatened to torture his wife and son if he did not provide them with the address of his friend. At one point Bervis's blindfold slipped off and he was able to recognize approximately 20 members of the military standing nearby. Bervis was released without charge five days later with six fractured ribs and other injuries. There has been no investigation of the case.
The 1993 report again fails to note the report of the Andean Commission of Jurists, cited in last year's Critique, that a number of those arrested in connection with the coup and detained into 1993, including José Antonio Cova, Manuel Quijada and a number of political candidates in the December 1992 state and local elections, were actually detained for expressing their political opposition to the Pérez government.
The report mentions the November 27 uprising at the Retén de Catia prison and the subsequent killing of approximately 60 prisoners by the National Guard. However, its conclusion that, "The National Guard stormed the prison and allegedly fired indiscriminately after having heard that coup leaders had distributed arras there" is misleading to the extent that it implies that the facts surrounding the National Guard's responsibility are unclear. While details of the killings may still be in dispute, the evidence is clear that the National Guard's assault included indiscriminate firing and that no more than a few prisoners had weapons — attested to by the fact that only one member of the Guard was killed and one injured. More seriously, the report does not address the charge that the security forces engaged in summary executions of prisoners who were under their control. Human RigJits Watch/Americas has stated:
411
CRITIQUE 1993
According to reliable sources, examinations of the dead prisoners' bodies indicate that a majority of the dead had been shot at very close range, and that the majority of those were shot in and about the head, hi addition, long bloodstains found in the prison's interior suggest that injured or dead prisoners shot in their cellblocks had then been dragged to the inner courtyard.
There is no indication that the police or prison administrators made any effort to negotiate with the prisoners or control the disturbance by any means other than the massive use of force. Given this evidence, the report should have been much more forceful in denouncing these extrajudicial killings and clearly holding the government responsible for its inability or unwillingness to control the actions of the National Guard.
In another serious omission, the report fails to discuss the restrictions on due process rights imposed by the government after the coup attempt, It makes only a brief reference to the ad hoc military tribunals set up by presidential decree to tiy those accused of participating in the November 27 rebellion, without pointing out that the expedited proceedings, secrecy, accelerated pace, and restrictions on counsel and the ability to appeal that characterized these tribunals, severely curtailed the ability of the accused to defend themselves. Although the report correctly notes that the Supreme Court later declared the decree establishing the tribunals unconstitutional, it does not point out that the narrow procedural ruling left open the possibility that future ad hoc tribunals could pass constitutional muster if the President were to suspend by emergency decree the right to defense and the right to be tried by one's natural judges prior to establishing the tribunals. The report should have stated that the use of the ad hoc tribunals authorized by the antiquated 1938 Code of Military Justice violates Article 68 of the Venezuelan Constitution guaranteeing the right to a defense (which is a non-derogable right under the American Convention on Human Rights) and violates Venezuela's due process obligations under international law.
The report should also have cited the threat to the right of habeas corpus arising fi"om actions of the ordinary military tribunals assigned to try the accused rebels after the ad hoc tribunals were declared unconstitutional. Civilian Judge Braulio Sánchez granted a writ of habeas corpus to a group of defendants who claimed that they had been detained for more than the prescribed eight days without being charged after their cases were remanded to the ordinary military tribunals. The military courts refused to produce the defendants and responded by issuing a warrant and a summons for Judge Sánchez for interfering with military justice. The ensuing crisis was defused when the Supreme Court agreed to resolve the conflict. More than a year later, however, the Supreme Court has yet to issue an opinion.
412
VENEZUELA
Finally, the State Department report failed to focus on the decisions of Interim President Velásquez and incumbent President Caldera to grant pardons to soldiers accused of participating in the 1992 military uprisings before any fmdings were made regarding the human rights abuses connected with the coup attempts. Velázquez issued 20 pardons, while Caldera has granted about 60.
While the report once more correctly notes this year that "extrajudicial killings by the security forces continued," this does not make clear that the number of such killings increased for the third year in a row. PROVEA (the State Department's source for these statistics) recorded 143 extrajudicial killings during the period from October 1991 to September 1992, and 187 for the same months in 1992-1993 (excluding those killed in the November 27 coup attempt and the Retén de Catia riot). The report's discussion is disappointing in that it fails to provide any analysis of the reasons underlying this pattern of extrajudicial homicides. As a result, the reader is left with the accurate impression that state agents frequently kill civilians (Venezuela's statistics for this are on a par with those for Peru and Guatemala), but without any sense of why or under what circumstances. The report does emphasize, however, that members of the security forces "act with near impunity, as the government rarely brings charges against them."
Impunity is a theme to which the report accurately and appropriately returns again and again, noting that no one was prosecuted for the 34 extrajudicial killings committed during the 1992 coup attempts, for the killing of 60 prisoners in the Retén de Catia prison or for ai^ of the approximately 190 extrajudicial killings recorded by PROVEA in 1993. After ignoring the issue in the 1992 report, the State Department provides an update on the long-stalled investigation into the mass graves located in the La Peste area of Caracas' Southern Cemetery, which contain the remains of at least 68 of the hundreds of people who were killed by security forces during the riots of February and March 1989. Five years after the event, the approximately 260 investigations related to those killings remain paralyzed in military and civilian courts. Not one state agent is in custody for having killed any of the riot victims. While the report blandly states that, "The government and the courts . . . have made no substantial efforts to hasten proceedings," Human Rights Watch/Americas sardonically notes that the results of the civil judicial inquiries (three cases, including two acquittals and one manslaughter conviction) "compare favorably — although just barely — with the unmitigated whitewash conducted by the military justice system . . . ." In addition, identification of the buried corpses is hopelessly stalled. Only three of the 68 bodies have been positively identified since exhumations began in 1990, despite a standing court order to identify all of the remains. This was another opportunity for the report to strongly condemn the Venezuelan government for its unwillingness to push forward with an investigation of serious human rights violations.
413
CRITIQUE 1993
The report also touches on another longstanding case demonstrating the reluctance of the military to hold its members accountable for human rights abuses. This is the killing of 14 fishermen in the town of El Amparo in 1988. The State Department insufficiently addresses the significant legal flaws in a March 2, 1993 decision by a military appeals court sentencing 15 soldiers to seven-and-a-half years in prison for intentional homicide. The sentences had been reduced by half due to the "mitigating circumstance" that the officers used "excessive force" while allegedly resisting an attack by the fishermen. While the report mentions that human rights groups and victims' representatives expressed "dissatisfaction" with the verdict, it should have spoken in its own voice to state — as Human Rights Watch/Americas did — that "the multiple wounds on the bodies, the predominance of head and back wounds, and the evidence concerning the range at which at least some of the victims were shot are more consistent with a cold blooded ambush and executions than with legitimate combat." Finally, the report should have provided a procedural update on the case, noting that in November 1993 the Penal Chamber of the Supreme Court annulled the March 2 decision and ordered the establishment of a new ad hoc tribunal to review the evidence and hand down yet another sentence. The new ad hoc panel affirmed both the decision and the reasoning of the March 2 decision. In 1990, relatives of the victims, PRO VEA and la Red de Apoyo de la Justicia y la Paz (joined in 1992 by Human Rights Watch/Americas and the Center for Justice and International Law) filed complaints with the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights over the handling of the El Amparo massacre and, on January 7, 1994, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights agreed to hear the case, The State Department should discuss the actions taken by this international organization in next year's report.
The report has improved its analysis of the use of torture by security forces, addressing a number of criticisms made in last year's Critique. However, the report has yet to find its own voice on-this issue. It cites Amnesty International for the proposition that "torture and ill-treatment are widespread," but then shifts to its own voice to note that "most of the victims come fi^om the poorest and least articulate areas of society." The report then shifts back to Amnesty International and other human rights groups to consider some of the factors contributing to the problem, such as the failure of the courts to investigate complaints of torture properly and the lack of independence of the forensic investigative arm of the courts, the Institute of Forensic Medicine, Future reports should speak in their own authoritative voice on the issue of torture, given the widespread availability of reports produced by Venezuelan and international human rights groups — including a report issued by the London-based Redress Trust in April 1994, which listed Venezuela as number five in its ranking of the world's 29 countries with the most reported cases of torture — and records of the Public Ministry listing such complaints.
414
VENEZUELA
Given the 78% increase in the number of complaints of torture reported by PROVEA from 1992 to 1993, the State Department should focus in greater detail on the reasons for the dramatic rise in the abuse of detainees in addition to those afready mentioned: the excessively lengthy eight-day pre-arraignment period, during which most torture occurs and habeas corpus petitions are in practice not reviewed; the weight that confessions carry as evidence in court; the routine violation of safeguards prohibiting incommunicado detention and the practice of moving detainees among various locations; and the ineffectiveness of the averiguación de nudo hecho, the special procedure for investigating alleged human rights violations by government agents, which Human Rights Watch/Americas, Amnesty International and the Andean Commission of Jurists have all claimed provides a state agent with almost de facto hnmunity from prosecution during the months or years during which these investigations typically drag on.
Finally, the report fails to mention at all the massive and systematic practice of the security forces of abusing and maltreating citizens in the course of carrying out official police duties. PROVEA received 883 reports of abuse by police between September 1992 and October 1993.
The report provides an excellent summary of the deplorable state of Venezuela's prisons and the prisoner-on-prisoner violence in 1993 that left a death toll of anywhere between the 195 killings registered by PROVEA and the 600 deaths estimated by "one expert on Venezuela's prisons" cited by the report. However, the report's narrative neglects to focus directly on the government's responsibility for the "underfiinding, poorly trained staff . . . corruption among prison officials ... extreme overcrowding, minimal health care, and physical abuse by guards," that contributed to the violence, and can only cite the Attorney General's efforts to monitor prison conditions in 1991 as an example of government action to address the problems. The situation is particularly egregious given the 1991 report's characterization of prison conditions as "appalling" and its conclusion that "concrete actions to improve conditions do not appear to be imminent." The report should have focused on the government's complete failure to take concrete steps to reduce the prison bloodshed or to investigate and bring to justice the security agents responsible for extrajudicial killings. The 1994 report will provide another opportunity to review some of the results of these over 120 inmates were killed in a riot in Sabaneta prison in Maracaibo on January 3,1994, nine more died in a prison riot in Aragua on January 5, 1994 and an additional 40 prisoners have been killed as of May 1994.
Although the 1993 report expanded its discussion of arbitrary arrest and detention, addressing some of the criticisms raised by last year's Critique, it should have noted the widespread use of detention in connection with the repression of protests and demonstrations. Of the 1,595 arbitrary detentions registered by PROVEA for the period between October 1992 and September 1993,720 occurred
415
CRITIQUE 1993
during peaceful protests. This pattern of arrests followed that noted last year; detentions rose in conjunction with protest activity, with 465 persons arrested during February and March 1993, the months of most intense demonstrations. The report also noted that 308 demonstrators were wounded and five killed, with all casualties attributed to police action. On July 27, police even fired rubber bullets at a group of blind street vendors to disperse a rally organized to protest the banning of street vendors in central Caracas. At least six of the vendors suffered serious injury. The report should have stated that these arrests and the use of violent measures violated Article 115 of the Venezuelan Constitution, which guarantees the right to peacefiil protest. The police continue to repress protest demonstrations violently. The report states accurately that some 15% of peacefiil protests in 1993 met with violent police reactions. This fact, and not the occurrence of numerous other demonstrations, should have been the focus of the report's discussion.
The report accurately describes the 1939 Law of Vagrancy and Crooks, which permits police to detain vaguely defined "vagrants" for up to five years without judicial review. On its face, this law is so egregious as to merit the State Department's own strong criticism. At a minimum, the report should have stated that the law violates Article 61 of the Venezuelan Constitution, which guarantees the right to a legal defense, and in the view of Amnesty International also violates various provisions of the ICCPR, to which Venezuela is a party. In addition, the report should have focused on the use of this law by police to round up "undesirables" in poor neighborhoods and to intimidate opponents of the government. For example, the report notes that the law was used by the head of the Caracas Metropolitan Police to threaten two human rights activists with arrest if they persisted in their activities. The report inexplicably fails to state, however, that both activists — Enrique Ochoa Anitch, member of Congress and chairman of the Movimiento al Socialismo party's Human Rights Committee, and Edgar Silva — were, in fact, arrested on the same day the threat was issued after participating in a peaceful demonstration in Caracas. They were later released without charge.
Again this year the report accurately summarizes the Venezuelan judicial system as "overburdened, corrupt and inefficient," noting that political parties and individuals can "influence judicial decisions in particular cases." Once again, however, the report fails to discuss the underlying reasons for the abysmal state of the institutions charged with defending human rights in Venezuela, Human Rights Watch/Americas stated that:
Improper judicial conduct responds to many factors including the absence of a tradition of high judicial ethics, poor pay, a legal system that permits ex parte contacts and the absence of an effective judicial disciplinary system. Minimal professional qualifications also contribute: while there is a qualifying exam
416
VENEZUELA
for the judiciary, passing grades are reputed to be set very low. Large numbers of law graduates with marginal legal skills and hence few professional alternatives become eligible for appointment to the bench .... [P]olitics still intrudes on the judiciary. Lower court judges are not given life assignments to particular courts, and they remain under the scrutiny of the legislature after their appointments. The main political parties, acting through their representation on the Judicial Council [responsible for the selection and appointment of new judges], secure the reassignment and promotion of judges for partisan and other purposes.
While the report discusses government censorship in the aftermath of the two 1992 coup attempts, it should have described other actions against the press — that reflect a tendency to attempt to suppress information critical of the government. The Committee to Protect Journalists listed 56 separate threats or attacks on the press in 1993. For example, the May 18 edition of El Diario de Caracas — containing an editorial warning of the possibility of a Fujimori-style coup allegedly being planned by embattled then-President Carlos Andrés Pérez was subject to confiscation by agents of the DISIP in several sections of Caracas. The radio station Radio Rumbos in Villa de Cura was searched by DISIP agents on September 9 and a cassette containing declárations of students condemning the violent repression of protests by the police was confiscated. Journalist Aleni Bracho Vizcaya was arrested by order of the govemor of the State of Guárico on October 8 and reporter Luis Aguilera was subject to attempted arrest by order of the Govemor of the State of Nueva Esparta, both for having written articles critical of the respective govemors. Finally, the report should have noted the January 15 death of Veronica Tessari, a television reporter who died from injuries sustained when she was hit on the head by a tear gas canister fired at close range during a student protest in Caracas on March 22, 1992. Those responsible for her death have not been identified.
The report's description of Venezuela as a "multiparty democracy with a government freely elected by secret ballot" is generally accurate but misleading. The two major political parties, Acción Democrática and COPEI, dominate all the organizations of civil society and monopolize the political process, even after the strong showing by the Convergencia alliance and smaller parties in the 1993 national elections. The parties, in tum, are govemed by a small elite, which effectively determines the outcome of most political and economic issues. The parties agreed at the outset of Venezuela's democracy some 35 years ago to avoid conflict by sharing the spoils of power, leading to a situation in which, as Human Rights Watch/Americas observes, "electoral competition has not empowered the
417
CRITIQUE 1993
Venezuelan electorate or created an authentic form of democratic governance."
Prior to 1992, for example, the president was the only national official elected by direct vote; legislators were selected from party-appointed slates and mayors and governors were appointed by the president. In 1993, voters directly elected 50% of the Congress for the first time. The report should have pointed out that the ability of AD and COPEI to dominate the electoral process and control the voting stations contributed heavily to widespread fraud in the 1992 state elections. The Supreme Court has annulled the results of gubernatorial elections in five of the nation's 22 states on the grounds of fraud. Elections were yet to be held in two of those states more than a year and a half after the original polls. Moreover, no satisfactory explanation was ever provided for the fact that one million of the ballots cast in the 1993 congressional elections (17% of the total) were nullified, compared to the more usual tally of three to four percent of null ballots in the presidential voting.
418
