SOUTH AFRICA
In 1993, the curtain fell on legal apartheid in South Africa. But this transitional year was marked by the most brutal and unrelenting political violence in the country's history, leaving more than 4,000 people dead. The 1993 State Department report accurately documents the denial of civil and political rights to black South Africans and the continuing socio-economic disparities between the races. However, although this year's report contains important new information, it is often too brief, understating the pervasive extent of human rights violations and at times describing them inaccurately. The report also fails to discuss South Africa's first human rights charter, the Chapter of the Interim Constitution on Fundamental Rights, which guarantees a wide range of freedoms and empowers the new government to take steps to redress the legacy of apartheid.
While the future shape of South African democracy was being negotiated at the multiparty forum, the government's military intelligence system continued to foment violence among blacks and to orchestrate attacks on the African National Congress (ANC) through a network of clandestine front groups and operatives. In a serious lapse, the report fails to highlight the impunity of members of the security forces implicated in such human rights abuses. It is true that Lt. Col. Eugene de Kock, former commanding officer of the Vlalq)laas counter-intelligence unit — identified as a death squad of the South African Police (SAP) — recently appeared in court along with two other men on charges related to these "Third Force" activities, including four counts of murder. However, the government has consistently failed to prosecute violators in a series of similar cases. In addition, the -government has reportedly made payments estimated to total between R12 million and R20 million (US $3.55m and $6m) to more than 70 members of the Vlakplaas unit. De Kock himself was paid R1.2 million ($355,000) as an inducement to leave the SAP. In January 1993, former SAP officer John Botumile Mokaleng alleged that he knew of secret graves containing the remains of a number of murdered detainees, including the prominent community activist Stanza Bopape from Pretoria's Mamelodi township, who disappeared in 1988 while in police custody. Despite official assurances, the authorities have failed to conduct a proper investigation into Bopape's disappearance. After a prolonged campaign by the family and human rights activists, the Attorney-General of the Witwatersrand decided in July to prosecute a police lieutenant (who was subsequently convicted) in the murder of Bethuel Maphumulo, who was killed while in SAP custody in 1990.
Although the number of deaths in police custody reportedly declined from 123 in 1992 to 39 in 1993, the report again makes no reference to the government's failure to fully investigate these deaths and to prosecute offenders. It should also have commented on the fact that 4,390 people died in politically related violence in 1993, 854 more than the unprecedented number of victims in the previous year.
331
CRITIQUE 1993
The report consistently fails to measure the escalating pace of violence over the course of 1993, despite the clear increase in the number of gruesome incidents after the announcement of dates for multiracial elections, hi August, 554 deaths were recorded — an average of 18 a day, or more than double the average death rate of the previous three years. According to human rights monitors, attacks against whites also increased in 1993, a fact that should have been reported, hi 1993, the South African murder rate was ten times higher than that of the United States and 95 times that of the United Kingdom.
In ascribing responsibility for this endemic political violence, the 1993 report repeats the evasive formulations of earlier reports, citing the involvement of a number of protagonists, ranging fi"om local gangs to striking workers. The report links the escalation of political violence to the negotiations only to the extent that increased violence fomented tensions between ANC and Inkatha Freedom Party supporters, with the aim of disrupting the political transition. The reference to alleged common criminal activities, such as car theft, by members of civil defense units is irrelevant to a report about human rights and should have been omitted.
As in previous years, the report fails to comment on the fact that the largest number of killings occurred in KwaZulu-Natal, or to refer to the destruction of the homes, villages and personal belongings of thousands of people violently displaced from the virtual civil war in that area. The 1993 report repeats almost verbatim the previous year's comment that the homelands of Ciskei and Bophuthatswana "in particular" continued to suppress free political activity. This phrasing ignores the effect of the endemic violence in KwaZulu, which severely limited free political activity there. The report also fails to mention the passage of legislation enabling the transfer of land to several of the homelands, including KwaZulu, during 1993, Despite an agreed moratorium on transfers, the government refused to release details of the exact location of the land affected.
The report only accepts with qualification the charges that political opponents were assassinated by several paramilitary and homeland security forces ("outside the central government"), specifically the KwaZulu Police, the Azanian People's Liberation Army (APLA) and some Umkhonto weSizwe (MK) operatives in Natal. Although the report describes government investigations into violent deaths in black areas as "inadequate," it again neglects to scrutinize this government inaction or to explore active complicity by the authorities in human rights abuses. The report is riddled with contradictions in this regard. It wrongly states, for example, that, "There was no evidence of a widespread, high-level conspiracy within the security forces [fomenting violence]," Yet it refers later to the findings of inquests into the deaths of anti-apartheid activists which concluded that high-ranking government officials had instructed agents to carry out the killings. On March 18, 1994, after two years of investigations, the Goldstone Commission of Inquiry Regarding the Prevention of Public Violence and Intimidation fmally
332
SOUTH AFRICA
acknowledged the possible higii-level involvement of SAP officers in "Third Force" activities to destabilize the country through violence.
Last year's Critique noted an inadequate discussion of prison conditions in South Africa, and the 1993 report unfortunately continues to pay scant attention to this serious problem. There is no mention at all of the reported 12,000 children detained in adult prisons, with the report merely repeating comments from previous years about the arrest and treatment of sfreet children. It should have mentioned that in June, nine officials from the Police and Prison Officets Union (POPCRU) were arbitrarily detained and denied a bail hearing for 120 days, just before their meeting with the Minister of Correctional Services to resolve a dispute between union members and prison officials in Pietermaritzburg.
As in past years, the report fails to point out that South Africa's Internal Security Act (ISA) and Public Safety Act (PSA) are inconsistent with internationally recognized human rights standards. The report should have scrutinized the effect of the "mini-states of emergency" or "unrest areas," which the government routinely invokes in response to perceived political unrest, thus repressing normal political activity and authorizing extreme powers to the security forces, including the dispersal of gatherings by force and indemnity from prosecution. The report should have pointed out that more than twice as many people were detained under the security laws during 1993 than in 1992. Over 5,000 political arrests occurred in 1993, most of them aimed at curbing freedom of political expression. Section 3 of the PSA unrest regulations allows detention without charge for 30 days, and there are frequent allegations of torture during such detentions. In 1993, 712 people were detained without trial. The report fails to mention that political trials continue under the ISA, with 146 trials involving 1,179 defendants being completed in 1993.
South Africa's Interim Constitution should have been described in greater detail, and there should have been some effort to characterize its hybrid of traditional civil; political and socio-economic rights with indigenous principles. Although it is a transitional document, tiie Constitution will have a profound effect on the new government and its policies. The report likewise fails to mention the new Constitutional Court, which will be established to enforce the Interim Constitution and ensure that the final Constitution complies with the principles agreed upon during the multiparty negotiations. These include a democratic system of government, constitutional rigidity and entrenched fundamental rights; a prohibition against discrimination based on race, gender and other grounds; affumative action; separation of powers with appropriate checks and balances; an independent judiciary; an acknowledgement and protection of different languages and cultures; the participation of minorities in the legislative process; and a government structured at a national, provincial and local level. The Interim Constitution is noticeably silent on the matter of the death penalty and the
333
CRITIQUE 1993
increasingly controversial issue of reproductive rights. The provision that, "Every person shall have the right to life" apparently defers to the Constitutional Court decisions on whether the death penalty may still be applied and whether abortions will be permitted. The question of the death penalty remains particularly sensitive, in view of the fact that 324 inmates remain on death row. The Interim Constitution also promises "just and equitable" compensation in the event that property is expropriated, and provides that compensation disputes must be settled by a court of law, taking into account the market value of the property, its current use and the history of its acquisition. The controversial labor provisions of the Interim Constitution are an example of the difficult political compromises that went into the drafting of the document: while workers are guaranteed the right to strike, employers are also guaranteed the right to lock out workers.
In its discussion of freedom of association and assembly, the report should have described the banning of meetings in the homelands. Similarly, it repeats the previous year's failure to report on the implementation of the Aliens Control Act of 1991, which was used to deport 80,261 aliens to Mozambique in 1993, and grants officials vast and unchecked powers of search, seizure, arrest and detention.
Gender-based discrimination and rampant violence against women receive insufficient coverage. The report should have referred to the Campaign for the Women's Charter, launched by the Women's National Coalition, consisting of over 80 member organizations representing two million women. The campaign is aimed at guaranteeing gender equality before the law, at work and in government, and at preventing violence, intimidation and rape.
The inclusion of new sections on discrimination against South Africa's 17.5 million children and against people with disabilities must be welcomed. However, these sections would have benefitted from greater detail. For example, the report does not mention that the Child Care Amendment Act of 1991 was passed to enable adoptions of children without racial considerations. According to the South African Medical Research Council, malnutrition affects nearly 25% of children under five, who comprise 36% of the total South African population. The Community Agency for Social Enquiry (CASE) found in a comprehensive study of basic health conditions that one-third of all South Africans could not afford to feed their children under the age of five.
The 1993 report includes references to continuing racial discrimination in education and pensions. Once again, however, the legacy of apartheid could have been depicted more thoroughly. The CASE study, for instance, found that 28 million blacks had no medical insurance; 3.6 million blacks in rural areas and squatter camps had no toilet facilities; only about 33% of blacks had regular refuse removal; and 44% of blacks had to fetch water from outside of their yards. The report's discussion of race-based discrimination also displays a certain carelessness. It refers, for example, to "progress as more minorities and women are graduating
334
SOUTH AFRICA
from the mihtary academy." Blacks are, of course, far from a minority in South Africa.
The 1993 report has updated its section on worker rights, referring to new labor laws that accommodate farm, domestic and public sector employees, but exclude the homelands. It should, however, have provided more information about these sectors of the workforce, including details of their conditions of employment and the prevalence of rigjits violations. It might have drawn attention to the fact that some 1.3 million farm and domestic workers continue to work under near-feudal conditions. The report also fails to offer any assessment of decisions by the Industrial and Labor Appeals courts.
Finally, the report fails to document a series of incidents designed to harass and intimidate voters in the April 1994 elections. On several occasions ANC supporters broke up meetings of the Democratic Party (DP); in June, the South African National Civics Organization announced that it would make it impossible for traditionally white parties, such as the NP and the DP, to campaign in black communities; and in November, uniformed members of the Afrikaner Resistance Movement (AWB) broke up an ANC meeting in the town hall of Middelburg, rushing the stage and tearing down ANC banners, flags and posters. According to one survey released in August 1993, 14 percent of black South Africans said they would not vote for fear of intimidation and violence.
335
CRITIQUE 1993
