ARGENTINA
This is a poor Report, omitting or misrepresenting much that is essential to evaluate the human rights situa-" tion. It appears to have been written in an attempt to support the Reagan Administration's professed intention to certify during 1983 that Argentina is complying with the human rights conditions of the foreign assistance act. To reveal the distortions in this report, our critique follows its sequence.
The Report credits the military government, after General Bignone replaced General Galtieri as President, with easing restraints on civil and political liberties and with committing itself to elections by late 1983. In contrast with other Country Reports, this section neglects to mention that all of these changes have been forced upon a resisting military government by an increasingly critical civilian opposition.
It is not true, however, that the press "has been less inhibited in 1982 than at any time since the early 197.0's." For a period following the elections of 1973 , the press was more free and represented a wider spectrum of thought than in the last year. It is true, however, that the surviving press, with the addition of some new publications.
was much bolder in its criticism of the military government than at any time since the 1976 coup.
The introduction to the Report attributes incidents of violence to "uncontrolled elements," linked to the state security organizations "but operating without the sanction of the Government." This explanation, offered by the military government over and over again since 1976, is widely discredited in Argentina. Those "elements" must be considered its responsibility as long as the government makes no effort to investigate the incidents or to discourage them. It is especially ludicrous to offer the "uncontrolled elements" explanation in the case of abductions of several people who later reappeared, since in most of these cases, though the Report does not say it, these persons reappeared in official prisons and detention centers. Though some observers may interpret these incidents as efforts by dissidents within the government to undermine the movement toward constitutional rule, it is just as legitimate to speculate that they are actually deliberate attempts to intimidate a segment of the opposition, including human rights groups, to ensure the success of a conditioned and limited transition to civilian rule.
Human rights groups have indeed increased their public participation in Argentine life. The reason, however,
-10-
is not that they have been granted greater freedom of action since General Bignone took over the presidency, but rather that their demands have become a part of the agenda of the increasingly widespread opposition to the military.
K i11i ngs
The thorough investigations promised by the government in the Martinez and DuPont cases have not materialized. In neither case has there been any indictment nor any significant break-through. This section fails to include the killing by police of two demonstrators, one in Mendoza on March 30 and one in Buenos Aires on December 16.. The latter case is particularly scandalous. Four officers of the Federal Police who were in the official car from which the murderer emerged were interrogated but released on the grounds that the bullet that killed the demonstrator was not of the type and caliber used by the police. The Report refers to this murder, at p. 390 only in the following sentence:
"Violence did break out at the end of the December 16, 1982 demonstration, however, and one demonstrator was killed."
This is misleading in that it does not disclose that the killing seems to have been a deliberate execution by a
-11-
security official who got out of a car and calmly approached Dalmiro Flores and shot him point-blank.
Disappearance
It is false to assert that there was no evidence of disappearances in 1982. Ricardo Rene Haidar, a leader of the Montonero revolutionary opposition, was abducted in Buenos aires in December. Public complaints through the press and a habeas corpus were filed on his behalf; a delegation of Brazilian Congressmen, politicians and trade union leaders travelled to Argentine in January 1983 to inquire about his whereabouts. A columnist for La Prensa, known for his contacts with the security forces, has written that, according to a general, Haidar was killed by security forces, but that fact could not be acknowledged because of the delicate political situation.
In the twelve instances of temporary disappearances noted in the Report, the human rights organizations do not infer official responsibility only from the fact that some abductors identified themselves as members of the security forces. Rather, they point to those and other facts - including that most abductees finally reappeared in official detention centers - as repeating the pattern of the thousands of disappearances that occurred between 1976 and 1981, that
-12-
were recently again acknowledged by high military authorities as having been conducted under official orders. (See interview in El Pais, Madrid, with General Ramon J. Camps, former chief of police of the Province of Buenos Aires, January 1983).
As to the number of those who disappeared in the past, it should be noted that the list of the Permanent Assembly for Human Rights was updated in 1982 to include 7,800 cases. At the same time, APDH and other human rights groups have always stressed that many cases never came to their attention, because relatives decided not to make public complaints. The fact that there were many more disappearances than those on APDH's list was again made clear last November when a judge released a partial list of names of people buried clandestinely in the past by the Army. Some of those names had never been listed either among the disappeared or among the dead in clashes with security f orces.
During 1982, there were many efforts by allies of the government to press the point that all the disappeared are dead. If this is the case, all of them have been killed by the security forces, and none "at the hands of the terrorist groups" as the Report claims. Although the government has repeatedly attempted to confuse the issue by claiming
that some of the disappeared are in exile or were killed by their former friends, it must be noted that the lists of disappeared include only persons taken by the security forces and never heard from again. Those killed when resisting arrest, or later transferred to official prisons, or killed in internal guerrilla conflicts, are not included in lists compiled by human rights groups.
The Report does not say that the unmarked graves involve twelve different locations and contain more than 1,000 corpses. It also neglects to say that in all twelve lawsuits, the judges have refused to allow participation by relatives of the disappeared or human rights organizations, have kept the investigations secret, have not yet ordered any identification of bodies and generally treat the cases merely as violations of administrative duties by cemetery personnel.
The State Department apparently believes that the government has privately provided information to relatives on 1,450 cases, including in "some," the location of the remains. Few in Argentina believe this. Since the identities of the 1,450 families that benefitted from this magnanimous gesture remain undisclosed, the information set forth in the Country Report is unverified. Although the State Department says this information is "believed," it does not say whether
-14-
anyone other than the compilers of the Report believe it. The relatives that are active in the human rights organizations (Mothers and Grandmothers of Plaza de Mayo, Commission of Relatives) have not been thus informed, which raises the question of whether they are being penalized for their open and public search for information. In any event, such a confidential procedure, if it exists at all, can hardly be considered a substitute for an effective accounting of the fate and whereabouts of the disappeared. The Ministry of Interior has promised a "philosophical" explanation of the isssue of the disappeared, which has yet to be produced. More disturbingly, it also announced it is planning an amnesty for security personnel, a measure that, if enacted, could prevent future judicial or legislative inquiries.
Torture
The Report is generally accurate about the pervasive use of torture by Argentine security forces and the increased public outcry against it. The cases cited of preventive and punitive actions by the government however, convey the false impression that there is an active attempt to discourage it by the authorities. In fact, those isolated instances of investigations and sanctions all relate to torture inflicted on persons accused of non-political crimes.
-15-
Since 1976, there has never been any investigation of torture against political detainees.
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
The test of reasonableness is not applicable to the "severity of sentences," but only to court review of administrate detentions under the state of siege. Therefore, it has no bearing on the length of the sentences nor on the conditions of imprisonment of those convicted of political crimes.
Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
It is not the Penal Code, but the different provincial codes of criminal procedure that grant courts (but not police) authority to detain persons and hold them incommunicado. Both in political and non-political cases, however, security forces routinely exercise this unauthorized power. A law passed by the Junta in 1976 does give broad powers of this sort to military officers in security-related matters. That law is still in effect.
The constitutional "right of option" (to leave the country rather than remain in prison under the state of siege) has been made "nominal" by the military government, through constitutional amendments enacted by the Junta in 1978. They give the Executive a veto power over its
-16-
exercise. An important limitation to the state of siege, written into the Constitution since 1853, has thus been made a matter of executive discretion. In addition to citing the 1,000 former prisoners allowed to into exile (but not allowed to return to Argentina), the Report should have mentioned the several thousand repeatedly denied the right of option and therefore held indefintely without charges for 5,6 or 7 years. At least 101 and possibly more, remain in such a status in 1983.
By using the word "parole," the Report misrepresents the status of restricted liberty (libertad vigilada) or house arrest, into which most political prisoners are released. Unlike judicial parole, these forms of PEN detention involve serious restrictions on movement, employment and association, and provide for extensive police surveillance.
The figures given by the government for the remaining number of political prisoners have been consistently disputed by the human rights organizations. The figures are difficult to verify because the government never provides a list of names.
Denial of Fair Public Trial
It is not true that defendants can be denied access to evidence against them in procedures before regular courts.
-17-
Besides the two cases cited in the Report, there were many other cases in 1982 where the regular courts upheld decisions of military tribunals or Special War Councils. Although many courts continued to use the reasonableness test to review indefinitely prolonged PEN detentions without trial, many other courts continue to reject appeals against such arrests.
The Report fails to mention that Judge Narvaiz, one of four federal district judges for Buenos Aires, resigned and fled to Brazil in late December. He had been threatened by General Lopez Dominguez, the Army's general counsel, if he pressed for information on the death under torture of prisoners taken by the IX Infantry Brigade in Comodoro Rivadavia. Before he left, Judge Narvaiz had also ruled the state of siege unconstitutional in the case of a lawyer held without charges since 1975.
Invasion of the Home
Under constitutional doctrine, the state of siege does not suspend the protection of the home, since Art. 23 of the Constitution expressly limits the powers of the Executive to detain and relocate individuals. The general practice of the security forces, however, is to conduct searches without warrants.
-18-
Freedom of Speech and Press
This section fails to mention that in November, three journalists, including a correspondent for Newsweek and The Washington Post, complained that they had been harassed and followed. Two Argentine journalists obtained asylum in foreign embassasies and then departed. The owner of Radio Cont inental, the most important private broadcasting station complained that her license was in danger of not being renewed because of critical statements made on her programs. In September, a well-known radio personality was threatened and followed by unmarked cars. In January 1983, HUMOR, the magazine with the largest circulation, was taken off the stands by the police, on account of its coverage of the threats to Judge Narvaiz.
In discussing the cases of foreign journalists kidnapped during the Falklands-Malvinas War, the section neglects to mention the case of three British journalists, prosecuted by a federal judge in Ushuaia, Tierro del Fuego, on espionage charges, and held in prison for months.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
Though generally accurate, this section fails to mention that even after the lifting of the ban on political activities, freedom of association was still selectively and
-19-
arbitrarily denied. For example, a round table on the proposed self-amnesty for security personnel, to be held in a downtown hotel in November, was prohibited without explanation. It was then held inside the offices of the Centro de Estudios Legales y Sociales (CELS).
The anti-government rallies in October and December, including the march of the human rights organizations on December 10, were harshly repressed by the police, as was the labor march of March 30. They were not "tolerated" by the Bignone administration.
Freedom of Movement
Prisoners in libertad vigilada (erroneously called parole) are restricted not by judges but by the Ministry of Interior and police. Many have waited longer than 6 to 9 months before their restrictions were completely terminated. Contrary to the statement in the report, they are also restricted as to work authorization and as to meeting with other people. This results in serious hardships for persons who have spent many years in prison, and for their families. Refugees from the post-World War II period have long been assimilated. As to the thousands of persons in the country from elsewhere in Latin America, it must be noted that, Argentina does not recognize them as refugees, according to
-20-
reservations filed when the government signed the UN Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees. They do not, therefore, enjoy legal refugee status.
Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
The appointment of civilians to cabinet posts and to provincial and municipal positions should not be seen as a measure of increased civilian participation in government, since in all cases these civilians are long time supporters of the military regime. They are either apolitical technocrats or members of insignificant conservative parties.
Government Attitudes Regarding International and Non-Governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
This section should have noted the renewed diplomatic efforts by the government to curb the activités of both the UN and the OAS commissions on Human Rights. The government has also actively opposed the activities of the Working Group on Forced and Involuntary Disappearances created by the UN Subcommittee for the Prevention of all forms of Discrimination (ECOSOC). This body has issued several interim reports dealing with disappearances in Argentina.
Since August, members of the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo, CELS, and Fami1iares have been repeatedly
threatened, followed and harassed, including the posting of offensive and menacing posters in their neighborhoods, some with anti-Semitic overtones. These incidents should not be called "minor."
Conclusion
In addition to the omissions or misrepresentations cited above, the Report failed to mention five important questions:
(a)	despite calls from the Church, the trade unions and all political parties, the government continues to rule by state of siege, long after any internal or external threat. Besides keeping persons in prison or in exile for an indefinite period without any due process, this allows the military regime arbitrarily to allow or restrict the exercise of fundamental rights.
(b)	during the year, the Abuelas de Plaza de Mayo received information on additional cases of children who disappeared with their parents or were born to women who were pregnant when they were abducted. Their dossier now lists 116 cases, and they estimate that there are many more unreported. Their demands received considerable domestic and international support during 1982, but the government continued to block the release of any information;
-22-
(c)	in August, a high official of the Ministry of Interior announced that an amnesty law would be enacted, the effect of which would be to protect all members of the security forces from any investigation or punishment for crimes committed during the so-called "war against subversion." Many institutions and prominent individuals publicly opposed such a measure, including the conference of Catholic Bishops. The government is, nonetheless, expected to issue such a law in 1983;
(d)	In November, President Bignone called on all parties and other sectors to reach an agreement (concerta-
c ion) with the government, on a long list of topics, including the conduct of the Falklands/Malvinas war, the desaparecidos, the cases of official corruption, the state of siege and other very serious matters. Presumably, the government expects the civilian population to agree not to pursue investigations into these matters, in exchange for holding elections. Every significant sector of the society has rejected this accord, although the government has said it will try again;
(e)	During the war in the South Atlantic, the British forces captured Captain Alfredo Astiz, widely reported as responsible for many disappearances, murders and torture of prisoners, as an agent of a special counter-
insurgency team of the Navy. The Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo intervened in a lawsuit to submit evidence and seek his prosecution. At the end of the conflict, Astiz was returned to Argentina, yet no investigation of any sort is under way.
-24-
