CHILE
The Report notes that human rights conditions in Chile have "improved significantly in comparison with the -post-coup period, 1973-77". This is quite true; no regime could have maintained for nine years the post-coup levels of brutality in the absence of a civil conflict. The Report goes on to state: "Recent trends, however, show that the pace of improvements has slowed in the past two years." This is not quite true; in fact, the situation deteriorated markedly in 1982. The Report presents the facts necessary to draw that painful conclusion - the increase in arbitrary arrests and cases of internal exile, the expulsion of two labor leaders and the former president of the Christian Democratic Party, the legalized repression under a nine-year-old "state of emergency," the continued incidence of torture during detention, the political murder of a prominent labor figure -but presents them either in qualified terms or without the necessary explanation, refusing to draw the conclusion they require.
In several instances, this avoidance amounts to distortion by omission. The Report states that 57 torture denunciations were filed before the courts - down from 68 in 1981 - and concludes that "some" of these denunciations
-25-
"appear credible." It fails to mention that the 57 cases have been minutely documented, presented because they are unassailable; that human rights groups have reason to assume the unreported incidence of torture is higher; and that no court action is possible largely because the secret police have immunity from testifying, and refuse to appear. The Report mentions house searches briefly, noting that human rights groups have complained of raids conducted without warrants; it omits the fact that these massive nocturnal raids have been conducted as military operations in entire neighborhoods of Santiago's poorest communities.
Not only omissions, but obfuscation mars the Report's presention. When it notes that "Police detentions are authorized prior to public notification of arrest," the Report is avoiding the clear explanation that such arbitrary arrests amount to temporary "disappearances." And, explaining the "minimal" restraints on individual rights, the Report contains this startling sentence: "It appears that personal liberties are restricted only in cases of fairly direct conflict with the interests of the Government." One might ask: in what other circumstances is repression ever necessary? Moreover, it is not clear how "fairly direct" conflict is measured, or how Government "interests" are objectively defined.
The Chilean Commission for Human Rights has
-26-
reported that individual and mass detentions in 1982 almost doubled 1981 levels. The Report gives no explanation for this intensified repression, except as retaliation against "unauthorized" protest demonstrations or against the implied security threat posed by "a moderate increase" in "extremist violence" such as property bombings. The Chilean Commission explains the repression, however, as the response to increased unrest over economic conditions - 25% unemployment, a real-wage decline of 13%, and the collapse of a monetarist economic program, which had already caused considerable popular suffering. Despite this, the Report's treatment of the economic program is relatively congratulatory. It cites, for example, "rising employment" between 1976 and 1981, omitting the fact that employment during 1973-76 had been forced to such catastrophically low levels that an improvement represented only partial recovery.
Apart from the economy, the year's most controversial issue inside Chile was the right of exiles to return. The Report refers to some 30,000 political exiles. While acknowledging that the official commission on this matter proposed 125 candidates for return and then was disbanded, the Report qualifies this absurdity by noting that "it is understood that others ... will be readmitted subsequently." No such understanding has been given a formal
-27-
shape; it is no more than a hope. And a dim hope, given the identity of the 125 approved candidates: they include a number of non-political temporary residents abroad and no significant political figures, certainly no activists of the Allende period. As the Report notes only in passing. Human Rights Commission president Jaime Castillo has been unable to return. As it also notes with unusual and commendable directness, "several expulsions occurred during the [exiles] commission's existence."
The Report contains references, in one form or another, to the entire range of egregious violations of human rights in Chile during 1982. Were this material presented so as to reflect the real deterioration of conditions, it would be difficult to understand why the Administration considered certifying Chile on human rights and why it has consistently opposed U.N. condemnations of Chile for human rights abuses. Read objectively, without the apologies, the Report is a severe indictment of a regime still resorting to extraordinary means after nine years in power.
-28-
