ZAIRE
On its face, the Reagan Administration's Country Reports on human rights for Zaire is well written and objectively critical, but it falls short on several key counts.
The Report provides extensive detail on poor prison conditions and inadequacies in the judicial system. It accurately describes the severe restrictions on press freedom, political parties, and labor union activities.
It suffers however from a tendency to excuse these problems, as symptoms of poverty and inefficiency, rather than the direct responsibility of the Mobutu Government. Thus, the Report suggests that while President Mobutu personally received a delegation from the International Committee of the Red Cross in 1982, and "personally took steps to facilitate" their work, "lower-level officials continued to respond slowly to instructions from the ministerial level to cooperate." While efforts to cooperate with international human rights organizations were undertaken "at the highest levels of Government," according to the Report, "not all local and lower-level officials have been sufficiently educated about the rights of prisoners." And while the Report acknowledges poor prison conditions, these are excused, at least inferentially, because such conditions
-110-
"are not an intentional form of degradation, but rather mirror general social-economic conditions in the country".
The Report fails to mention specific cases of reported abuses, such as the case of 28 prisoners who were refused food by prison authorities at Luzumbu Prison in late 1981 and early 1982. For six months these people survived only by gathering small morsels of food dropped by other prisoners.
While the Report emphasizes that in 1982, "efforts were undertaken to cooperate more regularly with international human rights organizations," it does not note, as it should, that although President Mobutu personally invited Amnesty International to make a return visit to Zaire, Zairian authorities have never found a convenient time for the visit actually to take place. In October 1982, President Mobutu stated on French television that his country was one of the few in Africa which invited Amnesty International twice. Four days later, Zairian authorities withdrew the second offer.
The Report states that Zaire provided support and shelter for 300,000 refugees from neighboring countries and allowed 200,000 Zairian exiles to return (since 1978) under an amnesty plan. It added that these refugees were allowed to become integrated into Zairian society. But it fails to
-111-
note that at the same Zairian citizenship was taken away from the Rwandan refugees even though many had been in Zaire since 1972. Nor does it state that hundreds of Zairian exiles were detained as soon as they tried to take advantage of the amnesty plan and re-enter the country. Zaire's violation of the amnesty plan was so serious that the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees made a special plea to President Mobutu on this issue.
With regard to the legal system, the Report is detailed, and generally accurate. It correctly records the existence of the Court of State Security which hears cases involving threats to national security, but it fails to mention the arbitrary nature of its procedures. The Report acknowledges the existence of prolonged detentions without charge but seeks to justify this practice, in large measure, by a shortage of magistrates. In fact, arbitrary detention and other nonjudicial sanctions have come into existence as a mechanism by which the Mobutu Government can circumvent the traditional court system and maintain a grip on power.
The Report is accurate in stating that the legal protections pertaining to civil courts apply to the Court of State Security, but it does not mention how these guarantees are repeatedly violated, most notably in Zaire's most famous recent case, which involved thirteen ex-parliamentarians and their attempt to form a second political party. According to
-112-
the International Federation of Human Rights and Amnesty International, the trial was not open to the public despite Zairian authorities claims to the contrary. The government refused admission to the trial to all representatives of human rights organizations. It only allowed one such representative to attend the sentencing.
Even though the Report claims that "[p]rivate lawyers continue to enjoy freedom and independence from government control," the Belgian attorneys for the defendants were warned by President Mobutu to refrain from criticizing the Constitution or face the threat of expulsion. The Report mentions that many spouses and friends of the thirteen ex-parliamentarians were arrested during the trial. What it does not mention is that arresting relatives and associates of suspected opponents of the government is a common practice, even when those relatives have committed no crime - a tactic used to put pressure on suspected opponents.
In describing the deficiencies in judicial procedings the Report stresses that judges are "poorly paid," court officials underpaid or "irregularly paid" and that corruption is "common." The Report is silent as to whether high officials of the government are doing anything to address these problems.
-113-
