COLOMBIA
The Report on Colombia represents a distinct improvement over that for 1981. It is more thoroughly researched, and its portrayal of the nation's serious economic situation is fair and explicit. Throughout the Report, national human rights organizations are cited as reliable sources, in contrast to the Report on El Salvador. The civilian Betancur governments' commitment to human rights and its actions toward reconciliation with the country's various guerrilla groups are also fairly presented.
Having said this, however, we must note an overarching f 1 a w, which affects both the general impression left by this Report and its treatment of specific events and issues. The Report fails to clarify that the Colombian military has actively opposed reforms and reconciliation and continues to block these avenues to progress. By concentrating attention on the ideals of the current government - in office for only half of 1982 - the Report creates the impression that these ideals can be enforced and that significant civilian-military tension at high levels does not exist.
Helping to create this impression is the Report's reliance at key points on 1981 data rather than current information: with regard to judicial action against
-29-
policemen found guilty of a political murder. With regard to the incidence of torture in rural militarized areas, and with regard to the number of political arrests. This material would be helpful if any 1982 information were used to update it, but in the crucial areas of civilian control over abusive military and police personnel, torture and political arrests, no 1982 figures or examples are given. Rather, the Report, offers unsupported assurances: "The Government has promised to investigate" allegations of 1981 tortures in rural militarized areas. "At his inauguration, President Betancur said he did not want more Colombian blood spilled ..." "Colombian officials have shared the concern of local human rights groups ..." And this, almost buried in the later sections of the Report: "... The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights has concluded that while there have been cases of torture and of illegal search and detention, these do not reflect official Colombian Government policy." This is a case of faint praise dressed up as exoneration.
Specifically concerning army abuses in militarized zones, the Report substitutes for fact such misleading general statements as this: "While some human rights organizations allege widespread violations in some remote areas of the country, where the military is predominant, the concern [of inviolability of the home] is widely respected in
-30-
practice." Presumably, "widely" is meant to include the cities and other non-militarized areas; but the problem, specifically, exists where human rights groups have pointed to it - in areas under military control, where the military does what it likes, much as it did under the previous governments. The absence of this explanation makes it possible for the Report to state that "in remote or isolated areas (such as the Department of Caqueta), ... it is often difficult to determine with certainty the circumstances surrounding the alleged violations." This is not generally true, however. In areas controlled by the military, violations often take place in the open, within sight of neighbors of the victim, as they are intended to intimidate. The evasion also permits the Report to state: "some of the crimes attributed [by human rights groups] to the military are believed to have been perpetrated by leftist insurgent groups ..." This too is misleading; by whom is it "believed?" In fact, human rights groups always base their reporting on direct testimony - contrary to what the Report implies. And areas of military control are clearly demarcated, as are guerrilla zones, with very little crossover.
Finally, by downplaying the army's continuing repressive role and its unchallenged authority in militarized
rural zones, the Report avoids confronting the correlation between some decrease in army repression since mid—year and the concurrent increase in the activities of death squads, most notably MAS (Death to Kidnappers). The Report notes that "some [Colombian leaders] have charged that MAS has connections to lower-level elements of the police and military" and that "Amnesty International has alleged that MAS is linked to the army's intelligence division." But the Report does not endorse these charges, elsewhere, calling MAS "a shadowy organization" and stating that military officials condemn "paramilitary violence." The MAS has in fact been credibly linked to the army, and not only at low levels, by former MAS members.
There are now, co-existing side by side, two governing forces in Colombia: the well-intentioned civilian government which has lifted the state of siege, offered amnesty to the guerrillas and established a Peace Commission to integrate them into the legitimate society; and the army, which has complete authority in militarized zones and refuses to de-militarize those areas - the guerrillas primary condition for laying down arms.
The Report justly praises the former, but fails to expose the intransigence and brutality of the latter -perhaps because actual U.S. policy offers significantly more
-32-
assistance to the military than to the civilian, development -oriented sector. Despite a marked improvement over last year's reporting, therefore, it appears that the Administration still has its process reversed: existing policy should not determine which truths are fit to print; this Report should present the whole truth in order to share policy and, if appropriate, to change it.
-33-
