GUATEMALA
The Report considers short-term human rights prospects in Guatemala dependent on whether the military government can win its war. "If the guerrillas are overcome, and Government efforts ... to improve the conduct of the armed forces continue, the outlook is positive." As the Report also points out, however, there have been guerrillas in Guatemala for 20 years. The relevant question, then, concerns prospects if, as seems quite possible, the guerrillas are not eliminated, and what is done to civilians in the meant ime.
The analysis of Guatemala's situation presented in the Report emphasizes a change of conditions after the March coup that brought Gen. Efrain Rios Montt to power: "A marked decrease" in urban killings and disappearances ("although some abuses continue to be reported"); and overall improvement in military conduct toward rural civilians by the year's end ("although there continued to be credible reports of human rights abuses by some military units"). The improvements thus cited are assumed from often questionable evidence. For example: "Reports of incidents in which noncombatants are alleged to have been killed by the army have diminished in recent months ..." This is hardly conclusive, as the only
-42-
medium for reporting in Guatemala is a censored press forbidden to publish any information on the war except that provided by the military. On the other hand, for the earlier part of the year, before censorship, there were, as the Report notes, "numerous allegations of atrocities." These, it states, were "difficult to verify."
Those accusations did not appear only in the Guatemalan press, but also in several reports by human rights organizations which have gathered direct testimony both inside Guatemala and from refugees. The findings of those organizations - Amnesty International and Americas Watch among them - run counter to the Report's assertion that "since Rios Montt came to power ... there has been a decrease in the level of killings." Rather, army killing in rural areas continued at a high level in 1982, was systematically brutal, and affected primarily civilians. Reference to these organizations and their observations is completely ommitted from the Report's discussion of rural killings.
Where attribution for rural murders is made in the Report, it qualifies the military's responsibility and uses dubious reasoning to assign responsibility to the guerrillas. There is credible evidence that guerrillas have carried out rural political murders of army auxiliaries (the "self defense forces") and individuals. It is misleading to
state, however, that "where it has been possible to assign responsibility [for large-scale rural killings], it appears more likely that in the majority of cases the insurgents, who have increasingly turned to terror in recent months	have
been guilty." The wording indicates that no hard evidence exists. The same dubious logic is evident in the description of the rural, village-level civil defense ("self-defense") forces, which are called voluntary. "Although pressure to join is great, the majority of villagers appear to support the program." This suggests that U.S. officials have canvassed the Guatemalan peasantry, but it is in fact a supposition citing no hard evidence of enthusiasm. (There is however, testimony to the contrary, gathered by international human rights organizations.) When such deductions are coupled with a readiness to exonerate the armed forces, the result is a serious misrepresentation.
The Report is at pains to show that the Guatemalan government has been open to onetime scrutiny by such organizations as the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and private American delegations. True, this is an improvement over previous conditions. The government, however, has not been open to the International Committee of the Red Cross, which could provide regular oversight of the treatment of political prisoners and offer humanitarian
-44-
assistance independent of the government. Especially in Guatemala, where human rights groups cannot function for fear of reprisal, the presence of the ICRC is desperately needed.
The Report contains a wealth of facts on repression in Guatemala. Persons arrested on the mere suspicion of a crime against the state or public order have no right of habeas corpus or bail, may be tried in secret proceedings and are subject to the death penalty. The state of siege permits warrantless searches and suspends labor union activity. The press has been censored, Congress dissolved. There are no private human rights groups active inside Guatemala. Three major political parties declined to participate in the advisory Council of State and called instead for a return to constitutionality. Despite these unassailable facts, the Report points to the announcement of plans for 1984 elections and electoral procedures as the long-term "best prospect" for protecting individual human rights. So far, these are only plans, not facts. The ban on political activity, however, is a fact. So are the deaths of many civilian Guatemalans, for which the Guatemalan armed forces deserve severe and unflinching criticism.
-45-
