HONDURAS
This report overemphasizes an alleged onslaught of externally-supported terrorism against Honduras. In fact, some spectacular guerrilla actions did take place during 1982, notably a plane hijacking in May and hostage-taking in San Pedro Sula in September. The Salvadoran FMLN does use safehouses and transportation in Honduras in violation of Honduran law, but there is no evidence of any connection between that fact and civil unrest or even unlawful political action emerging from domestic Honduran causes.
In any event, political violence against the government of Honduras has not reached a level that poses any threat to Honduran society, and therefore can hardly justify violations of human rights by the Honduran security forces.
The Report minimizes the incidence of abuses of authority, while admitting the existence of "credible allegations of extra-judicial action against terrorists." In fact, extra-judicial action has become standard operating procedure for the Honduran armed forces in dealing with violent opposition. The methods include disappearances, torture, use of clandestine detention centers and, ultimately it seems, the execution of prisoners. Human rights groups in
-55-
Honduras have documented more than 90 cases of persons abducted, presumably by security forces, who have never reappeared. More than half of these cases happened after President Suazo Cordoba took office in late January 1982. In spite of public petitions by human rights and other organizations, including legislation introduced in Parliament in October, the Suazo Cordoba administration has steadfastly refused to initiate any investigations.
Killing
Regarding the discovery of clandestine cemeteries, the Report fails to mention that the government has not made any significant effort to investigate. In fact, many months later, such judicial inquiries as have been undertaken remain secret. Also absent from the Report is any reference to the public statements of the former chief of intelligence of the army, Col. Leonidas Torres Arias, regarding the involvement of the security forces in disappearances and extra-judicial executions. The Report tries to portray the Suazo Cordoba regime as making a good faith effort to punish abuse, but it provides only one example, a case involving a U.S. citizen. This is the only case in which official action was taken, and the officials prosecuted belong to the lower ranks.
-56-
Disappearances, Torture and Cruelf Inhumane or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
In these sections, the Report simply sets forth the explanations provided by the government for the many credible reports publicized by local human rights organizations and the press. It also cites several statements from government officials denying government participation in these abuses. The Report should have analyzed the credibility of the many public complaints made by human rights groups and individuals, and widely circulated through the media. These complaints show a growing pattern of official use of illegal methods that is far more disturbing than the Report indicates.
Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
The country's outstanding legal practitioners have pointed to the failure of the judiciary as the key element in a deteriorating human rights situation. Habeas corpus is totally ineffective, as the police consistently refuse access to detention centers by lawyers and court-appointed officials; judges refuse to follow up with personal on-site investigations. As in other countries, this is the major contributing factor to the growing use of disappearances as a repressive method.
-57-
The Report is at its worst in this section, when it attempts to justify prolonged unlawful detention of certain suspects by the police, on the grounds of some perceived "leniency of release procedures" established by the code of criminal procedures. It goes on to say that, by international standards (unspecified) "judicial procedures ... are cumbersome and maximum penalties for certain offenses are lenient." This paragraph is appalling. It attempts to convey the impression that irregular and illegal actions by government are a necessary evil.
Denial of Fair Public Trial
As stated above, the claim that the Honduran courts maintain substantial independence is simply not true. In fact, the members of the Supreme Court are chosen by the President and serve terms equal to those of the President. Moreover, there is a disturbing pattern of simply not bringing people to justice in cases involving security-related offenses.
Invasion of the Home
There is no mention in this section that the Armed Forces frequently conduct rastrillo (rake) operations in neighborhoods of the larger cities, searching house by house without any warrant.
-58-
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
This section should have mentioned the fact that many student and labor organizations are routinely harassed, their peaceful demonstrations disrupted and their offices searched. Especially in the countryside, local leaders of peasant unions have frequently been targeted for imprisonment or disappearance.
Freedom of Movement
The Report shows a blatant partiality and bias when discussing the refugee problem in Honduras, by referring to refugees "who are fleeing the effects of guerrilla insurgencies in Guatemala and El Salvador and government oppression in Nicaragua." Either the authors know nothing about Salva-doran and Guatemalan refugees or they simply dismiss their consistent stories of repression by their own governments.
More serious is the failure to point out the difference in treatment these categories of refugees receive from Honduras. Salvadorans and Guatemalans are restricted to heavily guarded camps, whereas Nicaraguans are free to resettle and circulate throughout Gracias a Dios province. The Army actively assists efforts by anti-Sandinista leaders to recruit and train Miskitos to conduct raids against Nicaragua, while at the same time it cooperates illegally
-59-
with the Salvadoran military to abduct and illegally return refugees to El Salvador. In fact, Army forces have moved to the border to restrain the entry of Salvadoran refugees fleeing into Honduras under hot pursuit by the Salvadoran Army. The 3,000 Nicaraguan refugees near Douli are not under the auspices of the UNHCR because Honduras refuses to comply with UNHCR demands that they be relocated away from the border with Nicaragua so as to ease the tensions in the a rea.
Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
It is true that in 1982 Hondurans began a democratic process after 10 years of military rule. The elections of November 1981 were free and open, and the parties represented continue to act with total freedom. It should be noted however that ALIPO, a significant minority faction of the ruling Liberal Party, is not represented in Congress because their showing in the internal elections was never made public by the dominant Rodista faction. The Report recognizes that "the military play an important de facto part in the political process," though this is an understatement. The truth is that the Armed Forces, under the command of General Gustavo Alvarez, exert an undue influence over many sensitive areas of government. This
-60-
includes not only control of arrests and searches in security-related matters, but also refugee policy and, increasingly, foreign affairs.
Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-Governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
Honduras does allow visits by international observers and does not place obstacles in their way. Govern' ment officials do discuss these matters freely with visitors The government makes no effort, however, to respond to legitimate written inquiries by domestic and international human rights organizations regarding alleged violations of human rights.
-61-
