HAITI
The 1982 State Department Report on Haiti is more detailed and candid than earlier reports. It states accurately that "civil and political rights are severely restricted in Haiti" and that "public criticism of the Government is generally not permitted." Beatings of prisoners by Government forces is acknowledged, as is the Haitian Government's failure to take "effective measures to eradicate the practice." It acknowledges that important legal procedures such as habeas corpus exist "mainly in principle," and concludes that there has been a "severe curtailment" of freedom of assembly and association and "serious restrictions" in freedoms of speech and the press.
These frank evaluations contrast sharply with the section on freedom of movement, which is written more as a response to the Administration's efforts to expel Haitian asylum applicants than as a candid assessment of human rights. In other places, the Report focuses attention on reforms announced for the future, rather than examining actual performance. Given the Haitian Government's failure to deliver on past promises, this focus is misplaced.
Introduction
In its introduction, the Report notes that "in 1982 Haiti took several potentially significant steps toward
-48-
improved observance of human rights and political liberalization." In support of this assertion, it lists four points: the creation of a National Human Rights Commission; passage of a law providing for municipal elections; a Government invitation to exiles to return to Haiti; and retrials in two politically important cases.
Regarding the creation of a National Human Rights Commission, the Report does not note, as it should, that in its first eight months of existence the Commission has issued no substantive statements or reports, nor publicly intervened in individual cases of rights abuses. We note that the Government undertook a similar effort in 1979 when it formed a Human Rights Division in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Following the much publicized creation of this body, it was never heard from.
The State Department is also too quick to applaud the Government's announcement that it would hold municipal elections. While these elections are likely to take place, it is unclear who will be the candidates. As the Report points out: "the two political parties in Haiti, the Haitian Christian Democratic Party and the Haitian Social Christian Party, have not functioned since 1980. In 1980, the Haitian Government arrested approximately 50 individuals and expelled 16 others of its critics for various charges of conspiracy and subversion."	«
-49-
The State Department cites the retrial of Sylvio Claude, and other members of the Haitian Christian Democratic Party in August 1982, as further evidence of human rights improvement. While the Report notes that international observers (including the Lawyers Committee and the Americas Watch) criticized the procedures, it does not mention our criticisms: that the defendants were denied access to families and legal counsel; that none were informed of the specific charges against them until the day before the trial began; that while in detention a number of the defendants were subjected to harassment, beating and intimidation by members of Haitian security forces; that the trial took place on a single day and night — lasting 19 hours —with 22 defendants sentenced to 15 years at hard labor; and that the defendants were convicted of crimes that were never proved -- a verdict the Haitian League for Human Rights labeled "a judicial scandal of unbelievable proportions."
The Report makes several references to the Presidential clemency which was granted to Claude and his co-defendants in September. However, it fails to state that following his release Claude and his family were kept under strict surveillance. The Report also does not mention that on December 28, 1982, Haitian Security Agents raided Claude's home arresting him and his daughter, Marie France. Though
-50-
they were released 48 hours later, Claude has since gone underground, while Marie France Claude is now in Venezuela.
Freedom of Movement
Under the section on freedom of movement, the Report states that in the last twenty years an estimated 800,000 people have left Haiti "primarily in search of better economic opportunities." This statement serves the Reagan Administration's refusal to grant political asylum to virtually any of the several thousand Haitian now seeking asylum in the United States, a position that is unjustified in light of human rights conditions reflected in the Report. Of more than 1700 Haitians who were detained in the United States last year, and who are applying for political asylum, only two have been granted that status.
In further support of the United States Government's stance toward Haitian refugees, the Report notes that the Haitian Government has pledged not to subject returnees to prosecution or harassment. It notes that "regular follow-up interviews" conducted by the United States Embassy, "have confirmed they have suffered no harassment or prosecution by the Haitian Government." What the Report does not say is that these "follow-up interviews" have reached only a small percentage of those who return, and that, in a number of instances, State Department officials have been unable to
-51-
contact those who supposedly have returned. United States officials have repeatedly refused to make the names of those who have returned available to private groups interested in investigating the fate of these people.
Recent evidence indicates that returnees are still viewed with extreme suspicion and prejudice by the Haitian Government. One young mother who left Haiti in early 1982, and was forced to return, reports that she was "captured and beaten with wood clubs by the Tonton Macoutes." Taken to the political prison Ft. Dimanche, she was held there for four months, where she was subjected to further abusive pract ices.
At night we slept on straw mats on the floor, pushed together like sardines. We received no medical attention, they let us die. At night we heard dogs eating the corpses that were thrown behind the prison. We were not regularly beaten, only if we protested something.
As the State Department Report acknowledges, it is a crime to leave Haiti without an exit visa. This is the case in the Soviet Union and other Eastern European countries, and the State Department properly criticizes this restriction in those countries, noting in the case of Romania, that "the Government regards emigration as a betrayal of the country and used a wide variety of means to discourage it." In the case of Haiti, there is no similar criticism of the identical
-52-
practice, only a statement that "those who leave illegally may be subject to fine or imprisonment." [Emphasis added.]
There are minor inaccuracies or omissions in the sections dealing with trade unionists, human rights monitors, and members of the Catholic church.
Freedom of Association
Regarding trade union activity, the report states that there is "little in the way of trade organization or collective bargaining", and acknowledges the 1980 expulsion of leaders of the Centre Autonome des Travailleurs Haitiens. It omits an estimate by Yves Richard, President of CLAT, that 45 persons affiliated with the union were detained without explanation during 1981 and 1982. Considering this, and the fact that CLAT was the only independent trade association in the country, the Report's statement that "no other groups have encountered any government harassment" is absurd.
Concerning human rights monitors, the Report presents an unrealistic account of activities of the private Haitian League for Human Rights. Formed in 1977, the League is the only private human rights organization in Haiti. Following the violent break-up of a public League meeting in November 1979, several of its members were arrested and beaten. Si nee then the League has severely curtailed its activities, as its members fear for their own safety. The
-53-
State Department's suggestion that the League is now playing "a more active role" through "increased dialogue with the government, publication of its views in the media and an active recruiting campaign", is fanciful, at best. Despite the best efforts of the Haitian League and its members, in Haiti today no organization can openly work for human rights.
Freedom of Religion
Finally, the section on Freedom of Religion fails to mention increased tension between active members of the Roman Catholic Church and the government. On December 28, 1982 Haitian security forces arrested Gerard Duclerville, founder of Catholic Volunteers, a lay Catholic organization. Duclerville also appeared on a popular radio program on Radio Casique. In his last broadcast he criticized the government's round-up of poor people in connection with the Pope's visit to Haiti. This broadcast may have been deemed a violation of Haiti's press law, which virtually prohibits criticism of President Duvalier.
Following a public appeal on Duclerville's behalf in early February 1983 by all of the country's bishops, he was released on February 9. According to unconfirmed reports Duclerville was subjected to torture while in detention. He was never charged with a crime.
-54-
