 UPPER VOLTA
 In an almost bloodless coup d'etat on November 7, 1982,
 members of the Upper Voltan Army overthrew the regime of
 Col. Saye Zerbo, who had himself seized power in a coup in
 November 1980. The new Chief of State, Major Jean-Baptiste
 Ouedraogo, formed a moderate government composed of two
 military officers and eighteen civilians. Given the compo-
 sition of the Government and the absence of strong ideolog-
 ical rhetoric, there is no reason to anticipate changes in
 the nation's performance on human rights.
 Ninety percent of Upper Volta's seven million people live
 in rural areas, the vast majority living at a subsistence
 level. There are only two cities with more than 100,000
 inhabitants and perhaps another half dozen which qualify as
 regional urban centers. Government administrators, however,
 are found not only at the seat of the country's 11 prefec-
 tures, but also at subprefectoral and district levels.
 Thus, much of the populace is affected by the Government in
 Ouagadougou. Underlying basic legal and political struc-
 tures, inherited from colonial times, have been somewhat
 modified over the years, but they largely follow the French
 model.
 Although the 1977 Constitution was suspended in November
 1980, there remains a strong tradition of respect for
 individual civil rights. Political rights were severely
 restricted in 1980 with the abolition of parliament and the
 suspension of political parties. Many former political
 leaders, however, continue in informal groupings to discuss
 plans for the return of these political rights. Following
 the recent coup, the most serious violation of individual
 rights remains the house arrest of former President Lamizana
 and key officials of his regime detained since the 1980 coup
 and the post-coup detention of President Zerbo and top
 officials of his Government.
 Labor unions' right to strike, abolished in November 1981,
 was restored in February 1982, although limited by certain
 "cooling off" provisions. At the same time, organized labor
 has felt free to protest the dissolution of one of the four
 major labor federations and to call publicly for a return to
 constitutional democracy.
 The first indications of how the new Government views its
 role, and the avowed purposes of its coup, were voiced by
 the newly named Head of State Ouedraogo in a November 18,
 1982, press conference. Ouedraogo said that-the new regime's
 purpose was to restore order, to reorganize the armed forces
 and government apparatus, to establish social justice, to
 guarantee individual and collective freedoms while respect-
 ing human rights, to encourage economic, social and cultural
 development and to progress toward normal constitutional
 life and a return to civilian rule within two years. In
 these first weeks following the coup, foreign and domestic
 observers are watching to see how the Government acts to
 implement these goals. An early test will be the handling
 of the detainees and what concrete steps are taken to begin
 the promised return to civilian, constitutional rule.
 The new Government has brought forward for trial cases
 prepared under the just-deposed Zerbo regime against former
 President Lamizana and officials of his Government.
 
 
 347
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Killing
 There have been no reports of politically-motivated
 killing in Upper Volta in 1982.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no reports of disappearances in Upper
 Volta.
 c. Torture
 Torture is not practiced in Upper Volta.
 d. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Although the poverty of society in general results in
 poor prison conditions, there are no reports of cruel,
 inhuman, or degrading punishment.
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Some two dozen top leaders, including former President
 Lamizana, have been released from detention by the new
 Government but, as of this writing, are still being held
 under house arrest. The Ouedraogo Government has detained
 leaders of the former Zerbo regime. The conditions of the
 detainees' detention are considered humane, but they are
 held with no date yet set for their trial or release. Three
 members of a radical group, the Patriotic Line for Develop-
 ment were arrested in January, when they attempted to pub-
 lish a "subversive* periodical supporting banned labor
 leader Soumane Toure. They were released after one to three
 weeks because of negative public reaction. Habeas corpus
 does not exist under the Napoleonic code in force in Upper
 Volta. Preventive detention rules permit a maximum 72
 hour holding period, renewable once, in criminal cases.
 These rules are followed in practice.
 f. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Upper Volta's judiciary remains independent, and the aver-
 age citizen receives a fair trial, represented by counsel,
 if he is aware of his rights. Illiteracy and ignorance
 limit this awareness on the part of the poor, who do
 not always receive full benefit of the system's guarantees.
 g. Invasion of the Home
 Searches of the home may be carried out between 6 a.m.
 and 9 p.m. under a warrant issued by the Attorney General
 or with consent of the individual concerned. This law is
 adhered to in practice.
 2.   Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The media are government operated with the exception of
 the independent daily paper "L'Observateur." Except to
 the extent that they arise from government operation of
 
 
 348
 the media, there are few restrictions on freedom of speech
 and press in Upper Volta. The Secretary of State for
 Information has promulgated press guidelines which preclude
 criticism of 'friendly countries" and require positive
 reporting of domestic events, but these guidelines are not
 rigidly enforced. Press censorship exists, but is rarely
 exercised. All publications must be submitted to the
 Ministry of Interior for review, but during the past year,
 the only known case of media censorship was the suppression
 of one edition of "L'Observateur" which quoted labor criti-
 cisms of the Government. In another incident, the editor of
 the government press agency was briefly interrogated by the
 security police for having prematurely published information
 about a local bank fraud investigation. Although such inci-
 dents have been sporadic, the effect has been for local
 journalists to exercise limited self-censorship lest they
 run afoul of the authorities.
 Voltans are free to express their opinions, but political
 views are rarely expressed publicly since the suspension of
 political activity. During 1982, virulent anti-government
 statements led to the arrest of Patriotic Line for Develop-
 ment members (see paragraph le) and the dissolution of a
 major labor confederation. There are no known limitations
 on academic freedom in Upper Volta. Professors are free to
 teach their courses within the confines of the academic
 curriculum without outside interference. In the arts,
 movies are subject to rating and possible censorship by a
 review board which includes religious authorities as well
 as government officials.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Peaceful assembly and association are largely unfettered in
 Upper Volta. Administrative permission generally is re-
 quired for mass meetings, but permits are given freely, with
 the major exception that activities by political parties are
 banned.
 Three labor federations and a number of autonomous unions
 exist in Upper Volta. One group is affiliated with the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU),
 a second with the World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU),
 and the third with the Confederation of Christian Workers.
 Labor exercises its right to organize, train workers, and
 negotiate without restraints. The right to strike, on the
 other hand, is circumscribed by a number of administrative
 precedures that can defer a strike for a "cooling off"
 period of up to 56 days. The International Labor Organiza-
 tion (ILO) has requested that the Government ease this
 strike-limiting measure, but the ILO general assembly failed
 to issue a formal condemnation. To date, these cumbersome
 administrative procedures circumscribing strikes have not
 been applied. Old-line economic labor federations hold
 their own in the ongoing adversary relationship with the
 government and are not unduly harassed. This is not true
 for the highly politicized confederation of civil service
 locals, which was disbanded in November 1981 for flouting
 a government anti-strike law. All constituent locals of
 this group, however, continue to exist. Other professional
 groups have experienced no government interference and
 maintain links with their international counterparts.
 The new Government has announced "restoration" of workers
 rights but has as yet to provide details.
 
 
 349
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There are no limits on freedom of religion in Upper
 Volta.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 There are no limits on domestic movement, but emigra-
 tion is controlled through the issuance of exit permits.
 The declared purpose of this measure is to restrict the
 outflow of Voltan migrants to neighboring countries,
 particularly Ivory Coast, in an effort to keep more able-
 bodied producers within the agricultural sector. Refugees
 are accepted freely and attempts are made to provide for
 their care in cooperation with the United Nations High
 Commission for Refugees. Substantial numbers of refugees
 fro% Ghana have entered Upper Volta in the aftermath of
 the Rawlings coup in Ghana.
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Upper Volta is ruled by a military council that appointed
 a cabinet of eighteen civilians and two military officers.
 No partisan political activities are permitted and there
 are no political opposition groups. Participation in the
 Government comes rather through formal discussion within
 the larger armed forces council or through informal pres-
 sure groups acting on the leadership.
 Women enjoy the same rights as men under Voltan law and are
 active participants in Voltan economic life. Their politi-
 cal role traditionally has been limited. With expanding
 educational opportunities, however, Voltan women are slowly
 assuming a larger role in Voltan society. The Ministry of
 Social Affairs works to promote greater participation
 by women in the nation's economic, social, and political
 life. Two women have been appointed to the cabinet of the
 new Government. There was one woman in the former cabinet,
 and several others held high government positions including
 the Secretary General of the Presidency.
 3.   Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 Neither the present nor the previous Government made any
 formal public statement with regard to human rights organi-
 zations during 1982. At the annual ILO meeting in Geneva,
 Voltan delegates affiliated with the World Federation of
 Trade Unions introduced an assembly resolution which
 criticized their Government for its anti-union activities.
 It was not adopted. Amnesty International earlier called
 for the release or trial of former President Lamizana and
 his co-detainees. A Human Rights Association, formed in
 Upper Volta in January 1982 by private citizens, has under-
 taken no activities beyond its own organization.
 4.   Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 Upper Volta is a land-locked country of 7,023,000 people,
 most of whom belong to two major West African cultural
 groups:  the Voltaic and the Mande. The Voltaic are the
 most numerous and include the Mossi tribe, which makes up
 
 
 350
 about one-half of the population. Most Voltans adhere to
 traditional animist practices. The Muslim and Christian
 minorities, however, include most of the country's educated
 elite.
 Despite the high infant morality rate of 211.1 deaths per
 thousand live births, the population is growing at the
 rate of 2.6 percent per annum. Life expectancy at
 birth is 38.9 years. Population pressure on increasingly
 depleted agricultural land is somewhat restrained by the
 mortality rate and by large scale annual migrations to
 neighboring countries for seasonal agricultural work.
 Upper Volta is overwhelmingly tied to traditional sub-
 sistence agriculture. Approximately 90 percent of the
 population lives in rural areas, and less than one percent
 is employed in the modern, monetized sector of the economy.
 GNP per capita was $194.30 in 1980. The average caloric
 supply available for consumption is 79 percent of nutri-
 tional requirements.
 Poverty is pervasive in Upper Volta, although the coun-
 try's meager economic and social resources are distributed
 on a reasonably equitable basis. There are no identifiable
 disenfranchised groups, although living standards are
 generally higher in the few urban centers than in the
 countryside. 5 percent of the population are literate
 and 18 percent of school age children are enrolled in
 primary school. Safe water is available to 25 percent of
 the population.
 
 
 351
 U.S.OVERStAS -LOANS ANO GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AN3 LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS CF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: UPPER VCLTA
 1950     1931     1982
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL,.          22.7     30.7     19.6
 LOANS ................       0.0      0.0     .0.0
 GRANTS .............        22.7     50.7     19.6
 A.Al ...............       ...... 9.2    14.1     11.2
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............         9.2     14.1     11.2
 SEC.SUPPASSIT.),,,         0.0       0.0      0.0
 b.FOOO FOI PEACE.......         12.2     15.2      6.8
 LOANS...............      . 0.0       .       0.0
 GRANTS..............       12.2     15.2      6.8
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN $-LOANS,.,..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FUR. CUR; .....          0.0     0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL....,,.           12.2     15.2      6.3
 cRELIEFEC,0EV   WFP,          3.7      3.0      1.3
 VOL.RELIEP AGENCY .....         3.5     12.2      5.5
 C.OTHER ECUN. ASSIST...          1.3      1.4      1.6
 LOANS ........  .... ..  .0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............        1.3        1.4      1.6
 PEACE CORPS ......        1.3       1.4      1.6
 NARCOTICS,........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 OThER        .............  0.0   o0o        0.0
 II.M1L. ASSIST.-TOTAL...          0.1      0.1      0.1
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............     0.1       0.1      0.1
 A.MAP GRANTS.......            0.0      0.0      0.0
 ".CR:OIT SALES-FMS ....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.cD.TRNG....          0.1      0.1      0.1
 0,TRAN-aXCESS STOCK...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.CTHER  RANTS ........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ZON. I MIL...         22.4     30.3     19.7
 LOANS .............. ,.      .      0.0      0.0
 GANT..............        e2.3     50.3     19.7
 UTHEK US LOANS .........           .0      0.1      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LC0NS .......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL oTHER............... .0.0            0.0      C.0
 AS ISTANCl PIM INTERNATICIAL AG NCI=S
 19       11 ?1    1  52    1i46-87
 TJTAL ......... .5.9        10.3     10.2    339.4
 IBRD               0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 !FC                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.5
 IA               35.0      0.C       0.0    129.1
 105                0.0       0.0 '    0.0      0.0
 AOJ                 U        0.U      0.0      0.0
 AFJ                0.;       0.0     10.2     52.4
 UNOP               3.7       1.4      ..1  3?.9
 0THER-UN           4.4      0.9      0.0     12.1
 LEC                9.0       5.1      0.0    111.4
 
 
 352
