Argentina
^ I ^he State Department report on Argentina is an accurate A reflection of the overall human rights situation in that country in 1996. It describes each of the main types of violations, as well the many significant improvements, that occurred during the year. However, the report touches upon the country's human rights problems without attempting to explain their causes or place them in a wider context. Specifically, in 1996 the most serious abuses were: widespread police violence; inhumane prison conditions; extreme inefficiency in the judiciary that weakened due process rights; severe abuse based on sexual orientation; and physical attacks on journalists. While the situation showed signs of general improvement over previous years, these alarming patterns of abuse persisted because of a lack of accountability of government officials, excessive authority by the executive branch and police agencies, and a lack of protections for large segments of society. Without a better understanding and reporting of these tendencies, most advances in the protection of human rights are likely to be short-lived, especially as political and economic strains in the country worsen.
The report's failure to recognize the causes of abuse is clearest in its discussion of the country's two main police forces, the police of Buenos Aires province and the Federal Police {Policia Federal Argentina: PFA) of the City of Buenos Aires, which is the country's Federal District. The report correctly asserts that "police brutality remains a serious problem," but deems violations committed by the Buenos Aires provincial police "incidents of hasty use of force," without looking into their causes or stressing their persistence. Altogether, the report's examination of the PFA is inexcusably superficial. The suspension of 11 officers for exercising unwarranted force, including the use of rubber bullets, during a February 20 student demonstration in the Buenos Aires provincial capital of La Plata, which the report mentions, was only one of a number of incidents. On February 22, police fired without cause on an auto, killing the driver who was taking his daughter to the hospital. Although the report mentions this case, it does not discuss the judicial process against the police officer placed in custody for the shooting. In a separate incident, on April 17, a judge ordered the inspection of the Campana police station
23
Critique 1996
because of charges its officers were altering traffic violation documents and requesting bribes. On April 19, 18-year-old Cristian Cicovicci was shot point-blank by a police officer who discovered him poaching otters. On July 12, six officers and a sub-commissioner of Southern Zone Narcotics-Trafficking Division were arrested for receiving cocaine and protecting the money-laundering operations of drug traffickers.
Although the report mentions that incidents of excessive and hasty use of force prompted the government of President Carlos Menem to convene provincial police chiefs in February to draw up an action plan for improvement, there is no discussion of the plan's implementation during the rest of the year. That most of the incidents cited by the State Department occurred after February suggests that the official response warrants further scrutiny.
One of the invitations to such violence not mentioned in the report is the widespread use of police edicts, which are internal police regulations allowing for the arrest and detention, without judicial order, of persons for up to 30 days based primarily on non-criminal or "pre-criminal" behavior. The PFA has issued 23 edicts, ranging from prohibitions of "scandal" and public drunkenness to possession of firearms, while Law 8.031 of Buenos Aires province contains many provincial police edicts, including one that allows for the detention of those who cannot demonstrate their means of financial support. Enacted mostly during Argentina's first military regime between 1930 and 1945, edicts are used as an extrajudicial means of detaining persons from marginalized populations, such as the poor, youth, unemployed, immigrants, and homosexuals. There are more arrests under edicts than under normal criminal laws. In 1992, for example, there were 35,350 edict detentions and 32,484 criminal arrests. In 1994, there were 106,451 edict arrests, and in 1995 some 133,588. Rights groups estimate that the rate increased in 1996, reaching a daily average of 400 detentions. Over 80% of edict arrests are not related to public security or any criminal act, and only two percent of detainees had police records. In violation of basic due process rights, a detainee arrested under an edict has no guarantee of a lawyer at the time of making a statement, which, along with the report of the detaining official, constitute sufficient evidence of guilt. With no more
24
Argentina
than three days between detention and conviction, the speed of the process further erodes detainees' rights to adequate legal defense.
The new constitution of the Federal District, approved in August, revoked the PFA's edicts despite federal pressure on the Constitutional Assembly to maintain them. But rights groups warn that other police strategies for arrests, such as detention in order to check records {averiguación de antecedentes), are likely to be stepped up in the edicts' absence. The Buenos Aires provincial police still employs its own edicts, including many that are not public knowledge. Again, the arrest and detention of individuals for acts or status offenses that are not appropriately publicized violates elemental principles of due process. In addition, the Institute for the Rights of Minors of the La Plata Bar Association says that the provincial police routinely uses its authority to detain persons for checking their records and then holds them for long periods of time, sometimes several days, during which they are often subjected to threats, beatings and a denial of contact with family or lawyers. Excessive force, and unjustified shootings of civilians in particular, has been a persistent problem in the province, and has led to the decision, on April 25, to conduct training sessions in 18 regional police units to reduce the incidence of such abuses. Eduardo Duhalde, the provincial governor, may have been inspired by less disinterested motives as well: he is a leading contender to succeed President Menem in 1999, and human rights abuses by the PFA occasioned much negative publicity.
Other causes of police abuse include the lack of appropriate training and a failure of accountability within police agencies themselves. According to one high-ranking PFA official, interviewed on condition of anonymity, training of personnel is extremely militarized and there is only "cosmetic" education on human rights issues. Internal accountability is nearly non-existent: the two PFA bodies that conduct internal investigation, the Administrative Investigations Agency and the Preventative Investigations Agency, have no independence ft"om the police chief on any matter of importance. Rights activists believe that the majority of officer dismissals that do occur are for disobeying superiors' orders rather than violating citizens' rights.
25
Critique 1996
Police violence figures prominently in one of the report's most significant omissions: the high incidence of human rights abuses committed against lesbian, gay and transgendered persons. On an average weekend in the Federal District, approximately 70 such people are detained; on October 1, for example, the gay disco In Vitro was raided and its patrons were held for 24 hours without being charged. In 1995, there were at least 331 detentions in the Federal District against transgendered persons, and in 1996 the estimate was much higher. Nadia Echazu, the head of the Transvestite and Transsexual Organization of Argentina (OTTRA), has received death threats; the organization's secretary was arrested and held ovenùght every day between September 29 and October 4. While the average detention on an edict charge is 12 hours, for transvestites it is over 24. Transvestites say they spend an average of three nights each week in a police station, and one 43-year-old transsexual estimates that she has spent a total of six years in jail. In detention, transgendered persons are regularly humiliated, beaten, sexually abused and threatened with death. On August 18, Mocha Selis, a 34-year-old transvestite, was seen entering a white car which was widely recognized as belonging to the local police station. That same evening, she was shot three times and left bleeding in the street; she died after being rushed to the hospital. Police denied responsibility for the attack, and there has been no investigation. Over the last decade, there have been at least 64 documented killings of transvestites in the Federal District and Buenos Aires province. None of these cases has resulted in conviction, despite numerous legal actions on behalf of the victims. Although the new constitution of the City of Buenos Aires abrogated PFA edicts and expressly prohibits discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation — the first constitution in Spanish-speaking Latin America to include such a provision — the PFA continued to use edicts against sexual minorities, in part because there are no legal mechanisms to replace them.
A major factor in police abuses is the weakness of the judicial system. As in previous years, the 1996 report recognizes that the judiciary suffers from incompetence and a lack of independence, but does not go beyond its assertion that judicial processes "are inefficient, complicated, and, at times, subject to political influence." Many judges, journalists,
26
Argentina
congressional officials and rights activists say that the government regularly influences judges with money and f)erks such as trips abroad. On May 27, Argentina's Criminal Court overruled the indictment for administrative irregularities against Buenos Aires Mayor Jorge Domínguez, of the ruling Peronist Party, who was told by President Menem to "pay no attention" to the original indictment. Judge Mariano Berges, who brought the indictment, complained of "constant pressures" from Peronist Party officials for his decision. In the case of María Soledad Morales, a 17-year-old student murdered in 1990, the trial against the accused was suspended in 1996 after repeated delays and the resignation of the president of the court. Only about three percent of the 110 lawsuits on corruption brought in the past five years against government officials and others connected to them have led to conviction. In the past 128 years, nationwide only about 20 charges of judicial incompetence have made it to the courts; as of December, there were 170 proceedings accumulated against judges in the Political Trial Commission of the Lower House of Congress. Regular proceedings in criminal, civil, and commercial courts are also subject to long delays; only 3.5% of the 250,000 legal proceedings initiated in 1996 were completed during the year. The State Department report indicates that there was "concrete, if modest" progress in investigating the 1994 bombing of the Jewish Community Center of Buenos Aires, in which 86 people were killed. It does not mention, however, that on May 21, the Supreme Court refused to hear an appeal against a lower court's decision to free soldiers arrested in connection with the blast.
One of the obstacles to greater independence and efficiency is the ongoing battle among the political parties over the size and formulation of the Judicial Council {Consejo de la Magistratura), a body which was established under the 1994 Constitution to be responsible for the initial selection of judicial nominees, court discipline and financial administration. In a possible preview to what may happen on a national level, the Province of Buenos Aires inaugurated its own Judicial Council on September 13. But on September 10 and 11 the provincial Senate, in a period of less than 48 hours, undermined the future council's authority
27
Critique 1996
by hastily approving 64 judges in extraordinary sessions, after examining all the nominees' records in just the previous four days.
A^avating the judiciary's inefficiency and subservience to executive officials is a lack, of financial support and public confidence. In the most recent fiscal year, the judiciary submitted a budget of US$900 million, but this was reduced to $600 million by the executive when it was sent to Congress for final approval. While money alone cannot make up for the judiciary's inadequacies, it would help speed up judicial processes by allowing for urgently needed building renovations and the purchase of computers and other equipment. There is little political will to provide resources to modernize the institution, partly because of an overwhelming lack of public trust. In a September poll, only 13% of respondents said that they had "confidence" in the judiciary, a lower rating than those of seven other major institutions in the country. Three months later, only 9.5% of respondents had a "positive image" of the judiciary.
As in previous years, the report does not examine patterns of conduct by non-judicial state agencies in charge of human rights protection. Although the 1994 Constitution created a national ombudsman office, for example, the appointment of a presidential ally to the post has called into question the impartiality and effectiveness of the office. The Ombudsman of the Federal District, meanwhile, complains that political pressure exerted by the federal government on the Federal District makes it very difficult to investigate rights abuses by police and other officials.
The Public Ministry, meanwhile, continued to be vulnerable to different kinds of pressure. State Prosecutor Pablo Lanusse, who was responsible for investigating the government tax agency and a private firm in relation to possible fraud involving state subsidies for gold exports, was attacked in February. His sister was attacked on June 24: her legs and stomach were slashed and she was forced to carve the letters O-R-0 (Spanish for "gold") into her own forehead. In December, the prosecutor in the case of the 1993 kidnaping, torture and murder of 23-year-old Miguel Bru made the extraordinary request for the charges against the police officers arrested in the case to be dismissed because of a lack of evidence that the crime ever took place.
28
Argentina
The report's deficient examination of the causes of rights abuses is most clear in its handling of the prison riots and hunger strikes that shook Argentina in 1996. On March 30, a botched escape attempt at Sierra Chica prison of the Buenos Aires provincial penitentiary system led to a mutiny by some of its 1,000 prisoners and by II ,570 others in 18 prisons throughout the country. The riots left at least 17 dead and more than 50 wounded in the country's worst prison crisis. Although the report mentions some of the causes for the riots — such as overcrowding and the fact that over 70% of inmates have not been sentenced — it does not adequately investigate or discuss either the conditions that sparked the riots or the government's degree of compliance with the agreement that ended them.
Although the government blamed the riots on the escape plans of a small group of ringleaders, the facts indicate otherwise. An alarming rise in prison population over the past ten years, first of all, has led to unsustainable overcrowding. The Buenos Aires provincial prison population — four-fifths of the country's prisoners — has tripled over the past 24 years and since 1985 has risen almost 80% to about 10,400. The number of inmates in the federal prisons — which hold some six percent of the country's prison population — has increased by 132% since 1985. Prisons operate, on average, at 140% of capacity. Living conditions have fallen as the population has increased. Poor toilet and bathing faciUties, malnutrition, broken windows and unlocked jail cells are commonplace. One provincial police officer in Olmos Prison in Buenos Aires Province, which was built for 1,800 inmates but holds 3,500, said on condition of anonymity that violence and neglect leads to "one or two deaths each day," but that there have been few preventative measures. "Isolation cells" are used to punish inmates: internal rebellion, for instance, leads to 30 days in an isolation cell. Because of budgetary constraints, though, many complaints to the ombudsman for prisons go uninvestigated. AIDS is rampant throughout the prison system. According to the World Health Organization, 30% of inmates in Argentina's 28 federal prisons are infected with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, while some Argentine officials believe that number may be up to 40% in both federal and provincial penitentiaries. Many prisoners with HIV are not diagnosed
29
Critique 1996
until they have developed symptoms of AIDS, and for every inmate with AIDS who receives medical attention there are dozens who do not.
Inmates have persistently demanded better conditions, faster legal processes, more relaxed visiting rules, more lenient penalties for those convicted of car theft, and the implementation of a sentence reduction policy, the "two-for-one" law. Specifically, this law deducts two years from a convict's sentence for every year served awaiting trial. Despite its applicability to all inmates, it has thus far only benefitted those in federal prisons. In order to quell the March and April riots, the government agreed to implement the two-for-one reduction, to create a prison commission with inmate representatives, to reduce most car-theft sentences, and to move some inmates to prisons closer to their families; but how much of this agreement the government has respected after the riots is not discussed in the report. While the government did respond to the crisis with some encouraging steps, such as setting up a Justice Ministry commission in May to examine AIDS in the prisons, it requires a closer look at the government's response to determine whether crises such as the April riots will lead to long-term change.
The 20th anniversary of the 1976 military coup further fueled ongoing controversies and revived unanswered questions over the rights abuses committed by the 1976-1983 military regime. Most pointedly, the identities of many of the 9,000 to 30,000 persons "disappeared" by successive juntas have still not been established. There has been some progress: the National Commission on the Disappearance of Persons (CONADEP), the judiciary and the Office of the Attorney General have all been carrying out investigations regarding disappeared persons. The National Committee for the Right to an Identity was established by the government in 1992 to search for the children of the disappeared, and by February approximately 57 children had been traced. But aside from mentioning certain court actions and a government statement that it has no more information about the disappeared "beyond that released in 1984" by CONADEP "and collected since by the Interior Ministry's Subsecretariat for Human and Social Rights," the report ignores the continued lack of governmental cooperation in accounting for the disappeared. Three thousand four hundred sixty-one cases of
30
Argentina
undocumented disappearances remain outstanding. In addition, while a Federal Court {Cámara Federal) ordered the government to produce all lists of the disappeared, human rights groups allege that this order was intentionally ignored to allow the government to stall investigation. Many organizations are struggling to obtain release of all documentation in the government's possession regarding state operations, particularly disappearances, carried out between 1976 and 1983. The UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances was informed that evidence in some of these cases had been destroyed. This evidence may have included the complete records of the military government on disappeared individuals. Documents comprising perhaps 10,000 pages are believed to be kept by the Ministry of the Interior, which asserts that such documents are not related to the current legal actions. Several groups have charged three government ministers and three magistrates with deliberate obstruction of justice.
On May 2, furthermore, the UN Working Group urged the Argentine government to protect six members of the organization Children for Identity and Justice against Forgetfulness and Silence, which is comprised of children of the disappeared and other victims of rights violations, who had reportedly been subject to intimidation by members of the security forces. Rights organizations also protested delays in the investigation of Nestor Beroch, a teacher in Buenos Aires province accused of participating in the kidnaping and disappearance of high school students in the notorious "Night of the Pencils" of September 16, 1976. Although removed from teaching responsibilities, as of December, Beroch still received a salary as a public school employee.
Along v^th NGOs, the Argentine media plays a crucial and growing role in pressing for government accountability. But the press's success in uncovering v^ongdoing has generated a "proportionate rise in hostility and threats" on the part of state officials and private agents, according to the New York-based Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ). CPJ also reported that throughout 1996 in particular, the president conducted a campaign "against the press, bringing lawsuit after lawsuit, although so far the targets have successfully fended off his assaults." In May, amidst growing concerns over economic strains among the poor, President
31
Critique 1996
Menem denounced as traitors a group of journalists who had filmed people in the poor areas of northern cities cooking cat meat for food. In March, under a Supreme Court order, police unsuccessfully attempted to detain Jacobo Timerman, former director of the newspaper La Opinion and one of the country's most renowned journalists. The attempted arrest was related to eight-year-old charges of libel and defamation against Timerman by then-presidential candidate Menem in response to Timerman's critique of one of Menem's 1988 campaign proposals. Timerman had already been acquitted on these charges in two separate trials. On April 10, Menem dropped the charges. After a May 4 interview by the popular television journalist Mariano Grondona of two people from the People's Revolutionary Organization suspected of an April 4 attack on a government official, Menem accused Grondona of "defense of a crime." And on December 17, the court dismissed Menem's 1994 hbel suit against columnist Horatio Verbitsky of Página 12 for Verbitsky's article questioning Menem's assertion that he had the right to promote generals guilty of torture during the 1976-83 dictatorship because he himself had been tortured while imprisoned during that time. The judge ordered Menem to pay $40,000 to cover Verbitsky's legal costs and fees of the trial. Such rulings protective of press reforms were due in part to courts' "doctrine of true malice," under which accusations against the press must prove intention to damage or manifest and known falsity in published information.
These judicial actions, though, have not supplanted the more serious aspect of the growing offensive against the press: physical assaults and threats against outspoken journalists, usually by anonymous individuals. There were many such attacks in 1996, only two of which are mentioned in the State Department report. On August 31, the home of television journalist Aldo Rachit, in the Buenos Aires provincial town of Saladillo, was set on fire. Luckily, the family was not at home. Rachit believes the attack was connected with his denunciations of corruption and drug trafficking among government officials in the region. On February 21, six television journalists were severely beaten by uniformed and plainclothes police officers while covering student demonstrations in La Plata. On April 9, political cartoonist Cristian Dzwonick, known for his satirical
32
Argentina
drawings of the president, was held at gunpoint and threatened for 30 minutes, during which he was told to "quit all your rubbish." Also in April, Ricardo Sáenz Valiente, a newspaper editor in Entre Ríos province, received threats after publishing charges against a mayor. On April 29, Buenos Aires provincial police detained the author Hernán López Echague and questioned him for ten hours in connection to charges of corruption against the governor Echague made in his book, The Other.
While the report does a thorough job of reporting on discrimination against women, children, people with disabilities, indigenous peoples and other disadvantaged sectors, it passes over concerns regarding the effects of deteriorating economic conditions on these populations and on the worlang and lower classes. According to a report issued by the Ministry of Economics in October, the number of poor in the outskirts of the Federal District rose to 3.7 million from 3.1 million a year earlier, while the percentage of the area's population in extreme poverty over the same period grew from 5.4% to 7.2%. In the country's 2,343 "villas miserias," 496 of which are in the area surrounding the Federal District, unemployment reaches 60%, and much of the rest are underemployed or underpaid with the average monthly salary a scant US$300, far below the $400 received by the lowest-paid laborers in the Federal District, which itself is barely enough to cover the cost of living. Pollution and environmental problems in these impoverished zones are exacerbated by the continuing lack of sewers and other basic sanitation facilities. Just under half of the population of these shanty towns are minors, an increasing number of whom are involved in crime, especially drug trafficking. Homelessness, an almost unknown phenomenon in the 1980s, is increasing. In the Federal District, there were approximately 12,000 homeless people, a figure which represents a 60% increase over the last ten years. Of these 12,000, 52% are alcoholic, 26% have neurological problems, and many suffer from other physical and mental handicaps. According to a priest in the northern province of Jujuy, up to 50% of children in the area suffer from malnutrition, many with third-degree malnutrition, the most serious level.
Treatment of the country's estimated one million immigrants, most of whom are from indigenous areas of Bolivia, Paraguay and Peru, also
33
Critique 1996
worsened. Officially, the government continues its pro-immigrant policies, and an 18-month amnesty for illegal immigrants that ended in 1995 led to permanent visas for 250,000 individuals. Most immigrants, though, work for about US$300 a month, and live in squalid, overcrowded conditions, sometimes with up to 11 people in a single room. Many claim to have suffered abuse by the police and to have been denied access to health care and other social services. With nationwide unemployment at 17% throughout the year, in fact, the government is cracking down on immigrant workers, who it claims are taking needed jobs. As with children, the poor and other vulnerable groups, rights organizations fear that immigrants may not be getting the basic services that they need to survive.
As in its discussion of violations of civil and political rights, the report neglects to examine both the institutional causes behind patterns of abuse and the continuing lack of protections; regrettably, it does not question government responses and explanations. Police violence, abuse based on sexual orientation, prison conditions and physical attacks on journalists were the most troubling rights violations in Argentina in 1996. The State Department should look more closely at these problems in the future in order to better assess governmental policy and the prospects that measures taken to prevent rights abuses will succeed.
34
