Armenia
'"Jähere was a significant and very serious deterioration in the human J- rights situation in Armenia in 1996. The government's conduct during and after the September 1996 presidential elections precipitated a crisis without precedent in the short history of the newly independent republic. To many observers, the events represented the culmination of a growing climate of intolerance of any and all political opposition since the second half of 1994, when the government suspended the activities of the largest political party, the ARF-Dashnak Party, and shut down 12 non-governmental press and media organizations.
The State Department's 1996 report on Armenia does a good job of cataloguing the government's abuses and describing some of the flaws in the government's structure — notably the concentration of power in the executive branch and the absence of checks and balances — that facilitated these abuses. However, in some cases the report seriously understates the significance and scope of the country's human rights crisis, and it fails to provide a context or to describe the abuses chronologically, leaving the reader with an incomplete picture of the gravity of the situation in Armenia, and how seriously it has deteriorated.
For example, in one of its general assessments, the report states that "the Government's human rights record remained uneven, improving incrementally in some areas, while serious problems remained in others." But it is misleading to speak of an incremental improvement; on the contrary, as The New York Times reported, the government's record in 1996 indicated a "drift towards dictatorship." The report's unjustified optimism, which reflects the State Department's widely perceived partiality for Armenia's current government, undermines its credibility and accuracy.
Three events in 1996 attracted much national and international attention: the September presidential elections; the government's subsequent attacl<^ on and imprisonment of almost 200 members of opposition parties; and the ongoing trials of various opposition party members, many of whom have remained in prison since December 1994. These events are only the most visible symptoms of a profound human rights crisis, but they highlight the structural weaknesses of the Armenian government and the laws that permitted these violations to occur. While
35
Critique 1996
the report sporadically mentions certain facts relating to these events, it does not describe them in detail, nor does it say the government's actions constitute a systematic and flagrant disregard for human rights.
The "official" results of the 1996 presidential election were condemned as flawed and unfair by observer missions dispatched by human rights NGOs and inter-govemmental organizations, including the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (ONCE) and the International Foundation for Election Systems (IFES). Observers noted significant breaches of international election standards during the elections, including harassment and intimidation of voters, non-secret voting in one-third of its observations, stolen ballot-boxes, ballot-box stuffing, ballot tampering and irregularities in vote calculations at polling stations and election offices.
The ONCE's report concluded that "[sjerious breaches in ballot-box security took place during the count, and in some cases the law was flagrantly disregarded in clear view of international observers. . . [Djiscrepancies between the number of voters who signed and received ballots and the number of voter coupons in the election results, along with breaches cited throughout the report, can only contribute to a lack of confidence in the integrity of the overall election process. The results of the. . .ballot could even be questioned until a thorough review and assessment of the irregularities and discrepancies are conducted."
The irregularities and observations of fraud were so widespread that the European Parliament adopted a resolution calling for new elections in Armenia. The United States, one of the government's strongest supporters, declined to offer its congratulations to Levon Ter-Petrossian, the incumbent president. Nevertheless, the government disregarded all calls for investigations into election fraud and declared Ter-Petrossian the winner.
Voting irregularities were only part of the problem. The government excluded the largest political party — the ARF/Dashnaks — from the elections, having suspended the party's right to exist in December 1994 and arrested its leaders. During the campaign, the government continued its trials against members of the party, providing a chilling reminder of
36
Armenia
the risks of political participation. It also denied other parties proper access to government-owned and -operated television and radio stations.
In its section on "Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change their Government," the report does an admirable job of describing the problems that occurred during the election and addresses the judiciary's failure to deal adequately with the opposition's appeals for a review of the election. However, the authors seem reluctant to attribute responsibility for the voting fraud directly to the government or to criticize it without qualification. Instead, the report remarks gently that "[t]he Court's handling of the [election appeals] case did not assuage doubts about the credibility of the official election results," and "[cjhecks and balances were enacted into law, which, if implemented, might have addressed many of the suspicions about vote manipulation."
The report's most significant shortcoming comes in the discussion of the government's brutal attacks on opposition party members, its destruction of opposition offices, property and equipment and the storming of the capital immediately after the election by military, police and security forces with tanks. The report does not give a chronology of events leading to the arrest, beating and imprisonment of almost 200 Armenian citizens and it entirely neglects to examine in detail the severity and the extent of the campaign of terror against the opposition.
Before Ter-Petrossian's spurious victory, a crowd of tens of thousands demonstrated before the gates of the Central Election Commission, housed in the parliament building, to appeal the election results. Amid rumors that a leading opposition member (and the runner-up in the election) was being detained inside the building, the demonstrators broke into the parliament grounds/complex. A group entered the building and attacked the speaker and deputy of the parliament. The report asserts that the government crackdown followed a "violent demonstration," but it does not note that the allegation of violence is contested by various observers, and has not yet been addressed by the courts.
In a gross overreaction to the demonstrations, the president's security council — composed of the president and the Ministers of Defense and the Interior, among others — decided to send tanks and troops to break up the demonstration because it supposedly constituted an "attempted
37
Critique 1996
coup." The government then launched a massive attack against the leading opposition parties, arresting almost 200 opposition members (including several members of parliament who were subsequently stripped of their immunity), banning the two leading parties that had been permitted to participate in the election, destroying or looting their equipment and property and shutting down their offices. The government also banned all public political gatherings and arrested any persons who happened to pass by the area where demonstrations had occurred.
The arrests began during the day and continued into the early hours of the following night, as security forces in groups of 10 to 15 searched the homes, workplaces and party offices of opposition members. Almost all of those arrested were first severely beaten and were given no reason for their detention. They were held incommunicado for two to three days in secret prison cells throughout the country formerly used by the KGB, after which many were released without charge. During their imprisonment, police officers routinely beat them several times a day; some detainees reported that they were forced to sign statements confessing their guilt in "actions against the government." More than 100 were detained for over two weeks, and 16 were still in prison as of May 1997.
The unlawful arrests, beatings and torture of opposition party members were extensively documented by human rights groups, including Human Rights Watch/Helsinki, Amnesty International and the Center for Economic and Social Rights. Many human rights organizations called on the government to answer for its conduct and to release the prisoners immediately, but their requests fell on deaf ears. Instead, in interviews published in the press, Ter-Petrossian declared members of the opposition "insane," and the Minister of Defense maintained that the government would never have accepted defeat.
The section on "Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment or Punishment" grossly understates the treatment of these opposition members. Citing one case, it states that "the practice of security personnel beating detainees during arrest and interrogation continued," and that during the crackdown, "nonuniformed internal security forces beat and harassed passers by in the area where a
38
Armenia
demonstration was held." But there is no indication of the extent and severity of the government's attacks against opposition members, who were beaten by non-uniformed forces as well as by uniformed officers of the highest rank. Despite the fact that local and international human rights groups extensively documented the testimony of hundreds of those beaten and tortured by the government and submitted petitions in court both in Armenia and the United States, the report states only that "[t]wo cases of police brutality were registered in the first half of the year" and that "[m]ost cases of police brutality go unreported." The report neglects to mention the fact that these arrests were carefully planned and executed by the country's highest officials, many of whose extemporaneous comments reveal their disregard for human rights and international law.
The report is similarly remiss in its section on "Arbitrary Arrest, Detention and Exile," where it notes the government's continued practice of arbitrary arrest and detention without warrant, and states that "over 100 participants in the September 25 demonstration were detained ..." However, by using the passive voice — "were detained," 'Svere held," "were reportedly beaten," "access.. .was delayed or denied" — the report fails to attribute any direct responsibility to the current administration for its unlawful use of security forces against Armenia's citizens.
The section on torture also excludes any mention of prisoners' allegations of torture, mistreatment and abuse. It states, "[t]he office of the Prosecutor General (Attorney General) investigates allegations of mistreatment [of prisoners]." While the law does require this, domestic human rights groups have reported that in fact the Prosecutor General has not investigated any allegation of mistreatment. The report acknowledges the lack of investigations only in its section on arbitrary arrest, where it rather inconsistently notes that the Prosecutor General ignores prisoners' complaints about torture and forced confessions.
In its account of the government's cooperation in granting NGOs access to prisoners, the report praises the government as "generally cooperative in granting the ICRC access" to certain prisoners, but notes that the Red Cross "had significant difficulties in meeting with the prisoners detained by the Ministry of Interior following the Government crackdown in September... ." Here, the report obscures the fact that
39
Critique 1996
almost all prisoners are detained by the Ministry of the Interior (which is responsible for all of the country's internal security forces), so that if the Red Cross had difficulty meeting with prisoners detained by the Ministry of the Interior in fact they had difficulty meeting with almost all prisoners.
After the September presidential elections and the crackdown on the opposition, there were trials of members of the ARF-Dashnak Party and other opposition party members. The report is at its best in describing these trials, perhaps because the outline of the sections is most conducive to describing categorical structural problems.
Since the suspension of the ARF-Dashnak Party in December 1994, human rights observers have focused their attention on the "Dro Trials" and "Trials of 31," both of which involve ARF party members. Leading officials and rank-and-file members of the party stand accused of treason, conspiracy and terrorist acts. On December 10, 1996, the court pronounced all of the defendants in the Dro Trials guilty and sentenced three to death; both sides are appealing the verdict. The defendants have been in prison for over a year and a half; in 1995, two prisoners died as a result of mistreatment or abuse at the hands of prison officials. Most of the detainees have accused the government of torture, forced confessions, beatings and ill treatment, and one went on a hunger strike to protest the lengthy delays in his trial.
It is important to stress the political nature of these trials and to situate them within the larger context of the government's campaign to destroy all opposition parties, including the ARF-Dashnak party, which the government banned on the ground that it included non-citizens among its members — a charge which violates internationally recognized norms on freedom of association as well as Armenian law. The government denies holding any political prisoners and, as the report accurately notes, it has used that argument as the basis for refusing to register the non-governmental Committee for the Defense of Political Prisoners. While the report notes that the government shut down the ARF-Dashnak party, it does not mention that it also looted, confiscated or destroyed equipment and property at the ARF's many offices and
40
Armenia
media outlets, including its press and news organizations, social services offices and women's centers.
Besides the government's failure to address or investigate prisoners' allegations of mistreatment, human rights observers have observed a number of practices that violate the rights of defendants to due process and a fair trial. The defendants have reported difficulty in gaining access to their lawyers, who in turn have complained that the government has hindered or obstructed their access to the evidence against their clients. Reports have been confirmed that the government has harassed and attacked defense lawyers and members of their families, firing them from their civil jobs and expelling them firom state universities.
The government arrested almost all of the defendants in these trials without warrant, and did not allow them to contact their families or attorneys for several days after their arrests. The authorities, including the president, have publicly declared the guilt of these defendants, despite the law's presumption of innocence until guilt is proven.
The report does a very good job of describing the problems with the judiciary, including its lack of independence from the executive branch, but unfortunately does not reflect on the implications this may have for the political trials discussed above. Furthermore, the report does its best to praise the government for any sign of progress or reform, whether or not this is merited. It notes, "[m]any corrupt and inefficient judges were replaced during the year," but cites no evidence to support its contention that the judges who were replaced were corrupt or inefficient or that their replacements are not corrupt or inefficient. Many local human rights groups have taken issue with the executive branch regarding its selective and discretionary termination and appointment of judges, charging that bribery and corruption pervade the appointment process.
The report praises as progressive the passage of laws to replace the old Soviet legislation, but local groups have pointed out that several of these new laws are inconsistent and contradictory, often granting the executive branch excessive authority and control.
Overall, the report provides a reasonable factual summary of human rights violations in Armenia during the past year. But its disjointed presentation, its failure to examine the context of the crackdown on the
41
Critique 1996
opposition, its hesitation to attribute responsibility directly to the government and its repeated attempts to inflate the significance of the government's token gestures of goodwill all combine to minimize the seriousness of the human rights crisis in Armenia. The report's failure to address this situation suggests that the State Department takes an unwarrantedly indulgent view of human rights violations by the Armenian government.
42
