Bosnia and Herzegovina
'T^he role of the U.S. government as an architect of the Dayton X Peace Agreement (DPA) cannot be overestimated. Whether this role will be judged in retrospect as positive or negative depends on the extent to which the DPA is implemented. So far, only its military aspects have been enforced more or less fully.
Given the close links between the fate of the Dayton Peace Agreement and any evaluation of U.S. foreign policy, it may be unrealistic to expect the State Department to be objective about the human rights situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is precisely this lack of objectivity that explains why last year's report was so good that the 1995 edition of the Critique judged it "the best of the four annual reports issued so far on that country," whereas the 1996 report can compete for a spot at the very bottom of the State Department's achievements.
The devil is in the timing.
The i 995 report came out soon after the DPA was signed and soon after the arrival of the U.S. troops in Bosnia and Herzegovina to help implement it. Therefore, there was no reason to embellish the human rights situation or to airbrush any problems. On the contrary: the more comprehensive the picture, the more important the challenge for the U.S. troops forming part of the NATO-led Implementation Force (IFOR).
The 1996 report is willy nilly a judgment on how effectively the DPA has been implemented. Among other things, this means evaluating the results of U.S. foreign policy and the performance of U.S. forces. And the better the human rights situation looks, the better this performance looks.
Consciously or unconsciously, the report uses a variety of techniques that have the effect of minimizing the human rights problems in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The general picture is not dear; the different violations of human rights are presented in a fragmentary way, scattered throughout the text; the language is full of euphemisms and understatements; and positive thinking dominates the text.
The one exception, setting a higher standard which the rest of the text fails to meet, is the description of the human rights violations that occurred in connection with the transfer of authority over the Sarajevo suburbs: this is comprehensive and straightforward, giving enough data to present the full drama of the Serbs fleeing Sarajevo.
43
Critique 1996
It fails, however, to mention the passivity of the IFOR forces as the exodus was happening, although obviously many human rights violations could have been prevented if some security had been provided. The UN Secretary General in his report of March 29 noted, in referring to the passivity of the international forces when confronting the violence in the Sarajevo suburbs: "Aside from [providing escort to fire-fighting vehicles and personnel], IFOR declined to undertake any task it considered would draw it beyond the limits of its mandate into policing or law and order functions, and [the International Police Task Force], an unarmed, monitoring and advisory force, has no mandate to take action to maintain law and order."
When the subject is something that the U.S. government considers a success, there is no limit to the praise. The report boasts several times about the September elections being a "significant step toward implementing the Dayton Accords" and also a "significant milestone in the creation of a state based on democracy and the rule of law." This is simply not true. No responsible observers considered these elections to be free and fair, and thus the fact that "the balloting was orderly and calm" is not enough. To say that there were "significant restrictions on freedom of inter-entity movement" is to make a travesty of the Dayton Peace Agreement. There was no freedom of movement whatsoever and every crossing of the Inter-Entity Boundary Line (lEBL) was and still is a very risky undertaking for the local people. After arduous negotiations between the sides a mere 24 hours before the actual voting, tightly sealed buses were allowed to carry minority voters on ethnically pure routes to enclaves a few kilometers across the lEBL, and had to return them immediately.
The September elections were pushed through at the insistence of U.S. diplomat, Robert Frowick, head of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, acting under widely reported pressure from the U.S. government, which wanted these elections to talce place before the U.S. vote in November. The OSCE, which was entrusted with the job of organizing and supervising the vote, gave the go-ahead in spite of the absence of freedom of movement, freedom of association, freedom of expression or a
44
Bosnia and Herzegovina
politically neutral environment, the self-imposed requirements for holding the elections. Human Rights Watch reported that:
OSCE human rights staff were strongly encouraged by [Frowick] to report positive developments and to downplay the bleak human rights situation. As the elections neared, the U.S. administration replaced staff members and pressured Europeans associated with the mission to quiet criticisms of the process, even as reports about serious human rights abuses and manipulation of the voter registration process emerged, attacks on opposition members increased and restrictions of access to the media continued.
When the authors of the report write that "the large turnout demonstrated that citizens were committed to the voting process," they are being either cynical or ignorant. Fraud in these elections was so widespread that turnout numbers are totally meaningless: in many municipalities, there were more ballots cast than voters registered. The International Crisis Group, a London-based NGO monitoring the implementation of the DPA in Bosnia and Herzegovina from its headquarters in Sarajevo and field offices in Banja Luka, Mostar and Tuzla, gave an unequivocal evaluation in a report issued after the voting:
The validity of these elections is in serious doubt, the results cannot be certified, and the elections must be rerun at a later date. These elections should not be declared free, fair or democratic either. If they are, the international community will have seriously undermined its own credibility.
Even more distressing than the report's unwarranted optimism is the euphemistic treatment of serious problems and the constant downplaying of the severity of human rights abuses. Thus, in discussing the Serb Democratic Party (SDS), the report says that it "ensured conformity among local authorities in many areas and used its authority to ensure adherence to nationalistic positions," that "in the Republika Srpska the authorities dominated the media," and that the leaders of the SDS
45
Critique 1996
"single-mindedly pursued policies of ethnic exclusivity." This is not enough. The SDS-ruled Republika Srpska is a totalitarian state maldng humanitarian aid allocation contingent upon the political beliefs of the potential recipients. Until mid-July it was run by an indicted war criminal, who implemented personally and later by proxy a racist policy effectively expelling all non-Serbs from Republika Srpska territory and whose followers have muzzled any independent journalism and intimidated any nascent opposition.
Perhaps the euphemisms and understatements are due to the lack of concrete knowledge about the human rights violations that have occurred, but the result is a bias against those who allow closer scrutiny. Indeed, because the Bosniak side is the most open of all three of the de facto separated territories (Sarajevo is the headquarters of the majority of intergovernmental and non-govemmental organizations), and because the Bosniak government is the most interested in implementing the DPA, there is more information available about law enforcement problems and abuses on the Bosniak side. Taking the road of least resistance, the report gives prominence to those facts that are known to the authors while merely issuing general statements about human rights violations on the territory where Bosnian Croats and Bosnian Serbs are in the majority.
Here is an example of this tendency. In the section discussing "Freedom of Speech and Press," the report states: "In the Bosniak-controlled portions of the Federation there was a strong tendency to favor the positions of the governing [Party of Democratic Action] SDA. Party influence was particularly notable in the State-run television outlets, the principal source of information in all areas. The [Office of the High Representative] reported that on TV Bosnia and Herzegovina, announcers continued to use inflammatory generalizations to describe persons from the [Republika Srpska]." And later: "In general, the media of the [Republika Srpska] and the Croat-controlled portions of the Federation were unremittingly biased in favor of the positions of their ruling parties." No one unfamiliar with the situation would understand from this unbalanced evaluation that freedom of speech and press in the Bosniak part of the federation, while not satisfactory, is by far the best in all of Bosnia and Herzegovina. There seems no reason not to be
46
Bosnia and Herzegovina
even-handed. There is no shortage of independent monitoring organizations whose evaluations could have been cited. For instance, the London-based Institute for War and Peace Reporting (IWPR) commented on the main television news broadcast in Republika Srpska: "Novosti provides unreserved support to Republika Srpska authorities. It fully upholds the policies, ideology and national euphoria propagated by the ruling SDS. Its relentlessly negative stance towards the Federation — and especially towards Bosniacs — aims to rule out any possibility of coexistence and reintegration." And the International Crisis Group, in a report entitled "Media in Bosnia and Herzegovina: How International Support Can Be More Effective," points out that in the Republika Srpska. state-run television "Bosniacs are still frequently referred to in derogatory terms, and reports from the Federation are regularly placed in the section Iz sveta (From Abroad), thereby suggesting that Republika Srpska is not part of Bosnia and Herzegovina."
At times, the report tries to cover up its ignorance with hilarious results. About the SDS it says: "The party uses its own information resources, an information ministry, and tight control of most media outlets to dominate most outlets." QED!
On the same subject of the media in Republika Srpska, the report gives false information. For example, the Banja Lulca weekly Nezavisne Novine did not begin publication in 1996. In fact, after many problems, it managed to publish a daily edition in August only to find itself punished by a refusal from Glas Srpski, the company which exercises a print monopoly in Republika Srpska, to print either the weekly or the daily. As a result, the editor had to turn to a Belgrade printing company for the weekly and dropped the publication of the daily in October. On the issue of freedom to launch new publications, the New York-based Committee to Protect Journalists wrote in its annual report, Attacks on the Press: "A veteran foreign correspondent with international support and funding tried to help start an independent election daily in Banja Luka, the opposition base in Republika Srpska, but was unable to find independent editors or reporters willing to assume the risk."
Freedom of speech and press is far from the only area in which the State Department report is seriously flawed. For example, the discussion
47
Critique 1996
of torture is not serious. It announces the constitutional right to freedom from torture and cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment, states that the country authorities (an extremely vague definition in the Bosnian context), police and prison officials were responsible for numerous cases of physical mistreatment, and then gives five instances of arrests, beatings and evictions — all dating from November and December. There is no attempt to present the true grim scale of the phenomenon. On this subject, the civilian High Representative, Carl Bildt, wrote very frankly in his third report, covering the months of July, August and September: "Particularly troubling has been the increase in number and extent of human rights violations committed by police and other persons in positions of authority, as well as a substantial number of violations in the context of elections... . Crimes against the person, especially physical mistreatment of persons by the police, are on the rise .... In the context of elections, these problems took on new dimensions. Candidates and supporters of opposition political parries were subjected to harassment, intimidation and violent attacks in both entities. Local authorities, including police, failed to counteract these threats and sometimes were in fact the perpetrators of the abuses."
Different instances of ethnic cleansing are scattered throughout the report under a variety of different headings: "Degrading Treatment," "Exile," "Arbitrary Interference With Home," "Freedom of Movement.. .and Repatriation" and "Discrimination for Minorities." The rigid format imposed by the drafting instructions for the Country Reports, which imposes such headings, raises the question of whether the reports do more to illuminate facts or to obscure them. In Bosnia and Herzegovina "evictions," "expulsions," "forced exile" and "exodus" are all manifestations of a general intent usually known as "ethnic cleansing." This was the defining feature of the war, and to dilute it by artificially scattered allusions without one single cross-reference conceals that central fact.
Attacks by people from one ethnic group on members of another ethnic group trying to prepare their return or visit their former homes are endemic in Bosnia and Herzegovina. However, one would not form this impression from reading the report, which does not address the issue in any coherent way. Yet such evictions and the ethnically motivated attacks
48
Bosnia and Herzegovina
are the main impediments to the implementation of the DPA and the prospects for Bosnia and Herzegovina ever to become one country again. Sometimes the distortion of the truth is blatant. Here is one example, concerning the right to voluntary return. The report declares:
A few hundred Muslims have returned to areas of their former residence in Jusici, Mahala and Dugi Dio on [Republika Srpska] territory in the zone of separation between the entities. Press reports described [Republika Srpska] efforts to prevent Muslims from returning to the town of Mahala: Serb Interior Ministry police beat 10 persons before NATO soldiers gained control of the situation. Efforts of Muslims to return to towns in the northern [Republika Srpska] continued, however.
The picture looks different when seen without the positive spin provided by the State Department. Here is the version as presented by the UN Special Rapporteur on the former Yugoslavia, Elisabeth Rehn: "Republika Srpska police blocked the return of some 100 Bosniaks to their home town of Mahala. . and by the High Commissioner for Human Rights: "On 29 August 1996, in the village of Mahala, and on 20 September 1996, in Jusici, some displaced Bosniaks were prevented from returning to their homes by Republika Srpska authorities. In Mahala, 10 persons were injured by Republika Srpska police who fired at the group." Even IFOR in its 12th report, which deals extensively with freedom of movement, is more realistic:
With respect to [freedom of return], houses belonging to every ethnic group have been destroyed — by bulldozer, arson or explosion — in villages near the ZOS [zone of separation] in an attempt to prevent refugees from returning. On 11 November, in the most serious incident to date, several hundred Bosniacs, many of whom were armed, crossed the lEBL at Celic, south of Brcko, to occupy the small village of Gajevi on the Serb side of the ZOS...on 12th November, there was an exchange of gunfire between Bosnian Serbs and Bosniacs which resulted in at least one death and several wounded from both sides.
49
Critique 1996
Apart from demonstrating that every other observer of the Bosnia and Herzegovina scene seems to have seen more serious human rights violations than the State Department, these quotes point to another flaw, which could be ignored if it were not indicative of the general lack of familiarity by the State Department drafters with the situation on the ground. This concerns terminology.
There is a general problem with the terminology used to characterize the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The U.S. media and some independent commentators cannot agree on how to refer to the majority people who live within the territory under the control of the Sarajevo government. Should they be referred to as Bosniaks (or Bosniacs) as they call themselves, Bosnian Muslims, or Muslims? This disagreement is clearly reflected in the State Department's approach: it uses all three names! Thus, without even batting an eyelid, the report says that "Croat and Bosniak leaders" agreed to create a common army and — in the veiy next sentence — that "four corps and two independent divisions are mostly Muslim and one corps is Croat." Then comes a sentence about the "majority Muslim portion of the Federation" whose army is "comprised of Bosnian Muslims." These inconsistencies, whether deliberate or merely sloppy, should be eliminated if only because an unwitting reader might conclude that three separate groups are involved. Most international organizations, including the United Nations, OSCE and NATO, as well as almost all NGOs working in Bosnia and Herzegovina, have long ago adopted uniform terminology and there is no reason why the State Department should continue this confusing incongruity. The ethnically correct term is Bosniaks (or Bosniacs in the British spelling) and it should be uniformly used. Otherwise, an agency of the U.S. government is actually referring to the several hundred Jews still living in Sarajevo as "Muslims." It is to be hoped that in next year's report these misnomers will be corrected.
In conclusion, the State Department report on Bosnia and Herzegovina is an exercise in whitewashing, dilution and evasion of the real issues. Its value as a source of information is positively harmful: it muddles and obscures both the general picture and the particular issues.
50
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Political considerations rather than care for truthful presentation appear to have guided the authors. Unfortunately serious foreign policy decisions are likely to be influenced by this report, and these may further harm the Bosnian people, who have already suffered too much during the five years of war, and whose human rights continue to be violated.
51
