Colombia
T^he human rights crisis in Colombia worsened significantly in A 1996. Some governmental institutions responsible for protecting human rights appeared powerless against, and others complicit in, near-total impunity for violations. NGOs attempting to document and combat abuse came under direct verbal, and in some cases physical, attack. The dominant theme of 1996, perhaps more than in any other recent year, has been one of unquestioned and outspoken military refusal to recognize civilian authority. As the year progressed, the politically weakened President Ernesto Samper effectively relinquished civilian control over the armed forces and continued to exploit his emergency decree power to award supreme authority over large areas of the country to the armed forces. In the first months of 1997, the abdication of civilian authority began to yield predictably bitter fruit. In response to the Defense Minister's widely welcomed public peace initiatives, the military high command announced its "firm opposition" to negotiations. As the government itself has been forced to admit in 1997, its ability to counter Colombia's greatest purveyors of terror — the paramilitaries — is hampered by the military's unwillingness to carry out orders.
The 1996 Country Report on Colombia is arguably the most accurate and comprehensive summary of the human rights situation in that country that the State Department has yet published. It is very informative and it reaches important conclusions about the overall human rights situation in Colombia. The report cites telling statistics on political violence published by respected Colombian NGOs such as the Center for Investigation and Popular Education (CINEP), the Colombian Commission of Jurists and the Intercongregational Commission of Justice and Peace, and it attempts to explain the failures of Colombia's extensive governmental human rights bureaucracy.
The report does suffer from omissions. At least one speaks loudly. Unlike most other Country Reports for Latin America, which provide some discussion of the interplay between civilian and military authority over the armed and security forces, this report is virtually silent on the topic.
The report also shows a tendency, common to many of the Country Reports, to approve any government action (regardless of its significance) that could be interpreted as an advance in the protection of human rights.
53
Critique 1996
It refers in several places to Colombian government "improvements" and "increased efforts" and "attempts to curb" human rights abuses. Years of simultaneous proliferation of government human rights mechanisms and human rights abuses should have prompted the State Department to take a more critical view of governmental activities in this area.
Certain issues should predominate in any serious discussion of human rights in Colombia. These include the relationship between the state agents and paramilitary groups who commit most of the rights abuses, and how to apportion responsibility between them; the ineffectiveness of numerous governmental efforts to address the human rights situation; and the mechanics of impunity, involving a distortion of the civilian criminal justice system pursuant to a counterinsurgency strategy and executive abuse of states of exception. This chapter will try to address these issues in the context of the report's various subject headings.
The report shows important progress in its treatment of paramilitary groups, acknowledging the "major role" they play in the armed conflict and their organization as "drug traffickers' private armies or landowners' private defense," and dting reports that they are known to shoot suspected guerrilla members and supporters on sight. However, it falls short of conveying the full dimension of paramilitary violence, which many Colombian government agencies recognize as the country's most serious human rights problem.
The discussion displays an unwarranted reticence to state its own conclusions, particularly with regard to collaboration between paramilitaries and the armed forces. For example, it states that paramilitary atrocities take place "often with the alleged complicity of individual soldiers or entire military units and with the loiowledge and tacit approval of senior military officials." This is weak language, considering the de facto partnership that exists in many areas. There is abundant evidence — from public statements in favor of paramilitaries and "militias" by the military high command, accounts from inhabitants of paramilitary areas, and specific evidence adduced in particular cases — of collaboration at a number of levels going far beyond individual complicity or tacit approval. Internal paramilitary documents, revealed in Colombian media accounts, highlight paramilitary complaints of inconsistent support from the armed
54
Colombia
forces, reflecting an underlying assumption of links between the two. Such references make clear that the paramilitaries view their work in much the same way as human rights groups have alleged: they are doing the military's dirty work. Paramilitaries occupy strategic areas, and by staging campaigns of terror, clear the areas of dissidents and suspected sympathizers of the opposition or the armed guerrilla groups.
Such groups have long found official support in Colombia. Until 1989 they were legal under statutes that were repealed only when April 19 Movement (M-19) guerrillas tried to use them to legalize their own armed status. Colombian military training manuals explicitly note that the benefits of paramilitary units stem from their ability to camouflage the identity of state agents, allowing them to carry out illegal covert operations more easily. As the report notes, military-paramilitary collaboration also lends important official protection to illegal actions by civilians: the armed forces have generally refused to execute arrest orders against paramilitary leaders.
In 1983, the office of Colombia's Attorney General published a report which identified 59 then-active service military personnel who belonged to the paramilitary death squad MAS (a Spanish acronym for "Death to Kidnappers"). None was discharged and many are now high-ranking officers in the Colombian military. In the mid-1990s, the government issued statutes and regulations legalizing the ironically named Convivir ("Live Together") units and authorizing them to employ military weapons. The Convivir units are an explicit part of the government's counterinsurgency strategy, and have been utilized by the government as a means of increasing social acceptance of paramilitarism. Meanwhile, the Convivir have been denounced for various acts of violence and intimidation, such as restricting civilian freedom of movement, evicting people from the land, and even, in some cases, attacking civilians.
The report appears subtiy to link the statistical increases in paramilitary violence with a decrease in reported abuses by state agents: "While security force killings declined slightly, killings by paramilitary forces increased" (which, as the report notes, caps an increase in paramilitary violence of an estimated 60% since 1992). However, the State Department chooses to accentuate the positive, noting that the
55
Critique 1996
security forces had "improved," rather than exploring the significance of the linl<^ between official and unofficial forces. Viewed in its proper context, the drop in killings attributable to the army and security forces, concurrent with a rise in paramilitary violence, appears to reflect the evolution of a strategy of plausible deniability rather than an official commitment to end counterinsurgency abuses. The level of combined military-paramilitary violations has not changed. The division of labor has.
The evidence of high-ranking support for and involvement with paramilitaries merits further comment. In October 1996, Colombian Army Col. Carlos Alfonso Velásquez, then a senior commander in the devastated northern part of the country, called on his high command to investigate the failure of the 17th Brigade to take action against illegal paramilitary activities. Col.Velásquez's frank report occasioned charges of insubordination from the military high command and his departure firom the armed forces. Neither the colonel's report nor its aftermath is mentioned in the State Department report. The trial of three-star general Farouk Yanine Diaz on charges related to paramilitary abuses is also illustrative, both because of the detailed evidence of his involvement and his acquittal by the then-chief of Colombia's army. Moreover, in response to heightened criticism over the paramilitary issue, the Colombian government has acloiowledged errors of omission and commission with regard to the genesis and growth of paramilitaries.
The State Department should confront the potentially negative impact of U.S. military aid and training in this area. Former Amnesty International researcher Michael McClintock writes in Instruments of Statecrafi that U.S. complicity with state terrorism in Colombia dates back to at least the early 60's, when, in 1962, a U.S. Special Forces Mobile Training Team under Gen. William P. Yarborough proposed to the Colombian military a plan which would "select civilian and military personnel for clandestine training in resistance operations." The resulting paramilitary structures would then "perform counter-agent and counter-propaganda functions and as necessary execute paramilitary, sabotage and/or terrorist activities against known communist proponents. It should be backed by the United States." "Colombia's doctrine of counter-
56
Colombia
insurgency today" writes McClintock, "seemingly differs little from that of the United States in the 1960s." However, the State Department has vociferously denied charges by human rights groups that the Pentagon has provided training to paramilitaries as part of its strategic assistance to Colombia's military effort.
The paramilitary's displacement of the military as the primary author of human rights abuses has not been accompanied by a rise in convictions. To its credit, the report is unequivocal about the scope and significance of impunity in Colombia: "Rampant impunity is at the core of the country's human rights violations. According to government reports, in 97 to 99.5% of all crimes, the law breakers are never brought to justice." As the report also notes, 74% of crimes are never reported to the authorities. The most likely explanation for this is victims' awareness of the system's failures, and fear that filing a complaint may invite reprisals.
To explain the astounding rates of impunity, the report points out that the "judiciary is severely overburdened and has a huge backlog of cases." While accurate, this characterization is not a satisfactory explanation for the level of impunity that prevails regarding human rights violations. As the report notes elsewhere, the few human rights cases that the Prosecutor General's human rights unit is able to investigate are usually re-assigned to military courts. As one UN expert noted, these courts appear to be designed for impunity where human rights are concerned, and have protected the military from successful prosecution.
Civilian authorities continued in 1996 to acquiesce in the military's exceedingly broad and insistent application of military jurisdiction to cases of alleged human rights abuses. Despite the widely publicized 1995 commission established by the government to propose modifications to the military justice code, military jurisdiction has been expanded, not limited. (A reform was proposed by the government in July 1997 and should be discussed in next year's report.) Oddly enough, the report points to the house arrest of Gen. Farouk Yanine Diaz as a success resulting from "increased efforts" of the Prosecutor General's office to prosecute high-profile human rights cases. Yanine Diaz, identified by human rights groups as the founder and intellectual author of a number
57
Critique 1996
of paramilitary death squads in the Magdalena Medio region in the 1980s, is accused by former paramilitaries of having ordered the disappearance of 19 merchants, the massacre of 20 banana workers in Uraba, as well as the "la Rochela" massacre of 12 judges and investigators sent to look into the paramilitary presence in Magdalena Medio. In fact, the judicial process in the Yanine case is evidence of the well-oiled machinery of impunity rather than a human rights "success," though the efforts of the Prosecutor General are indeed praiseworthy. Predictably, the courts divested civilian authorities of jurisdiction in favor of the military tribunals, in which members of the armed forces investigate and try their subordinates. The fusion of institutional military authority and judicial authority can easily mean that the officer who gave the order to commit the crime finds himself responsible for judging the soldiers who carried it out. As a three-star general, Yanine was slated to be judged either by his superior, then-armed forces chief Harold Bedoya, or by Bedoya's designee. Bedoya, a vocal supporter of paramilitaries, responded to Yanine's legal troubles by publicly calling him a national hero. The 1997 military tribunal opinion (drafted by Bedoya's replacement as miUtary Chief of Staff, Gen. Manuel José Bonett) predictably acquitted Yanine and bitterly attacked the Prosecutor General for having even brought the case.
As the Yanine case illustrates, the military is allowed to transfer human rights cases to its own courts under an exceedingly broad interpretation of the Constitution which requires that acts committed in the line of duty be processed in military criminal courts. Throughout 1996, the Superior Council, which resolves civilian-military jurisdictional conflicts, adhered to an anomalous conception of military jurisdiction which sends allegations of murder, torture and disappearance to the military courts on the grounds that the crimes are related to military service. According to one governmental official interviewed by the Lawyers Committee in 1996, the military had asserted that even rape should be included as an act of service.
Rather than move to limit military jurisdiction, proposed constitutional changes pending before the Colombian Senate in 1996 sought to accomplish exactly the opposite by destroying the legal basis for civilian review of military human rights abuses. These changes would have
58
Colombia
stripped the office of the Prosecutor General of its authority to conduct criminal investigations, and the Ombudsman for Human Rights of its power to conduct civil administrative hearings, which is often the only redress available after the military has absolved its own personnel of criminal charges relating to human rights abuses.
The report's discussion of the rest of Colombia's justice system lacks coherence. Its pronouncement that "the judiciary is largely independent of the executive and legislative branches, both in theory and practice" seems an evasion of the huge shadow cast over the justice system by the military. The characterization is particularly surprising since the report makes several references to the military's influence, most notably in its ability to assert military jurisdiction over virtually the entire human rights docket.
Nor does the report acknowledge the dubious legacy of U.S.-sponsored judicial reform — the wholesale takeover of process of judicial review by the prosecutors, who now act in effect as judges in all matters involving arrest, detention and access to evidence. This has effectively put an end to real judicial review — the independent control mechanism that is at the core of judicial independence. After years of exchanges on this issue without significant changes in the report's text, it must be concluded that the State Department has simply decided to ignore criticism of the indefensible.
Among the manifold indefensible aspects of the Colombian justice system is the regional, or "faceless" court system, which covers a broad range of crimes, including narcotics trafficking and offenses related to subversion. However, because of the narcotics cartels' tremendous wealth and power, all but the pettiest narcotics cases receive separate treatment from political cases. The latter continue to be characterized by the broad use of anonymity for witnesses, prosecutors and judges; restricted defense access to the case file; an effective bar on defense counsel participation in evidentiary proceedings; the virtual dependence of prosecutors on the military for arrests, evidence and, in a number of cases, office space, insurmountable travel distances between the scene of the alleged crime and the prosecutorial and judicial offices where the files are maintained and the case is decided; and lengthy pre-trial detention without
59
Critique 1996
meaningful judicial review. Perhaps the most pernicious factor is the dominant roie of the military in arresting individuals suspected of terrorism, often on the basis of accusations by a cadre of anonymous witnesses maintained and often paid by the military in exchange for identifying subversives. Operating for the most part without legal authority, the military continues to carry out police functions in conflict zones, where they make most of the arrests for faceless court subversion-related cases.
The report sets the due process concerns of human rights groups against what it characterizes as the generally held view of prosecutors and judges that the system is "necessary to the successful investigation and prosecution of human rights cases in a country where violence is endemic and acts of revenge against those prosecuting violent crime may be expected." This is quite similar to the text employed by the State Department in past years, except that "human rights cases" are now the objective which justifies the use of regional court means. This is disingenuous for several reasons. The 219 cases currently handled by the Prosecutor General's human rights unit, which are now investigated within the regional court system, constitute less than 7/lOths of one percent of the cases currently going through this distorted process — on balance, hardly enough to support a serious argument. Moreover, as the report recognizes, cases investigated by the human rights unit are ultimately transferred to the military courts. The all-justifying "end" does not exist: the cases end up in the oblivion to which they are assigned under military jurisdiction. Further undermining due process, the identities of the 25 prosecutors in the human rights unit were revealed in the public installation ceremony attended by other officials, including military officers. As was indicated above, none of this should come as a surprise to the State Department.
The human rights unit is emblematic of the government's many efforts to address the human rights situation. Consisting of dedicated professionals worldng at substantial risk and largely on their own because of a lack of confidence in the police and armed forces, they have managed to cobble together several serious investigations. The results, however, have been negligible, except to demonstrate the futility of investigating
60
Colombia
cases in a system that will turn trials over to those being investigated. Many of the Samper government's efforts appear tangential to the core problems, which were exacerbated by the government in 1996. Although on balance, the report gives the government more credit than it earned in 1996, its discussion of governmental attitudes toward human rights investigations and its other references to government responses to the crisis offer much useful information, and give an accurate picture of the government's conflicting policies regarding human rights. On the one hand, Colombia's human rights officials are respectful of and occasionally collaborate with their non-govemmental counterparts. On the other hand, in 1996 the Samper Administration pushed for approximately 50 constitutional amendments which amount to an attempted legislative coup against the rule of law, and was content to let the military high command attack human rights activity by non-govemmental entities, the government itself and the State Department. The government must take responsibility for the actions of the military, particularly when government policy emboldens the military to usurp civilian authority, as the Samper Administration has so consistentiy done. This has left NGOs and even government offices vulnerable to attacks from the military. Human rights workers in Colombia face surveillance, veiled and direct threats by military, intelligence, police and paramilitary forces. Much of the hostile action which ostensibly comes from private groups actually involves the tapping of phone lines — an act that indicates the technical assistance of state actors.
As soon as the State Department's report was released, the high command issued a vitriolic statement condemning it and General Bedoya made public statements condemning human rights reporting as a violation of the armed forces "presumption of innocence." The high command has also attacked the work of the Prosecutor General's human rights office, and there have been reports that army units have harassed the unit's prosecutors. Several weeks of exchanges in early 1997 culminated in one of strangest "man bites dog" stories in recent memory in Colombia. Spealdng to the press, Gen. Bedoya criticized the Prosecutor General's office and the civilian justice system for their high levels of impunity, and compared them unfavorably to the military courts.
61
Critique 1996
On other fronts, the government simply ignores its commitments to human rights. Its reaction to the Trujillo Massacres is a case in point. The 1995 Country Report praised the Samper government for its acknowledgment of state responsibility for the 1989-90 killings. Since that acknowledgment, however, the government has done almost nothing to act on its many promises to honor a special international commission's recommendations to sanction the guilty and compensate the victims. Groups representing the victims pulled out of a joint NGO-government coalition in frustration, and called on the OAS to pursue the case at the Inter-American Court of Human Rights.
The report's discussion of themes related to the armed opposition or other left-wing entities seems to reflect a subtle bias, manifested in the failure to provide a complete and contextual picture of what is a very complicated situation. For example, in its discussion of conflicts between the military and peasants protesting military counter-narcotic fumigation programs, the report makes a distressingly vague reference to the "support" of guerrillas and drug traffickers for the protesters. "Support" is an ambiguous term capable of meaning anything from passive agreement — hardly a connection worth mentioning — to indispensable material assistance. Th report should be more explicit, including such references only when they are relevant to the discussion and when they can be placed in a meaningful context.
In its discussion of the peasants who, we read, "support" guerillas and drug traffickers, the report provides no political or economic context to help the reader understand their motives. The cocaleros are peasants who live by picking and selling coca leaves; last year they turned out in huge numbers to protest government fumigation of coca plants in Putumayo and Caquetâ. A more complete approach to the issue would have discussed why so many poor, unarmed peasants marched against the well-armed military. The reasons lie in basic economics, as well as in widespread opposition to militarization and the concomitant human rights abuses. Peasants began to mobilize following the implementation of decrees which created aerial fumigation programs and special zones of "public order" under military control. Aerial fumigation harms primarily poor rural farmers and has littie if any effect on the drug trade, since the
62
Colombia
leaf buyers will simply buy the leaves in other regions of the country "protected" by either guerrillas or by the military itself. Small farmers only recently began to grow coca to supplement their declining incomes. Forced out of their traditional self-sufficient agricultural practices by economics and powerful landowning narcotics traffickers, coca leaf cultivation barely allows them to eke out an existence. Aerial fumigation, say peasant leaders, not only kills the coca plant, cutting off an important income source, but also kills other crops including staples such as yucca, potatoes and maize, and reportedly even livestock. The herbicide presently used, glyphosate (Roundup) is a suspected carcinogen. It is a "broad spectrum" plant poison which kills many types of plants and can cause eye and sldn irritation, headaches and vomiting.
If the State Department wishes to go beyond the material facts of abuses committed during military operations against civilian protesters, it should elucidate the range of factors other than "guerrilla infiltration" that pushed thousands of poor peasants to demonstrate — factors such as economic policies, military "public order" jurisdiction, pressures from narcotics traffickers, and the harmful effects of U.S.-Colombian fumigation. When facts are presented free of such context, the reader is not likely to reach a balanced understanding of the situation.
The report might also have looked closer to home for an explanation of peasant opposition to certain anti-narcotics practices. U.S. military aid sent in the name of the drug war has likely been used by the Colombian mihtary to commit human rights abuses. Last October, William Schulz, director of Amnesty International USA, produced official documents that he said proved "that almost every unit highlighted by Amnesty for murdering Colombian civilians was in fact receiving U.S.-supplied arms and other equipment." This is not news to the State Department. The Clinton Administration, prompted by legislation sponsored by Senator Patrick Leahy (D-Vermont), has since attempted to restrict the flow of counter-narcotics aid to abusive military and security force units.
On June 28, 1996 the Intelligence Oversight Board issued findings that the U.S. Army School of the Americas (SoA) had used training materials that recommended "executions of guerrillas, extortion, physical abuse, coercion and false imprisonment." The content of the manuals
63
Critique 1996
should be of particular interest to critics of Colombia's human rights practices considering the number of Colombian soldiers who have been trained by the United States. At least 9,679 soldiers and officers have trained at the SoA, and most attended while the manuals condoning torture were still in use.
The State Department again fails to face the facts in discussing the continuing violence against the left-wing Union Patriótica party (UP). In referring to the targeted killing of thousands of UP members over the past several years, the report says merely that the UP "perceives" violence against them as a case of genocide. This year, the report should have mentioned that the UP made its case quite powerfully before the UN Commission on Human Rights that the violence against party members and leaders constitutes genocide against a particular social group — in this case a political party. To its credit, the 1996 report goes beyond its predecessors in presenting the findings of the human rights organization Fundación Reiniciar that "between January 1 and September 20, UP activists were killed at the rate of one every other day. Many murdered UP members held or had previously held elected office: I regional deputy, 13 municipal council members, 2 former mayors, and 3 former council members." While the State Department is likely to object to the invocation of "genocide," regarding it as inapplicable in these circumstances, it should nonetheless endeavor to recognize the basic premise: that an organized campáign of extermination continues to decimate the UPs ranks. This is of particular importance, since the UP's fate is interpreted by many as a signal to current guerrillas that they will never be able to reinsert themselves peacefully into Colombian society.
The report's discussion of elections fails to note that the "political cleansing" of leftist and opposition leaders and community activists characteristically peaks in the months before elections. Under the circumstances, many municipalities in Colombia lack the "democratic" atmosphere necessary to enjoy elections that are "fair and open."
On the subject of internal displacement, the report states: "The presence of paramilitary, guerrilla and narcotics trafficking organizations, and the armed confrontations among them, displaced 750,000." This hides as much as it reveals. Paramilitary organizations, which use terror
64
Colombia
to dear the countryside of communities they suspect of supporting guerrillas, are by far the largest cause of displacement. Guerrilla atrocities have also led many to flee, but the logic of rebel groups is to retain populations in areas they seek to control — and this is precisely why the paramilitary and the military (inexcusably omitted from this discussion) have so often sought to "cleanse" areas of their inhabitants. Armed confrontations between the paramilitary and guerrilla forces are exceedingly rare, and are a minor cause of displacement. Although multiple factors contribute to this phenomenon, the State Department should acknowledge that the main cause of displacement is paramilitary terror.
The report might also have cited international findings that support or further the State Department's own conclusions. For example, the report's short section on torture says there was no appreciable decrease in the practice by the military and police and that paramilitaries are presumed responsible for many cases. The situation is more serious than this short discussion suggests. In July 1996, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights concluded that state forces committed torture "in a manner that would appear to indicate a systematic practice" and criticized the Colombian government for failing to bring "its legislation into line with the requirements of the Convention Against Torture."
There is no mention of the report of the UN Working Group on Enforced Involuntary Disappearance, dated December 13, 1996. Nor were the decisions adopted by the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention dated October 29, 1996 discussed in the report's section on detention and imprisonment. Lastly, there was no mention of the June-July 1996 mission to Colombia of the UN Special Rapporteur on Contemporary Forms of Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance. Next year's report might take into account the rapporteur's findings, which were published in January 1997.
Many factors complicate Colombia's human rights situation, most notably the government's own contradictory policies and the increased use of non-state agents to carry out abuses. This year's report is not without its flaws, yet it represents a significant improvement. In early 1997, the establishment of a UN human rights office in Colombia raised hopes that
65
Critique 1996
international attention iind technical cooperation would help combat the most recalcitrant problems. Next year's State Department report should pay close attention to the work of this office, and the U.S. government should vigorously support efforts by the UN, Colombian officials and NGOs to come to terms with a gravely deteriorating human rights situation.
66
