Egypt
T^he 1996 State Department report on Egypt continues its JL unfortunate custom of admitting that many human rights abuses are committed in Egypt while declining to hold the Egyptian government directly and unequivocally responsible. In addressing abuses committed by the government, the report is often incomplete and equivocal. In contrast, its reporting of human rights abuses by "terrorists" is assertive and unequivocal. The report frequently suggests that human rights abuses committed by the Egyptian government are somehow justified as the result of the confrontation with terrorists.
Human rights conditions in Egypt continue to deteriorate, and the Egyptian government acts with increasing impunity and disregard for minimum human rights standards. In recent years, the Critique has emphasized the importance of taking a clear and decisive stand against human rights abuses committed by the Egyptian government. It has stressed that the State Department report should not give the government the impression that the struggle against terrorism justifies its rampant disregard for human rights. The State Department report, though critical of the Egyptian government on many issues, does not refiect the appropriate sense of urgency about human rights conditions in Egypt.
In some instances, it must be granted that the report is admirably frank and decisive. For example, it repeats its oft-quoted statement that "[t]he ruling NDP [National Democratic Party] dominates the political scene to such an extent that citizens do not have a meaningful ability to change their government." It also notes that the NDP uses its entrenched position to dominate national politics and that security forces commit numerous serious human rights abuses. The report further adds that "abuse and torture of detainees by police, security personnel and prison guards is common."
However, the impact of this language is diluted by the fact that at times, the report is inexplicably optimistic about improvements in the human rights situation in Egypt. For example, it states that "[t]he use of violence by security forces in the campaign against terrorists appeared more limited this year than in previous years," adding, "[t]he Government's human rights record improved somewhat over the past year, although it remains poor." One might conclude that although human
75
Critique 1996
rights problems in Egypt persist, the government is making an effort to improve its record.
It is difficult to understand the report's optimism. Several human rights organizations, including Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International, note that human rights practices in Egypt continue to deteriorate, and that security forces operate with impunity. The State Department report fails to mention that in May 1996 the UN Committee against Torture issued a report concluding, "[t]orture is systematically practiced by the Security Forces in Egypt, in particular by State Security Intelligence, in spite of the denials of the Government," and "[r]eported cases of torture are seen to be habitual, widespread and deliberate in at least a considerable part of the country." The UN Special Rapporteur on Torture reported the same findings in 1997.
As in previous years, the Egyptian government has been unrepentant regarding its numerous human rights abuses. The Egyptian government's response to the Committee Against Torture was to send a letter stating that the disclosure of its findings "might be interpreted as signifying support for terrorist groups and would encourage the latter to proceed with their terrorist schemes and to defend their criminal members who engage in acts of terrorism by resorting to false accusations of torture." Furthermore, the Egyptian government and in particular the Minister of Interior continued to accuse human rights organizations of "defending the rights of terrorists" and of propagating false and politically motivated information.
Despite such statements, the State Department report does not call attention to the impunity and arrogance with which the Egyptian government operates, nor does it fully assess the government's attitude regarding international and non-governmental investigations of human rights violations. The report notes that the government refuses to license local human rights groups and that the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights (EOHR) continues to conduct its activities openly. The report adds that "[d]espite their nonrecognition, the EOHR and other groups sometimes enjoy the cooperation of government officials," and that "[t]here were no reports during the year that the Government banned
76
Egypt
meetings of human rights groups, although the Government has on occasion made the holding of such meetings difficult."
In fact, it might have added that the government has continued to harass and intimidate Egyptian human rights activists. State Security Investigations Sector (SSIS) officers detained and interrogated several Egyptian human rights activists and prohibited human rights organizations from holding seminars and workshops. At times, the SSIS threatened guests of human rights organizations and surrounded locations where meetings were to be held. On several occasions, SSIS officers intimidated Egyptians who spoke to human rights organizations. A particularly egregious incident took place in November 1995 after a member of EOHR gave an interview to the BBC. The SSIS interrogated her for three hours. She was ordered to submit an official apology to the Ministry of Interior and to disclaim what she had said in the interview.
Not only does the report omit significant facts (although that is a serious problem), it fails to reflect the arrogance of the Egyptian government's underlying assumption of impunity. Besides being inaccurate, the indication of improvements in human rights will only increase the Egyptian government's sense of impunity and lack of responsibility. The report's language regarding this issue gives the Egyptian government an undeserved reprieve.
The Egyptian government consistently cites the struggle against terrorism as justification for its human rights abuses. The Egyptian government regularly accuses human rights organizations of supporting terrorists, and the State Department report does little to discourage this tendency. In fact, the report often cites terrorism and the threat of terrorism as the background for human rights abuses by the security forces. For example, the report states that "[a]s part of the Government's antiterrorist campaign, security forces conducted mass arrests and detained hundreds of individuals without charge after specific terrorist incidents." Elsewhere the report states, "[i]n fighting the terrorists, the security forces continue to mistreat and torture prisoners, arbitrarily arrest and detain persons, hold detainees in prolonged pretrial detention, and occasionally engage in mass arrests." Then the report adds, "[a]side from the antiterrorist campaign, local police abused common criminal
77
Critique 1996
suspects." The report leads the reader to believe that human rights abuses committed by the security forces are incidental to its struggle against terrorism, and that other abuses are those committed by local pohce against common criminals. This is misleading. Human rights abuses by security forces are pervasive and endemic, and have little to do with the existence of terrorism. It is imperative that the report avoid giving the impression that it accepts the Egyptian government's attempt to link its human rights abuses to the existence of terrorism.
The report's ambiguous position on the role of terrorism and its relation to human rights abuses leads it to make inconsistent statements. For instance, the report asserts, "[i]n antiterrorist operations, the security forces Idlled 34 suspected terrorists; there were no reports of excessive use of lethal force." But a few sentences before, the report states, "[t]here were no reports of political killings by government officials; however, extrajudicial killings may have occurred in certain antiterrorist operations." It is puzzling how there could be no reports of excessive use of lethal force in so-called antiterrorist operations, when there are reports of extrajudicial killings during these very operations. Amnesty International has reported that some killings by security forces during clashes with members of armed groups "bear the hallmark of extrajudicial executions." The report's noncommittal and ambiguous language does not reflect the seriousness of the situation.
In another example of ambiguity, the report states, "[h]igh-profile cases involving Muslim Brotherhood members and a large number of terrorists went to military courts." Earlier, the report declares that in military or state security courts the "accused do not receive all the constitutional protections of the judicial system." This statement is shocking. When the report states that "a large number of terrorists went to military courts" it is assuming that those accused of being terrorists or those convicted of terrorism are in fact terrorists. Both assumptions are unjustified. The Egyptian government's allegation that someone is a terrorist cannot be accepted as proof. Furthermore, a conviction by a military or state security court means littie: the report itself concedes that military and state security tribunals do not follow due process of law. Human rights organizations have observed that the government refers
78
Egypt
civilians to military courts in cases where evidence against them is weak or nonexistent. It is therefore inappropriate for the report to conclude that a "large nimiber of terrorists went to military courts." Moreover, the report states euphemistically that defendants in such courts do not receive "all" the constitutional protections of the judicial system; the reader might conclude that defendants do however enjoy "some" constitutional protections, but this is far from the truth. Last year's edition of the Critique noted that such trials are "kangaroo trials." They have not improved. Military and state security courts do not provide defendants with any constitutional protections because they do not uphold the most basic requirements of due process of law.
The report's attempts to portray the Egyptian government in a positive light often forces it to adopt inconsistent positions. For instance, it states that "[t]he Government took disciplinary action against police officers accused of abusing detainees, but did not pursue most cases or seek adequate punishments." Later, the report notes that in a June interview, the Minister of Interior stated that human rights were taught as a subject at the National Police Academy, and that police officers responsible for human rights infractions must be brought to trial. However, the minister's assertions do not receive the scrutiny they deserve. The report goes on to say that while the government has investigated torture complaints in criminal cases, the punishments imposed were not in line with the seriousness of the offenses. Nonetheless, the report maintains that according to government officials, administrative punishments can be severe enough to prevent further career advancement, and some police officers have opted to face criminal charges instead. Finally, the report notes that the government has said that it will not disclose further details of individual cases of police abuse for fear of harming the morale of law enforcement officers involved in counter-terrorist operations. In the paragraph that follows, the State Department refers to reports by human rights groups that the government effectively blocks the investigation of torture complaints by concealing the records of detained citizens.
It is not clear what conclusions the report hopes to draw from all of this. Its lack of clarity is unwarranted, especially in light of the
79
Critique 1996
government's concealment of records and its refusal to open investigations to public scrutiny, a fact which the report acknowledges. The report's mention of purported training methods and internal discipline procedures is also puzzling. In May 1996, the UN Committee Against Torture noted that no investigation has ever been made into the SSIS; nor has legal action been brought against members of the SSIS since 1987. Amnesty International reports that while it was assured by the Egyptian government that all reports of torture and deaths in custody were being investigated, it was not able to obtain details on these investigations. Human Rights Watch/Middle East reports that there are still no results in official investigations of the SSIS. Clearly, torturers in Egypt continue to enjoy impunity.
If the report means to argue that there is a difference between government investigations into torture by the police and government investigations into torture by security forces, it needs to make this distinction more dearly. Specifically, it should state unequivocally that the government does not investigate allegations of torture by the SSIS, and should explain the consequences of the government's decision to conceal the results of investigations into police abuse. The report should also avoid diluting the responsibility of the Egyptian government by citing human rights courses supposedly taught at the police academy.
On the subject of deaths in custody, the report notes only that "[tjhere were no total figures for deaths in custody from government or human rights sources by year's end. Human rights groups were investigating eight deaths in police custody, six of which they believed were due to medical negligence, one to suidde, and one as a result of a beating or being tortured to death. They were also investigating 13 prison deaths related to medical negligence." Again, the report simply notes what human rights sources believe without expressing its own view on the matter. Even the report's language is disturbingly vague. On the subject of deaths as a result of "medical negligence," it neglects to explain that this could mean failure to treat a prisoner who has been tortured, and that the government will often cite asthma or heart attack as the cause of death without allowing the body to be examined.
80
Egypt
The report often states that human rights sources "alleged" or "reported" a human rights violation. For example, in discussing prison conditions the report states: "The use of torture and other mistreatment, lack of medical care, the banning of visits, and substandard living conditions are reportedly common. Prisoners have claimed that their cells are poorly ventilated... ." As has been pointed out in previous editions of the Critique, such equivocal language obscures the grim reality of the human rights situation in Egypt and attenuates the responsibility of the Egyptian government.
Although generally thorough, there are several issues on which the report gives incomplete information. It states that there were no reports of politically motivated disappearances. It adds that of the 11 individuals "that local human rights groups claimed had disappeared in 1994 and the one cited in 1995," eight have been located in detention facilities and four are still missing. In fact, at least one case of disappearance occurred in 1996. Moreover, the report should mention that the majority of those who are still missing were detained by security forces and supposedly released. This is significant because it is likely the government continues to hold them, or is concealing their deaths.
Although the report mentions that members of the Muslim Brotherhood were arrested and referred to military courts, it says nothing about the Wasat Party. Members of the Muslim Brotherhood applied to register the Wasat as a political party. The government rejected the application and arrested 13 Wasat party members. President Mubarak ordered the case transferred to the military court in May 1996. Although no evidence was presented to show that the defendants had either planned or engaged in violence, in August the military court sentenced seven of the defendants to three years in prison. Human rights organizations vigorously protested the persecution of the Wasat for peaceful and open political activity.
The report's section on freedom of speech and press is also incomplete. It states that "[c]itizens openly speak their views on a wide range of political and social issues, including vigorous criticism of the Government." But the evidence that follows belies this rosy picture. Indeed, the report acknowledges that Egyptian laws stipulate substantial
81
Critique 1996
fines for criticizing the president, members of the government and foreign heads of state. It notes that the government exercises censorship and that on several occasions in 1996 editors and journalists were detained and interrogated for publishing allegations of official misconduct and corruption. As the report states, about 45 journaUsts were being prosecuted under Press Law 93 at the time of writing. Regrettably, the report neglects to mention that one of these defendants, the editor in chief of al-Sha'b newspaper Magdi Husayn, was physically assaulted by an unidentified group of men in July 1996.
A host of laws enable the government to censor and punish free speech. Restrictions and penalties are set forth in the Penal Code which speaks of "crimes of opinion and publication." Other restrictions and penalties are included in the Law on the Protection of the Internal Front and Sodal Peace, the Emergency Laws, the Code of Criminal Procedures, the Publications Law, the Press Authority Law, the Author's Copyright Law, the Censorship of Artistic Production Law, the Political Parties Law and al-Azhar Law, and Law 93/1995, known as the Press Law. As was pointed out in last year's edition of the Critique, if citizens exercise their right to free speech in Egypt, they do so at the government's unlimited discretion and at great personal risk. The report's assertion that "dtizens generally express themselves fireely" is an overstatement, to say the least.
The report's review of human rights abuses committed by terrorist groups is excellent; its tone in this section is assertive and unequivocal. It correctiy notes that terrorist groups continued attacks on police, Coptic Christians and tourists, and it chronicles in detail the case of Nasr Abu Zeid, a university professor convicted of being an apostate by a trial court in Cairo. The report deals accurately with fireedom of religion and discrimination against women, admirably calling attention to the problem of female genital mutilation and the efforts of the government to bring an end to the practice.
As in past years, the State Department report is generally accurate but selectively assertive. It continues to link governmental human rights abuses to the existence of terrorism, thus giving the impression that human rights abuses committed by the Egyptian government are a justifiable reaction to terrorism perpetrated by opposition groups. The
82
Egypt
report often relates information in a detached and non-committal fashion and avoids reaching conclusions. As previous editions of the Critique have noted, in light of the deteriorating human rights situation in Egypt, it is imperative that the State Department take a firm stand against such abuses. It is to be hoped that in future reports the State Department will reject once and for all the argument that terrorism somehow mitigates the responsibility of the Egyptian government for its egregious human rights abuses.
83


ó'-v.
Í .. I ; " •
I y	'

