United Kingdom/Hong Kong
T^he year 1996 will be remembered in the annals of Hong Kong JL both as the last full year under colonial rule and for the increasing number of acts by China that have effectively eroded the solemn promises of the 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration. Verbal threats gave way to a worrying series of actions by the mainland government to compromise the Declaration's promises that the future Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR) would enjoy a "high degree of autonomy," democracy and human rights. The Preliminary Working Committee (PWC), a select group of local pro-China figures and mainlanders appointed by Beijing to lay the groundwork for its future rule, passed the torch in January to another hand-picked 150-member Preparatory Committee (PC), which continued to threaten systematically the foundations of Hong Kong's fragile democratic and human rights systems. This has given rise to increased concern for the commitment to "one country, two systems" and "Hong Kong people ruling Hong Kong" articulated in the 1984 agreement. However, as in past years, the State Department's report on human rights in Hong Kong reflects very little of the turmoil and anxiety occasioned by the future sovereign's current policies. The report understates the rising tensions in the territory over China's statements and actioi\s on major issues such as the right of abode, freedom of the press and of assembly, and the powers and immunities of the People's Liberation Army (PLA) troops to be stationed in Hong Kong. Unfortunately, the State Department's hands-off approach has persisted in spite of repeated criticisms in each of the last three editions of the Critique.
Key ingredients of the Joint Declaration provide for the election of the legislature, either elections or consultations for selection of the future Chief Executive, continuation of the common law system, independence and finality in the courts, and the sustenance of 16 enumerated basic human rights. Issues relating to democratization and China's resistance to it have been extremely contentious. After an earlier breakdown in negotiations with the British over Governor Chris Patten's 1992 electoral proposals (carried out in the 1995 elections for the current Legislative Council), China determined that it would terminate all current democratically elected bodies in the territory and proceed with the
247
Critique 1996
appointments of its own substitutes. The substitute bodies have not been very representative. As the report notes, not a single Democratic Party member was chosen for the PC, although party members constitute the largest contingent in Hong Kong's first fully elected Legislative Council (Legco). Nonetheless, there remains hope for Hong Kong's fledgling democracy in the substantial development of a civil society, with political organizations and skills, which has arisen in the course of recent democratization and other reforms.
The rule of law suffered an equal onslaught during 1996. After a controversial review of all existing legislation to vet it for legality under the 1990 Basic Law, Hong Kong's new "mini-constitution," the PC by the end of the year had recommended the repeal or amendment of some 25 key ordinances. Significantly, the recommendations included the abolition of recently instituted electoral laws; striking of the Boundary and Election Commission Ordinance (which provides for an independent body to administer and monitor elections); striking key provisions of the Bill of Rights Ordinance (BoRO); deleting key constraints in the Public Order Ordinance (amended in 1995 to incorporate less restrictive requirements for registering processions and rallies); and undermining the more liberal regime for registering associations contained in the Societies Ordinance (as amended in 1992). The ramifications of this rollback in democracy, freedom, and rights protection cannot be stressed enough.
While Chinese officials and their local supporters argue that rights are adequately protected in the Basic Law, their attack on rights protections in local ordinances raises serious questions about their commitment to rights enforcement. The attack on the BoRO, which merely repeats verbatim the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR, which China has sworn to uphold in the Joint Declaration), especially raises this concern. The PWC's original plan to scrap the entire Bill of Rights was modified by the PC, which elected to just set aside implementing sections, including provisions which declare the BoRO to be an implementation of the ICCPR; provide that BoRO takes precedence over all pre-existing legislation; and require subsequent laws to be interpreted as consistent with the BoRO to the extent possible. The use of this Basic Law review to reduce rights, rather than better
248
United Kingdom/Hong Kong
secure their protection, also turns the traditional notion of constitutional review on its head. China's moves against the BoRO were attacked by worried pro-democracy groups, legislators, human rights activists and the legal profession, with calls for clarification continuing into 1997. Governor Chris Patten called the proposed amendments "legal nonsense." The mainland, however, remained firm in its contention that these provisions must go.
By far the most pernicious decisions of these China-appointed bodies (and in 1997 the Chinese National People's Congress) was the decision to disband the elected Legco and replace it with an appointed Provisional Legislature. The State Department report fails to refiect the grave concern that this caused at every level of the local community, although it does provide a thorough synopsis of events. Responding to critics of the PCs decision regarding Legco, China placed the blame on the British for abandoning plans for a mutually agreed upon "through-train" for legislators, claiming it had no choice but to continue with its plans for choosing a Selection Committee to select a Provisional Legislature and Chief Executive. China's attempt to give the selection process an air of transparency seemingly failed. China held what it called "democratic, open and successful" consultations with over 1,000 people on how the Selection Committee should operate. But at the same time the PC withdrew a discussion invitation earlier given to pro-democracy members from the Professional Teachers' Union, saying that as known opponents of the Provisional Legislature their comments would have lacked "sincerity." Meanwhile, support for the Provisional Legislature was required in order to be nominated for the Selection Committee. The report also notes the case of PC member Frederick Fung, the one dissenting vote on the decision to disband Legco; Fung was rewarded for his efforts with exclusion from the Selection Committee (although he later won a seat on the Provisional Legislature).	*
In late 1996 a Hong Kong resident was chosen as the first HKSAR Chief Executive, becoming the first local person ever to occupy Hong Kong's highest office. Unfortunately, most of the territory's 6.2 million people were bystanders to the momentous December 11 decision. From an original field of over 30 contenders, eventually reduced to four main
249
Critique 1996
candidates, shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa won overwhelmingly, garnering 320 out of 400 Selection Committee votes.
In 1996 Mr. Tung's approval ratings remained strong, despite criticism of his emphasis on the importance of collective values over the rights of individuals, chiding people to "talk more about our duties rather than our rights." He promised to focus on housing, education, welfare and the maintenance of economic vitality, issues which he said have become too politicized. Tung also made a very popular decision to renew the appointment of the Hong Kong Government's top civil servant. Chief Secretary Anson Chan (a decision that was followed in early 1997 by the equally popular decision to renew the terms of the remaining top local policy secretaries in the Civil Service). Chan fought for the service's continued neutrality, and she will remain a part of Tung's government — a lone yet notable exception as her opposition to the Provisional Legislature is well-documented.
The Provisional Legislature was chosen by the Selection Committee a mere ten days after Tung's selection. Its 60 members included 33 existing Legco members and ten who had been defeated in the 1995 elections, as well as others drawn largely from the Selection Committee itself. Former Democrat Chan Choi-hei, expelled from the party for violating its ban on joining the handover body, also won a seat. The Hong Kong government, members of the pro-democracy camp, democratic Legco members, the United States, the United Kingdom and the United Nations Human Rights Committee all protested against the formation of a body that is not provided for in either the Joint Declaration or the Basic Law. China promised the Provisional Legislature would exist for only one year and that fresh elections would be held in 1998.
Optimism about these future elections may also be unfounded. Within the constraints offered by the Preparatory Committee, the Provisional Legislature been assigned the task of enacting a new electoral law, raising concern that the model will favor pro-China or conservative business candidates and dilute the position of the Democrats. There are some worries that it might even exclude them outright, perhaps citing their membership in the allegedly subversive Alliance in Support of the Patriotic Democratic Movement in China, founded in 1989. This dilution
250
United Kingdom/Hong Kong
may be achieved by a combination of functional constituencies representing various business sectors and multi-seat districting or proportional representation to insure tiiat grassroots and other democratic forces are reduced to a minority in the future body. The Basic Law already provides that more than half of Legco will be made up of functional constituencies or other less representative constituencies, while multi-seat districting or proportional representation for the geographical constituencies has been proposed by pro-China and business-oriented camps (and was formally recommended by the PC in early 1997). The State Department report also fails to mention that China has further shown its intention to diminish democratic representation at the community level by declaring that it will boost municipal and district board ranks by 25% through the addition of appointed seats (which had been scrapped in 1995).
The transition of Hong Kong's judicial system has also been of concern. The report gives littie attention to the continuing erosion of the independence and integrity of Hong Kong's courts.
In 1995 the Chinese and British governments reached a deal to provide that the Court of Final Appeal required under the Joint Declaration and the Basic Law will come into existence on July 1, 1997. The report mentions the anticipated existence of this Court and its power of final judgment, as well as the fact that key exceptions to this power exist in the Basic Law; if broadly interpreted, these exceptions could be used to limit the independence of the judiciary after 1997. The report properly notes the continuing concern over the exclusion of future HKSAR courts from deciding issues that are characterized as "acts of state" or matters of central authority. These limitations, articulated in the Basic Law and a 1995 Sino-British agreement over the Court of Final Appeal, are vague and difficult to delimit. The report fails to adequately address concern over the smooth transition of the courts. Article 9(/of the Basic Law requires the appointment of judges to be endorsed by Legco, a body that will no longer exist. At the end of 1997, the Provisional Legislature was sent to carry out such functions in a meeting to be held across the border in China. There is also a question of ambiguity between Article 93 of the Basic Law, which states that judges "may" remain in
251
Critique 1996
position, versus Article 88, which says the Chief Executive shall appoint them.
Other key events also eroded confidence in the role of the judiciary after the handover. In May, the Hong Kong Bar Association felt it necessary to issue a warning to all judges that their involvement in any consultations about the Selection Committee could create doubts about judicial independence. At year-end it was revealed that a high-level committee to choose new judges would have its term extended, a sign the government was straining to reach a deal with Mr. Tung over its membership. Additionally, other events seemed to indicate confusion in the system. For example, attempts to set up a special list to prioritize the hearing of human rights cases were delayed for the entire year. Another looming problem is the use of Chinese in the courts; in March the first High Court trial in Hong Kong entirely in Cantonese was heard, after a three-month delay; the translation of all of Hong Kong's law from English was still not complete at year-end.
The report does a good job of reporting eight deaths in police custody in 1996 (three by natural causes, four suicides and one that was under investigation at year-end). Legislators and activists continued to push for an independent investigative body to handle prisoner complaints. More egregious complaints included an accusation of Correctional Services Department use of sedatives on prisoners and the death of an inmate due to an alleged gang fight. While there is a case review committee in place, the private Human Rights Commission believes the current closed-door complaint system may not be adequate. As the report points out, complaints against police are rarely substantiated; such complaints have included claims of water torture. In June a 23-year-old hawker was released after serving ten months of a two-year sentence when the Court of Appeals accepted that police had beaten a confession out of him. In addition, proposals were announced in October to reduce police powers to stop and search suspects and remove jail terms for some minor offenses. Legal experts claimed the reforms, a response to a 1992 Law Reform Commission Report, did not go far enough, while law enforcers warned the changes would undermine their effectiveness. These proposals are still under review.
252
United Kingdom/Hong Kong
There is i\o mention in the report about Hong Kong's significant step in setting up a Privacy Commission in late December. By early January it was already overwhelmed with complaints filed under the new Personal Data (Privacy) Ordinance, which protects against the misuse and disclosure of data, including medical and credit records, etc.
There is also no mention of the considerable controversy generated over the terms of service for the People's Liberation Army (PLA) garrison to be stationed in the territory. There has been much discussion between Britain and China over the PLA's powers and jurisdiction. A draft of the Hong Kong Garrison Law before the National People's Congress in Beijing stated that troops would only take part in maintaining law and order if the HICSAR makes the request to Beijing; its role is supposedly to serve as a symbol of sovereignty, The PLA will also be responsible for "safeguarding Hong Kong's security" and "countering infiltration and attacks." Army duties in the mainland, expanded since 1989, now include containing the "peaceful evolution" tactics of the West, maintaining "spiritual civilization," and quelling challenges to Beijing; there remain fears in Hong Kong that without proper guidelines the PLA could abuse its power, act corruptly or even be deployed against citizens as they were during the Beijing massacre on June 4, 1989. Proposed NPC legislation pending at the end of 1996 would have PLA soldiers only subject to national laws while on duty — although questions remain over the definition of "on duty" — yet in certain instances mainland military courts could hand over cases to Hong Kong courts.
As in 1995, the State Department report offers substantial coverage of freedom of expression and association. Despite the liveliness of public debate in Hong Kong in recent years, there is growing concern over the future of (invariably peaceful) public demonstrations such as the annual June 4 Tiananmen commemorations. The June 1996 commemoration saw more than 3,000 demonstrators marching to the New China News {Xinhua) agency (China's defacto embassy), calling for democracy in China and an associated rally attended by an estimated 16,000 (police estimates) to 45,000 (according to the organizers), a record for the past three years.
253
Critique 1996
The report also notes aptly the vibrant tradition of a free press in Hong Kong, which includes at present the publication of 59 newspapers and 675 periodicals, and the emergence of China's shadow on the horizon. As it notes, widespread debate across many viewpoints was represented in the media throughout the year on such issues as the Selection Committee, the Provisional Legislature and the selection of Tung Chee-hwa.
China's stated intention to reverse the reforms already carried out under the Bill of Rights and other legislation offers little room for optimism that media laws and policies will develop in a progressive direction. Chinese involvement has already been apparent in a number of areas. In October 1995 it was reported that China would be consulted over contioversial radio and television reforms. The mainland has already become involved in censorship directly by attempting to control which Chinese films would be permitted to be shown in the annual Hong Kong film festival, even going so far as to "advise" four producers, including a Hong Kong company, that it would not be in their interests to exhibit films; all four complied with the request. Later in the year, however, the watchdog Television and Licensing Authority said censors were unlikely to gain extra powers to block politically unacceptable films after the handover; this is an area that future State Department reports should monitor closely after Hong Kong comes under Chinese sovereignty.
Radio Television Hong Kong (RTHK), a government-owned operator of seven radio channels with access to prime slots on Hong Kong's two commercial TV stations, reacted strongly against a mid-year demand from the PC to give it air time. It reiterated its intention to keep editorial control over content and production, and argued that the government has never taken over its time slots. Increasing fears of censorship prompted the Arts Development Council, in announcing its first five-year plan in February, to admit that it would be powerless to act against unreasonable censorship of cultural activities after 1997.
There is overt and covert Chinese intimidation of reporters covering the mainland. As the report notes, Hong Kong journalists based in or traveling to China face personal risks. It is illegal for journalists to work in China without a work permit, but it is still a common practice to travel
254
United Kingdom/Hong Kong
without such permits since it can be a bureaucratic nightmare to get the appropriate papers. As the report says, the continued detention in 1996 of Hong Kong Ming Poo reporter Xi Yang, serving a 12-year sentence since 1994 for reporting financial information China deemed secret, also continued to have a chilling effect on reporters covering the mainland. (Xi Yang was unexpectedly released in early 1997 in what was taken as a sign of goodwill). The ongoing harassment of Hong Kong publisher Jimmy Lai remains vexing. After closing down his Beijing retail store in 1994 in response to an article critical of Chinese Premier Li Peng in his Next magazine, Chinese officials have taken a dim view of his newly opened newspaper, A/jpfe Daily. Since 1995 they have refused his reporters press credentials in China, and in February detained a Next photographer on suspicions of spying.
Blacklisting, favoritism, harassment of China's critics and an environment of self-censorship in Hong Kong all appear to be growing. The Hong Kong Journalists Association reported an increasing "climate of fear" in the media as the handover approaches; in 1996 it complained of both inducements to self-censorship and of the local media having trouble securing interviews with top Chinese officials who were granting "exclusives" to the international press. Taking precautions, at least one magazine. The Nineties, a China-watching monthly magazine banned in the mainland, moved its offices to Taiwan.
The report does not mention the May 1996 launch of Hong Kong's pro-Beijing journalists association. This body claimed that its focus would be on training reporters and fighting for press freedom. Nevertheless, it left the case of Xi Yang and the banning of Apple Daily's access to the mainland off its agenda, ostensibly due to lack of knowledge about either issue. The launch was attended by Xinhua director Zhou Nan and several PC Members.
In one of the clearest signals from a high-ranking Chinese source that press restrictions in Hong Kong are inevitable, Chinese Foreign Minister and Preparatory Committee Chairman Qian Qichen said in an October 1996 interview with the Asian Wall Street Journal that media coverage "advocating" independence for Taiwan, Tibet or Hong Kong, or that contained "rumors or lies" would not be permitted. Chinese President
255
Critique 1996
Jiang Zemin added fuel to the fire by telling the media he wanted them to follow three guidelines: to promote love for China and Hong Kong; to confine themselves to reporting facts; and to handle news in an ethical and responsible way — a prescription similar to that often given the mainland press. Further, in an interview with a French newspaper, Jiang played down the significance of an independent judiciary and a free press as fartors behind Hong Kong's economic success, attributing its prosperity to the creativity of Hong Kong people and to the support fi^om other parts of the mainland.
The State Department should be commended for pointing out a worrisome story of Xinhua harassment of a university student for printing comments on China's method of dealing with the press, gleaned from an interview with the news agency's Deputy Director. The problem remains of defining what exactly China considers a state secret, prompting legislators in December to try to water down the Official Secrets Act in an effort to prevent bureaucrats from gagging press freedom.
The exercise of freedom of association by political bodies in Hong Kong remains strong. In 1996 leading independent legislator Christine Loh expressed her intention of forming a new party in early 1997. In. August a new political alliance of democratic independents, the Frontier, was created under the guidance of five legislators. These legislators are also members of the United Front Against the Provisional Legislature, which comprises 57 groups and various members of the municipal and legislative councils. China has made several unconvincing overtures to local groups, but its moves were undermined by repeated denial of entry into China of members of delegations seeking to travel to Beijing to submit petitions against the Selection Committee and Provisional Legislature.
There is cause for concern that more vocal critics of China, such as the Democratic Party, may be marginalized or excluded from the political process after the handover. On an optimistic note, Lu Ping, the Head of the Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Office in Beijing, emphasized in May that the Democrats could stand for election after the handover. And Chief Executive-designate Tung has indicated that he will meet with the Democrats every two months. But the involvement of leading party
256
United Kingdom/Hong Kong
members in tlie allegedly "subversive" Hong Kong Alliance in Support of the Patriotic Democratic Movement in China raises questions about whether such promises will be honored.
Overall, freedom of association remains a serious concern. By year-end, China had done little to assuage fears that provisions in the Basic Law banning foreign political organizations will be used to exclude such international organizations as Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch/Asia and Justice (the Hong Kong affiliate of the International Commission of Jurists), all now permitted to operate in the territory. Furthermore, there is continued concern for those local organizations that Chinese officials have already criticized as subversive; as well as for private local human rights NGOs such as the Hong Kong Human Rights Commission and the Hong Kong Human Rights Monitor. Mr. Tung has already stated that groups advocating independence for Taiwan and Tibet will have no place in Hong Kong. After nine years in Hong Kong, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) moved its regional offices to Bangkok, leaving the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) as the only international humanitarian group in Hong Kong to hold diplomatic status.
The report largely ignores the continued anxiety of Hong Kong people about their future nationality status. Britain continues to deny full British nationality to Hong Kong citizens who formerly held it. After the 1989 aisis, Britain determined that only 50,000 Hong Kong heads of household and their families (ultimately 135,000 in total) would be granted full British nationality. The bulk of Hong Kong people are only allowed a lesser form of British nationality via a British Nationality (Overseas) (BNO) passport or British Dependent Territories Citizen (BDTC)tiavel document designation (slated to end on June 30, 1997). An indication of the anxiety Hong Kong people feel about the handover can be evidenced by the 195,000 people registered as BDTCs since this nationality scheme was introduced in 1992; (the designation allows them to file for BNO passports which remain effective beyond July I, 1997), of which there are 2.5 million in circulation; of the 195,000 who have filed for BDTC since 1992, over 100,000 registered themselves in March, the final month for eligibility. Confusion over the nationality and right of
257
Critique 1996
abode issue prompted the British Foreign Secretary to warn that the 500,000 foreign passport holders in the territory would leave if they lost confidence. Finally, nationality issues were of particular concern to Hong Kong minorities who feared becoming stateless after 1997 (although a British pohcy granting such nationality was announced in early 1997).
The problems of Hong Kong residents living abroad who want to retain their local right of abode has also continued to be vexing. Despite warnings that "chaos" would reign if China did not change its original plan to require emigrants wishing to retain their right of abode to return before July 1, the issue remained unresolved at year-end. China's planned treatment of resident foreign passport holders also remained unclear. The fear is that such passport holders of Hong Kong origin may not be allowed consular protection. It seems likely a registration requirement may be imposed, raising concern among some in this international city that they may suffer discrimination due to their foreign nationality.
China's attitude toward Hong Kong holders of foreign passports has been generally hostile. China has continued to insist that holders of full British passports under the British nationality scheme are Chinese nationals, and that all foreign passport holders would have to renounce their Chinese nationality in order to confirm their foreign nationality. There has also been hostility toward Hong Kong democratic activists. This hostility to foreign passport holders has been particularly marked toward democratic activists. China has denied entry permits to several Hong Kong political activists, prompting fears of a political blacklist. These issues should be monitored carefully in 1997.
Next year's State Department report should also pay close attention to the uncertain fate of an estimated 80-100 dissidents from the mainland; Canada has offered to take any who would face persecution after the handover, while Hong Kong's role as a transit point for noted dissidents leaving China, who in 1996 included Wang Xizhe and Liu Gang, may be threatened. Prominent exiled Chinese dissident and labor activist Han Dongfang, who has been stranded in Hong Kong for more than three years, has been granted a work visa through August 1998, and has no plans to leave Hong Kong unless deported.
258
United Kingdom/Hong Kong
The year also saw numerous problems in the immigrant and refugee areas, which are addressed in the report. It correcdy notes that Hong Kong has never turned away Vietnamese boat people; in 1996, about 1,000 new migrants arrived in the territory, up from 460 in 1995 and 363 in 1994. With a total of just under 8,000 at year-end (including those given refugee status, migrants that Vietnam had not accepted for repatriation and illegal Vietnamese immigrants arrived via China), the constantly changing population size was near its lowest point since the late 1970s. This was down from 21,000 at the start of the year, of whom one-third were children under 18. A large number of these children had contracted tuberculosis attributable to the squalid conditions in the centers. These have been criticized for overcrowding, lack of work opportunities, educational and medical fadlities, bad sanitation and poor security for women and children.
As problems with the repatriation and resettlement of Vietnamese have mounted, Hong Kong has resorted to harsher measures, including closed camps and voluntary and forced repatriation. The report fails to note an important High Court judgment in January, ordering the release of 15 Vietnamese migrants holding Taiwan passports, whom Vietnam refused to accept back; the ruling also resulted in the release of 207 detainees who were similarly situated, before the passage of emergency legislation prevented further releases. Britain has expressed fears that the fate of about 4,000 boat people not yet cleared for return by Vietnam might not be guaranteed by the handover; Vietnam will not accept anyone even of Vietnamese origin it does not consider a national. Both Vietnam and China have made it clear they want Britain to take responsibility for any people who remain. The fate of 11 men who gave military secrets and police intelligence to the United States and Hong Kong during interviews upon their arrival in the territory, and who woyld be considered traitors if repatriated to Vietnam, remained unclear.
Discrimination takes many forms in Hong Kong. Age discrimination is not illegal and openly occurs; a June 1996 survey showed that 20% of ads in the newspaper mention age as a requirement. The Hong Kong government came under attack for its limited efforts to enhance understanding of sexual orientation and age discrimination issues, as well
259
Critique 1996
as for its failure to introduce adequate legislation to combat the equal opportunity and discrimination problems. Various legislators proposed and supported more thorough private members' bills to prohibit discrimination based on sexual orientation and age, but the government has opposed such legislation (which was still pending in mid-1997).
The report accurately notes that the government maintains a firm commitment to children's rights and welfare. However, the Hong Kong Children Committee's calls for the government to set up an independent children's commission to oversee implementation of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child was rejected as "unnecessary," and the committee criticized the government for concealing the numbers of unattended children who have been injured.
The report also correctly notes that violence and discrimination against women, particularly in the realm of employment, remains a significant problem. However, it fails to note that the British government extended the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) to Hong Kong in October 1996. Under British law, such a covenant ultimately depends on local legislation for its implementation. There has been a lot of legislative activity in this area in recent years but the results are still spotty. A 1994 ordinance removed the bar on women inheriting land in the New Territories, but it only narrowly survived the year as it came under attack from the PC, several Chief Executive-designate candidates, and the vocal indigenous leaders of the umbrella organization representing New Territories villagers. It is noteworthy that when the British government acceded to CEDAW on behalf of Hong Kong, it included a reservation excepting the Hong Kong "small house" policy, which allows male, but not female, indigenous New Territories villagers to apply for the grant of a parcel of land for a small residential house. There have been calls to strengthen the newly passed Sex Discrimination Ordinance (in particular, to abolish the current $150,000 limit on damage awards for work-related sex discrimination or harassment) and calls for a women's commission in Hong Kong.
Legislation was passed allowing for faster divorces, speeding up several hundred backlogged cases and potentially lowering legal costs.
260
United Kingdom/Hong Kong
Guidelines in the Equal Opportunities Commission Ordinance regarding equal pay, sexual harassment, recruitment, advertising, job titles and other issues were criticized as unenforceable and impractical. Both the Equal Opportunities Ordinance and Disability Discrimination Ordinance, despite being passed in mid-1995, had yet to take effect, with the government only wanting to enforce those parts related to the commission's functioning. This has resulted in delays for several sexual harassment appeals.
The report also correctly mentions concern for the 140,000 Filipino domestic workers in the territory who are at risk of deportation when not employed. Reports indicate some large employers are beginning to hire Chinese from the mainland instead. There were calls for tighter controls on the residency status of Filipino domestics; almost a third have been in the territory for more than seven years, entitling them to register as permanent citizens, a potential burden to the social welfare system.
The report makes no mention of the threat to freedom of religion after the handover. Current government policy and general practice ensure freedom of religion, yet an ominous indication of future Chinese attitudes surfaced surrounding a church conference scheduled to take place a week after the handover. Xinhua had urged the Lutheran World Federation to postpone its world conference, saying that it was happening so close to the handover as to be a matter for discussion by the Joint Liaison Group (JLG), the body that coordinates transition matters between the treaty partners. The Chinese backpedaled quickly as Christian groups condemned Xinhua, but the damage had been done.
The State Department report is especially thorough in its treatment of workers' rights. It points out that Hong Kong is not a member in its own right of the International Labor Organisation (ILO), and that the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) is highly critical of the failure of labor legislation to protect the right to strike and for allowing dismissals and disciplinary action against striking trade unionists. Some striking mainland airport construction workers were laid off in July after protesting against pay being irregularly deducted from their checks by the agencies who secured their employment.
261
Critique 1996
Labor leaders and liberal political leaders have also sought to expand social welfare benefits and the government's social welfare budget, particularly for the elderly, but this can take an unfortunate turn; thousands of people living in "cage homes" are to remain in their squalid conditions after funds initially set aside for their accommodation were redirected to support housing for "well-off senior citizens aged 60 or over;" meanwhile, 14 elderly homeless persons were believed to have died of exposure.
In the face of worrisome human rights trends in Hong Kong, the United Nations Human Rights Committee (UNHRC) and numerous community groups and activists have continued to articulate concern over China's intention to discontinue human rights reports required under the ICCPR and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), despite its obligations to adhere to both covenants under both the Joint Declaration and the Basic Law. The UNHRCs concern was further emphasized when it took the extraordinary measure of calling for an additional report in May of 1996. Despite directives from the UN to continue monitoring the human rights situation in Hong Kong, Britain maintains that there will be considerable difficulty in doing so after the change of sovereignty. The fact that China is not a party to these covenants complicates the matter, though it would appear to be obligated to assist Hong Kong in directly filing the required reports.
When it prepares its human rights report for 1997, the State Department might usefully look for guidance to Governor Chris Patten's last policy address to the people of Hong Kong. After the handover, the State Department would do well to ask if Hong Kong's civil service is still professional and neutral; if the HKSAR is writing its own budget or doing so under mainland pressure; if Hong Kong's courts are operating without interference; if Hong Kong is maintaining its own network of international law enforcement liaisons; if there are any new constraints on fireedom of assembly, religion or the press; and if legislators are fairly and openly elected and passing laws in response to the aspirations of local people. It is the world community's responsibility to monitor these and other human rights developments in Hong Kong's efforts to maintain its democracy and the rule of law.
262
United Kingdom/Northern Ireland
^ I ^his year's report continues the recent trend of a wider coverage JL of issues, and in that respect it is welcome. Its coverage of social and economic concerns is especially helpful. It is more circumspect in many instances about the reporting of state behavior, although in others it takes two or three steps backward. In a number of notable examples, the report reverts to presenting the situation in a light entirely favorable to the state.
In places, this year's report acknowledges the true extent of state human rights abuses. This is another welcome improvement over previous reports, but these acknowledgments are far too few and much too grudging. The report would be greatly improved overall if it adopted a much more neutral stance when reporting state abuses. Generally, it adopts the biased tone and posture of previous years, which is unfortunate and undermines the putative neutrality of the report.
There are a number of alterations of previous erroneous statements, and this too is a welcome advance over previous years. For example, the 1995 report confused the review of detention in Northern Ireland by a senior police officer under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA) with "judicial review." This year's report amends that paragraph and includes a more detailed description of the actual, very limited measures available to a detainee.
That the report refers, often in some detail, to human rights concerns is welcome and important, but that strength is substantially impaired by the manner chosen to acknowledge them. Violations committed by the state are usually referred to as "allegations" or "complaints," which can be directly contrasted with the tone adopted when reporting human rights violations carried out by paramilitaries. In the latter case, such violations are generally reported as real and proven, even where the allegations of state abuse are supported by as much, if not more, evidence. This 'is nowhere more clear than in the anodyne reporting of the maelstrom of last summer's unrest in Northern Ireland.
The difference in tone underlines the general bias endemic in the report, with different weight given to complaints of state human rights abuses on the one hand, and to government allegations that measures are being taken to improve matters on the other. The report frequently makes
263
Critique 1996
baid statements about the law which conceal a reality entirely less favorable to the UK government. For example, the report states that arrests without warrant under the PTA are available if the authorities have "reasonable cause to suspect wrongdoing." In fact, the phrase "reasonable cause" has been interpreted by the courts (e.g. in Murray v. MOD) so widely as to be almost meaningless, and more importantly, to provide no real bulwark against arbitrary arrest. In other places, the report uses language which is not neutral — referring, for example, to Northern Ireland as "the province," a phrase which is meaningless in law and history, but one which is used largely by Unionists and the UK government.
On other occasions the report is simply wrong. For example, it declares that "prison conditions meet minimum international standards," which is simply not so for many prisons throughout Great Britain. This statement is especially startling given the widespread controversy over the conditions in which some Irish prisoners are held, and particularly those in which Roisin McAliskey was detained in the latter part of 1996. The report does not mention the case of Ms. McAliskey, who is the pregnant daughter of former MP Bernadette Devlin and who is on remand following an extradition request from Germany. The charges relate to an IRA attack on British Army barracks there. Her conditions were of such concern that early this year Amnesty International issued an urgent action appeal relating to her case. The conditions of such prisoners are obliquely referred to in the State Department report, but should have been reported more fully.
The bias of the report is perhaps most naked in the assertion that "[t]he Government does not practice exile. . .but the terrorist organizations do. . . ." In point of fact both engage in practices which amount to exile, the government by way of exclusion orders under the Prevention of Terrorism Act, which are an administrative measure immune to effective challenge by way of judicial review or by appeal.
The report also contains a number of references to the pronouncements of international human rights bodies on matters of concern in Northern Ireland, a continuing trend from the previous year which is very welcome.
264
United Kingdom/Northern Ireland
The summer months of 1996 saw perhaps the most serious civil disturbances in more than 20 years in Northern Ireland. It is clear to most independent observers that the response of the government and the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) to the very serious public disorder led to a breakdown in the rule of law. It is also clear that serious human rights abuses took place.
One of the most glaring omissions of the 1995 Country Report was its failure to even refer to the unrest associated with the "marching season," much of which sowed the seed for the 1996 disturbances. Given the trauma of last summer, that omission was unlikely to be repeated this year. However, while the report does refer to the unrest, it does so in a highly unsatisfactory manner. In part this is due to the incomplete and anodyne manner in which the events are reported. While it is not possible in the course of a report to detail every concern, the magnitude of the events of last summer is so great that the authors should have paid a great deal more attention to them. Again, this failure is exacerbated by the fact that the authors of the report choose to record events in a manner which is largely favorable to the UK government, which has generally refused to accept any responsibility for the unrest.
The report correctly acknowledges that the reversal of a decision by the Chief Constable to ban a controversial Orange parade in the face of serious street violence and threats of further disorder was "perceived. .. as a victory of might over the rule of law. . . It would have been better if the report could have observed that it was in fact a serious collapse of the rule of law, which is what it indisputably was.
The State Department completely fails to report the reasons for the controversies which surround the Orange Parades. It refers to the marches as "traditional parades to celebrate their [Protestant] history and cultural identity," but it does not record, as it ought to have done, that some of these parades take place through communities which do not want them and which frequently feel intimidated and threatened by them. Nor does it relay the objections of the community resident groups with which the Orange Orders largely refuse to communicate.
This obviously skews discussion of the events, but a much more serious flaw is the manner in which the behavior of the RUC and the
265
Critique 1996
British Army are reported. The authors of the report refer very briefly and in general terms to the extensive criticism of the activities of these two bodies. A number of detailed reports — most notably The Misrule of Law by the Committee on the Administration of Justice (CAJ) — were produced by NGOs, recording their observations and concerns, yet the DOS report does not see fit to refer to a single one. Worse, it glosses over or omits to mention the most serious of the abuses committed by the RUC and the Army during that period. For example, the huge number of plastic bullets fired in a small area of the largely nationalist Bogside area of Derry are referred to in a single, bald sentence as, "[t]he number of plastic rounds fired this year surpasses all but one prior year." This is such an overwhelming generalization as to be meaningless. It also conceals apparently sectarian use of plastic bullets. Many fewer were fired during the period of Unionist unrest, despite comparable incident levels and damage to property.
In fact almost 3,500 baton rounds were fired in a three-evening period in Derry and great numbers of people, many of them not involved in illegal activity, were injured. This gave rise to very serious criticism of the RUC and the Army — not least by the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights. Furthermore, there were numerous and widespread reports of serious human rights abuses, including assaults on peaceful protesters, attacks on people in their homes and in a hospital casualty department. There were also some reports of isolated attacks on human rights monitors.
The report fails to refer at all to the sealing-off by the RUC of the Lower Ormeau Road in Belfast, one of the areas through which controversial and disputed parades pass {see the 1995 edition of the Critique for a fuller discussion of the issue). For almost 24 hours a de facto curfew was imposed on the area and movement was severely restricted — to the extent that RUC Landrovers were parked flush against the doors of homes, preventing residents from getting out. Hundreds of local residents have subsequently filed false imprisonment lawsuits against the RUC. Yet the report does not refer at all to this incident, one of the most serious of last year. This omission is extraordinary.
266
United Kingdom/Northern Ireland
The most serious incident was the death of Dermot McShane, a civilian who died when he was crushed under the wheels of a large armored vehicle in the center of Derry in the early hours of July 13. The reference to this event in the report is so favorable to the state as to be offensive. Mr. McShane, who is described by the report as a "terrorist" had certainly in the past been convicted of unlawful activities, but there is absolutely no evidence that he was engaged in "terrorism" at the time of his death. Indeed it is clear that he had been uninvolved in such activities since his release from prison in the mid-1980s, and there were no paramilitary trappings at his funeral. The report omits entirely to mention that the driver of the armored vehicle was not interviewed by the RUC investigating the incident until some eight weeks later.
The report correctly records the limited government response to the summer's events, although it is incorrect in its description of Her Majesty's Inspector of Constabulary (HMIC) as "independent." In fact HMIC is a senior police officer. Further, it gives the impression that the HMIC "review" was a particular response to the events of the summer, instead of what it actually was — an additional task carried out as part of the routine annual inspection. Local human rights organizations expressed public concern at the failure of HMIC to meet with or discuss any of their concerns about RUC behavior, a failing which must be a serious concern to all independent observers. Yet the report does not mention this.
Neither do the authors of the report see fit to record the trenchant criticism of the government's response to the entire matter. The government reaction is perhaps best summarized by the Secretary of State's memorable rejoinder to his critics, on television at the height of the trouble, to "for goodness sake, cheer up." Numerous groups and individuals have drawn attention to the UK government's political failure to seriously address both the issues and the effects of the unrest and it is a matter of some regret that the authors of the report chose not to include it. Overall, the reporting of these events is partial and biased in favor of the state.
The manner in which the State Department deals with the vexed issues relating to the emergency law regime is patchy. As noted above, it tightens up its reporting in some places, adding for example this year a
267
Critique 1996
reference to the United Kingdom's derogation from the European Convention on Human Rights. However, the report does not mention the derogation from the ICCPR. This year's report is a little better at recording criticism of emergency law but in many places the reporting is either careless or far too general. Frequently it glosses over abiding human rights concerns — as for example in its reference to the rules governing the admissibility of confessions. The report correctly notes that "judges can exclude even voluntary confessions," although this is rarely done in scheduled cases. In fact, large numbers of convictions in the non-jury Diplock courts are on the basis of confession evidence. The report's assertion that such confessions "cannot be the sole basis for conviction" is simply incorrect. This is so in Scotiand, but not in Northern Ireland. This basic error is telling.
Another less obvious error occurs in the description of the suspension of the right to trial by jury which the report claims can be suspended "for certain terrorist-related offenses." In fact the reverse situation is the case. Under the Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act 1991 (EPA), such cases are automatically tried in the non-jury Diplock courts unless they are "scheduled out" to ordinary jury courts. Furthermore, the list of "scheduled offenses" (those which are tried automatically in the Diplock courts) is quite lengthy, not the limited number suggested by the report.
The report notes the review into the operation of emergency law by Lord Lloyd of Berwick, but does not report the criticism by independent monitors of emergency law generally, nor the particular criticisms of both Lloyd and the annual reviews. Its statement that "[t]he PTA is the most reviewed piece of legislation in the UK" disguises a reality entirely less favorable to the state. In fact, the annual reviews are largely meaningless. They are conducted by a government appointee, with a remit so narrow and with such a low prospect of any progressive recommendations being taken up, that many dvil liberties organizations have refused to take part in the review process. The review process is largely a sham and the report ought to have at least acknowledged those criticisms.
The bias endemic in the report is demonstrated again in its allegation that "[t]he judiciary is independent. . . ." In fact there are many serious questions over the operation of the courts in Great Britain as well as
268
United Kingdom/Northern Ireland
Northern Ireland and numerous examples of questionable judicial balance, some of which are helpfully referred to in the report. Despite the assertion that "[t]he law provides for fair trial," there are many areas where it does not and many occasions where trials have later transpired to be manifestly unfair.
The manner in which the report deals with the issue of exclusion orders under the PTA is partial and inaccurate. Exclusion orders permit a member of the government — usually the Home Secretary (although a similar power is available to the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland) — to make an administrative order excluding someone from either Great Britain or Northern Ireland. No evidence is required to sustain such an order, nor can it be challenged in court. This the report acknowledges. However, it describes those who are the subject of exclusion orders as "anyone believed linked with terrorism," which is an advance on last year's "suspected terrorists and supporters." The report would have been better to remark that evidence of such links is neither publicly required nor supplied for the making of an exclusion order. Its continued insistence that there is an independent appeal against exclusion orders is disappointing, given that this is simply not the case. The reference this year to criticism of such orders is welcome, however.
A broad range of individuals and organizations have argued that the failure of the UK government to respond in a meaningful way to human rights concerns contributed to the ending of the ceasefires. The continuing failure of the UK government to engage in this debate, preferring instead an entirely security-driven agenda, is regrettable. The report would have been improved by some reference to these concerns.
As the events of the summer demonstrated, the issue of policing is in many respects at the heart of the conflict in Northern Ireland, and the problems associated with it continue. In some respects the report is a little better than last year, acknowledging that "some members of the police have committed human rights abuses" and that "[p]olice occasionally abused detainees." However, the manner in which the manifest concerns about policing during the summer are reported is, as noted above, quite poor. Further, there are dubious declarations throughout the report, such as, for example, the claim that the reversal of the decision over the
269
Critique 1996
Drumcree march "damaged the RUC's reputation as an impartial police force." The existence of such a reputation is highly questionable.
The manner in which the matter of harassment is reported is unfortunate. Once again, the report describes the areas from where most complaints of harassment stem as those "where support for terrorists is considered strong." A more useful description would have been "rural and urban working-class areas." The report might also usefully have acknowledged the growing evidence that harassment is occurring not just in "nationalist" areas but in working-class loyalist areas, something borne out by a study on the matter, entitled Harassment: It's Part of Life Here, by the Committee on the Administration of Justice (CAJ). It might also have referred to the growing body of evidence that such harassment does indeed occur (see, for example, Helsinki Watch, Children in Northern Ireland: Abused by Security Forces and Paramilitaries, 1992).
The report is right to note that many relatives of those killed by paramilitaries have not had the truth of what happened acknowledged, nor have they had the bodies of their relatives returned to them by the paramilitaries. It does not, however, report the continuing problems for the many relatives of people killed or injured by the RUC or the Army, who have also never had the truth of what happened to their family members acknowledged. Moreover, it does not refer at all to the renewed controversy over the deaths of 13 unarmed, innocent civilians in Derry on January 31,1972 (a 14th victim died later of his injuries). Throughout the latter part of 1996, information refuting the official government version of events and the now largely discredited Widgery Tribunal was uncovered and made public. Yet the authors of the report do not mention this at all.
The report correctly records the ongoing controversy over Patrick Finucane's murder and the release from jail of the man alleged to have assisted the security services in targeting Finucane. This matter remains unresolved and a continuing source of controversy.
The passages on equality measures are certainly an advance on previous Country Reports and there is a genuine attempt to correct previous omissions, but the style is still highly favorable to the state.
270
United Kingdom/Northern Ireland
The report records that there is no legal bar on women holding public office, and this year quotes some figures which graphically demonstrate the huge under-representation of women in parliament, but not in government. As before, the report tends to regurgitate the official government line and frequently fails to examine the truth. It claims, for example, that the government "respects and enforces all extant antidiscrimination laws" when the truth is that the government has been responsible for many breaches of such laws. There are a plethora of cases where government acrion or the decisions of public bodies have been held to be discriminatory. (See, for example, Marshall v. Southampton and South Hampshire Area Health Authority (no.l) (No 152/84) [1986] IRLR 140; (no.2) [1990] IRLR 481; Johnston v. Chief Constable RUC (No 222/84) [ 1986] ECR 1651; v. Eastern Health & Social SB [ 1992] IRLR 251; EOC(NI) V. Dept of Education for NI, [ 1988] NI 223; EOC (GB) v. Secretary of State for Employment [1994] IRLR 176.)
The report asserts that the law "provides for equal opportunity between the sexes" and adds this year that "women experience discriminarion in practice" and quotes the figures on disparity of equal pay. All of these are welcome improvements. It does note, correctly, that legislative measures to deal with domestic violence are operational, but it would have been more helpful still to record the numbers of women killed or injured by their partners each year.
Although the draft legislation to prohibit race discrimination in Northern Ireland appeared at last, it was still not on the statute books at year's end, something surely worthy of note. It should have been possible, too, to point out that the UK government has included Travelers (an indigenous nomadic ethnic group) as a prptected group under the legislation. This is something the government was urged to do by ethnic minorities and human rights groups, and it should be acknowledged.
The report this year addresses the problems of religious imbalance in the civil service in Northern Ireland, a helpful addition. However, the public sector is much greater than merely the civil service and there are some very worrying patterns of discrimination elsewhere. This the report ought to have recorded. It records the gap in unemployment rates between Catholic and Protestant men, but once again does not mention
271
Critique 1996
the gap between Catholic and Protestant women, which is widening. To be fair, this is a fault perhaps more of the debate in Northern Ireland, which focuses much more on the male differential.
The report acknowledges the rise in Catholics applying to join the RUC, but fails to record that few of those applications were successful. Nor does the report mention the review of the Fair Employment legislation which was initiated by the government in 1995 and which is still extant.
The report this year is most useful in its recitation of human rights abuses in Northern Ireland as well as in the breadth of issues covered. There are some genuine attempts to address past criticisms of the report and this, too, is an advance. The continuing references to the findings of many August international bodies is also gratifying. But the tone of the report lacks balance and its authors are too quick to accept government versions of events as fact. It is particularly poor in its reporting of the disturbing events of last summer and the parts played by the government and police in them. It ought to be the case that where human rights abuses are most worrying, there is the most rigorous reporting. In this the authors of the report fail most abjectly.
272
