Croatia
' I ^he year 1996 was a pivotal one in the early development of the A independent Republic of Croatia as a democratic state with a free market economy. Croatia's attempts to embrace a Western style of government and economic organization represented this young republic's desire to escape the Balkan and post-communist mold and be recognized as part of the European mainstream.
It was also the first full year of peace in the Balkans since 1991, thanks largely to the signing and implementation of the Dayton Peace Accord in late 1995. Although the implementation of the terms and conditions of the agreement leave very much to be desired, the relative peace it achieved offered the government of Croatia, led by President Franjo Tudjman and his party, the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ), the first opportunity to define and implement fully their own brand of democracy.
The developments in Croatia during 1996 were significant for two main reasons. First, the nationalistic brand of democracy that has evolved in Croatia establishes an unfortunate precedent of ethnic intolerance which, when viewed in the context of the recent ethnic strife in the Balkans, does not bode well for Croatia's future as a multiethnic society based on the promotion of democratic principles and protection of fundamental human rights.
Second, in the short term, many of the Croatian government's repeated failures to uphold acceptable human rights standards directly target the country's remaining ethnic Serb population. Meanwhile, attempts by the state to muzzle the media and the blatant corruption of the privatization process were effectively attacks on all citizens of Croatia, regardless of their ethnicity.
The State Department's 1996 Country Report on Croatia is a significant improvement on its predecessors. It extensively details the ongoing human rights violations within Croatia, including Itillings, disappearances, torture, harassment and false arrest. The report's focus on the details of human rights abuses obscures the fact that when taken collectively, these incidents constitute a quasi-systematic ethnic cleansing campaign aimed at pushing Croatia's remaining Serbs out of the country.
67
Critique 1996
One of the report's weak points is the dearth of information it offers relating to the general situation "on the ground" — in Krajina for example. Many violations take place in the rural hinterland whose isolation and poverty, exacerbated by the recent destruction of the infrastructure, severely impede effective reporting. Communication and travel have become nearly impossible for the remaining elderly and impoverished ethnic Serb population, and human rights organizations wishing to document cases in these regions are forced to establish a regional presence by sending monitors to find and interview the victims. Since funding for such organizations tends to be limited, so is their ability to provide comprehensive coverage of the actual situation. Moreover, many victims refuse to divulge information that would lead to the identification of the transgressors, out of fear of retaliation from local elements once the international or local monitors leave. The result is that many cases of human rights abuses and violations go unreported.
Many testimonies that have been received by the Croatian Helsinki Committee for Human Rights suggest the participation of local Croatian authorities, including those in uniform, in the looting, harassment and murder of ethnic Serb civilians in remote parts of the countryside that are not easily monitored by international and local NGOs. Unfortunately, the report does not comprehensively describe the continued occurrence of such cases, thus giving an incomplete picture of one of the fundamental problems challenging the protection of human rights in the region.
Although it is difficult to link the Croatian government directly to these incidents, the government's failure to punish those members of its police and armed forces who participate in human rights abuses amounts to a tacit sanctioning and promotion of such activities; this permissiveness seriously undermines any claims that legitimate law enforcement exists and erodes the confidence of ethnic Serbs residing within Croatia.
The same is true of cases involving non-uniformed civilians. Although, as the report rightly points out, Croatian authorities have tried and convicted a number of individuals for their participation in human rights abuses, the number of such convictions relative to the number of violations is very small. This is true even though substantial evidence pertaining to many of the cases that remain untried is available. Many of
68
Croatia
the cases that do go to trial are quickly dismissed. In cases that lead to convictions, the punishments are seldom more than token gestures.
The Croatian government's apparent unwillingness to take the necessary steps to ensure that the rights of its Serb minority are protected lends credence to those who accuse it of employing "soft" methods of ethnic cleansing in removing ethnic Serbs from Croatia. This is underscored by the Croatian government's general reluctance to fully support the reintegration process, as evidenced by its failure to cooperate fully with the United Nations Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia (UNTAES) in the creation of conditions deemed necessary for the repatriation of ethnic Serbs to Eastern Slavonia. According to a 1997 UN Economic and Social Council Report, the number of Serb returnees to former UN Protected Areas (UNPAs) is considerably smaller than the estimate of 12,000 granted return requests that is cited by the State Department report. The results of such obstructionist policies on the part of the state are fairly evident in light of the relatively insignificant number of ethnic Serbs who have returned to Croatia. Most of those who have returned to Croatia have chosen to relocate to the larger cities where they are less vulnerable to random acts of ethnically motivated persecution.
As the report correctly notes, among the major obstacles deterring ethnic Serbs from returning are the many complicating factors relating to the reclaiming of property. Laws governing housing in Croatia stipulate that any property abandoned for 90 days or more can be requisitioned from its original owners and put under government trusteeship. In fact, many of those who have returned have done so only to discover that their homes and property were already occupied and had been reallocated to Croatian refugees, soldiers and veterans. A January 1997 UN Economic and Social Council Report cites a case of a returning Serb couple's attempt to reclaim their old home, which had been handed over to a Croatian police officer by authorities. When the couple brought the matter to the authorities, a local housing commission told them that even though the officer was willing to leave their property, it would in any case be allotted to Croatian refugees.
The report does not adequately address issues pertaining to freedom of religion. It seems disingenuous to discuss these freedoms without
69
Critique 1996
mentioning the close link between Croatian President Franjo Tudjman and Cardinal Kuharic, Croatia's highest ranking Roman Catholic cleric. Their relationship is a reflection of the union between church and state in Croatia. Although the Croatian Constitution does not declare an official state religion, the truth of the matter is that the Roman Catholic Church's close association with the government has virtually bestowed such a position upon it. This association has transformed the Cardinal into a political figure as well as a religious one. His political influence has made him an effective ally in President Tudjman's campaign; the president and the cleric have often been depicted together by the government-controlled media. Despite the fact that the church has tried to distance itself from the state and the ruling party in recent months, the image of Croatia as an exclusively Catholic state remains, much to the dismay of Croatia's Orthodox Serb population.
Although the report alludes to the many Catholic churches that were destroyed in formerly Serb-controlled areas before May 1995, it neglects in that same section to point out that many Orthodox churches were also destroyed during 1996. The destruction of religious edifices and places of worship seriously undermined the religious freedom of Croatia's Orthodox population and served as a further reminder of the inhospitable environment in which they find themselves.
The report does an impressive job of summarizing developments in the area of freedom of the press and media. Government attempts to eliminate or muzzle the independent media are a particular cause for concern since they tell us much about the Croatian government's ideology with respect to human rights. By resorting to various methods of repression, the state is effectively weakening the independent media's abihty to contribute to the democratic process. The importance of the independent media in Croatia is underlined by the government-controlled media's role as a catalyst in the mobilization of nationalistic sentiment during the critical early stages of the conflict.
The year was characterized by numerous attacks by the Croatian government on the independent media. In March the government reinstated two amendments to the Penal Code making publication of criticism of top officials {Article 71) and publication of state secrets
70
Croatia
(Article 72) criminal offenses. Ambiguities surrounding the definitions of "criticism" and "state secrets" forced most journalists to censor their own reports before publication out of fear of prosecution, since the passing of the amendments also empowered the public prosecutor to launch investigations against any journalist alleged to have offended or slandered high officials.
Meanwhile, the state's levying of a multi-million dollar retroactive tax on Novi List, an independent Croatian newspaper that is among the most openly critical of the ruling party, amounted to nothing more than another attempt by the state to silence its critics.
The government's dealing with cases such as these, and the controversy surrounding the expiration of the license of Zagreb's Radio 101, support the claim that Croatia's current leadership is democratic in name only. A noteworthy example (not mentioned in the report) of the Croatian government's disregard for media freedoms, especially where ethnic minorities are concerned, is its decision to discontinue funding the Zagreb Serb newspaper Nas Glas. According to the 1997 Human Rights Watch World Report, the government justified its actions on the grounds that the paper espoused an "anti-Croatian stance." Other than this omission, the State Department generally handles the issue of press freedom thoroughly.
The report goes to great lengths in describing the circumstances surrounding the effectiveness and practices of Croatia's judiciary. However, it is necessary to place greater emphasis on cases of the ethnically and politically motivated harassment of judges. Despite the fact that Croatian law mandates that all judgeships be lifetime posts, many senior judges were removed in 1996 for reasons unrelated to their professional qualifications. A UN report issued in early 1997 details the cases of the ethnically motivated dismissals of six ethnic Serb judges in the municipality of Karlovac. In Split, political affiliation played an important role in the removal of several highly experienced judges who were replaced with HDZ appointees. A case particularly threatening to judicial independence is the suspension of the President of the Supreme Court, Dr. Kxunislav Olujic, by the State Judicial Council in November 1996. The council justified its decision by citing Dr. Olujic's alleged
71
Critique 1996
"moral failures." His removal followed shortly after his public disagreement with HDZ policy and his announcement that he was leaving the ruhng party because his political affiliation represented a conflict of interest.
Meanwhile, many questions arose in 1996 concerning the ability of Croatia's judicial system to maintain its impartiality, a subject only touched upon by the State Department report. Cases such as the acquittal of six Croatians accused of the murder of 16 elderly Serbs after Operation Storm in August 1995 underscores the inherent bias of the judiciary. Establishing a credible rule of law is essential to the development of a just and democratic system in Croatia and as such, merits closer scrutiny in the future.
Croatia's questionable commitment to the protection and promotion of human rights is perhaps best exemplified by its half-hearted cooperation with and occasional blatant defiance of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTFY) at the Hague. The Croatian government's failure to bring indicted war criminals before the ICTFY is a clear demonstration of its reluctance to hold individuals accountable for crimes they committed during and after the war. The Croatian government is also suspected of harboring indicted war criminals and their families in state-owned flats. Outrageously, a recipient of the 1996 "Model Citizen Award" was a commander of the Special Police Forces in Karlovac reported to have gunned down a number of unarmed and surrendered Yugoslav People's Army (JLA) prisoners of Serb nationality at close range in 1991. The commander in question also received presidential recognition from President Franjo Tudjman for his acts of "heroism" during the war. It is noteworthy that his acquittal in the first instance court was greeted with a standing ovation. A Supreme Court decision ordering a retrial remains unfulfilled.
The Croatian government's blatant disregard for the rulings of the ICTFY was never more evident than in a full-page article by President Tudjman's adviser on human rights issues, Dr. Slobodan Lang — an article which the report never mentions. Announcing in the title "We Will Defend Blasldc," Dr. Lang goes on to praise the actions of this indicted war criminal and even declares that he was "proud to walk the streets of
72
Croatia
Zagreb with General Blaskic." The omission of such details undermines the State Department report's objectivity and de-emphasizes the Croatian government's culpability in the resulting ineffectiveness of the ICTFY.
The 1996 Country Report on Croatia marks a definite improvement over the reports released in previous years. It justly reviews the great variety of human rights violations that took place in Croatia during 1996. More impressive and encouraging still is the fact that the report outlines these violations and shortcomings within a broader political framework. The reader is therefore better able to understand the wider repercussions of the Croatian government's human rights abuses. Furthermore, the report accurately chronicles Croatia's political development as a struggling young democracy. It is therefore a useful guide to policymakers seeking to better understand the nature of Croatia's leadership and its politics. If the most reliable guide to the future is ultimately found in the past, then this year's report on Croatia will be an effective tool in charting Croatia's likely future course.
The report's description of non-ethnically motivated human rights violations accurately depicts the struggle surrounding the development of a truly democratic society. That there is a struggle in the first place is encouraging. Civilian protests and mass demonstrations such as those in support of Radio 101 suggest that the spirit of democracy exists within Croatia and that perhaps it is only a matter of time before it comes to the fore.
While the authors of this year's report should be commended for a job well done, human rights activists cannot take comfort in the fact that this sort of objective and all-encompassing reporting has come several years too late. It is indeed unfortunate that it has taken so long for the State Department to pay sufficient attention to the human rights situation in Croatia; greater awareness earlier might have been reflected in a more enlightened U.S. foreign policy. According to reports from local NGOs, approximately 80 elderly Serbs were executed in the early months of 1996, despite the fact that the Croatian government had established firm control over the area many months earlier. Local sources point to the fact that although the government had been well aware of these killings it undertook no measures to prevent such abuses in the future. Recent
73
Critique 1996
statistics provided by Human Rights Watch paint a grisly portrait of the results of a "soft" ethnic cleansing policy: as recently as 1995 ethnic Serbs represented 12% of the population of Croatia; now they represent less than three percent. The praise a report of such quality would merit is therefore muted in light of the fact that the violations described have on the whole achieved their intended political objectives, making the issue of the protection of the rights of Croatia's Serb minority a moot point.
74
