Haiti
V ineteen ninety-six was another transitional year for Haiti. It - - ^ marked the beginning of the first full post-coup presidential term, the completion of the first phase of re-establishing the Haitian National Police (HNP), and the publication of the report of the Truth and Justice Commission. It was also a year of decreasing organized political violence and decreasing police impunity.
However, Haiti's transition was not entirely positive. State-sponsored violence was eclipsed by near-anarchic conditions on the street. Nineteen ninety-six was a year of dramatically increasing homicide, robbery and kidnaping rates.
The State Department report touches on a number of key issues, generally displaying a willingness to address the persistent failings of a government it has provided with extensive military, economic and technical support. To a large degree, Haiti's institutional faiUngs reflect the obstacles facing a U.S.-spearheaded international effort to consolidate democracy. Political considerations have at times led the CUnton Administration to exaggerate the positive results for human rights of its Haiti policy while minimizing problems. The State Department has for the most part resisted this temptation, and this is laudable.
The report is weakest on the subjects of elections, employment conditions and worker rights, and the judicial system. Moreover, greater emphasis needs to be placed on the effects of pervasive poverty on human rights and on the stability of the Haitian state and society. Although Haitian human rights organizations have published relatively little in recent years, a joint UN-OAS monitoring mission (MICIVIH) remains a reliable source of information from which the State Department could have obtained more accurate statistics, particularly for its section on the judicial system and prisons.
As the report acknowledges, political and extrajudicial killings by state agents increased in 1996 compared to 1995, although they remained lower than the 1991-1994 rates. According to a New York Times article, "[m]any Haitians express irritation with the police, calling them brutal, corrupt and imperious. At the same time, they complain that the police are incompetent, apparently unable to solve even simple cases." Although the report notes 25 killings by HNP officers in 1996, including 16 deaths
101
Critique 1996
by excessive force when making arrests or controlling demonstrations, according to MICIVIH, more than 50 people were Idlled by on- or off-duty police officers in 1996. It is unclear how the State Department settled on the lower figure. Although some killings occurred during fire-fights — some of which may have been initiated by the HNP — at least 15 reported deaths seem to have been the result of summary executions in six different situations. A particularly notorious instance cited by the report was the March 6 police sweep of the Port-au-Prince slum district of Cité Soleil, which resulted in the executions of at least six people and the wounding of another 15. As of January 1997, none of the police officers involved in that action have been prosecuted. Moreover, on November 5, 1996, HNP officers shot and killed five men — one of whom was in handcuffs — on a busy downtown street.
To a large extent, the HNP is a force lacldng in adequate preparation or expertise for the tasks that it faces. In the aftermath of the army's dissolution, the HNP is Haiti's only institutionalized means of keeping the peace and providing domestic security. On April 22, Secretary of State for Public Security, Robert Manuel, said the HNP was not yet ready to shoulder the burden of maintaining security in Haiti without outside assistance. As a result of the accelerated training schedule — only four months as opposed to the 18-month "rule of thumb" training for new police — the HNP is relatively under-trained and inexperienced. Even dedicated cadet officers are hampered by the lack of training and experienced guidance from superiors. Special government working groups, such as the working group on management, have been established to address various issues, including recruitment, promotion and discipline. Advanced training, focusing on such specialized fields as criminal investigation, narcotics and crowd control, is scheduled to be completed by the end of 1997.
These efforts did not prove sufficient in 1996, however. Exacerbating the lack of experience of the HNP is its sparse and unevenly distributed staffing; as U.S. Ambassador Swing noted in his congressional testimony in September, there are only 5,200 police officers nationwide. Perhaps even more alarming, at the beginning of the year the HNP was reportedly
102
Haiti
operating with only 26 of 185 of its mid-to-senior level field commanders in place.
This combination of a paucity of senior commanders and an inexperienced and under-equipped staff can perhaps best explain the emerging pattern of police abuse. As the Washington Office on Latin America (WOLA) explained, the
[v]iolations do not appear to be systematically ordered from above by either police or governmental authorities, but follow different patterns over time. They reflect an alarming tendency to adopt the repressive practices of Haiti's past security forces, as well as the weaknesses in the institutional development process...Initial problems with excessive or inappropriate use of force, particularly in crowd control situations, characterized the first phase of abuses, as well as accidental shootings and shootings by off-duty cops. A second dynamic emerged characterized by deteriorating police-community relations in Port-au-Prince slums [as exemplified by the Cité Soleil violence].... Police abuse also took a new turn with a wave of mistreatment and killings of detainees totaling 86 cases during the first five months of 1996.
Criminal violence and the erratic and often excessive reactions of the HNP constituted the gravest threat to respect for the integrity of the person. Although, as the State Department notes, there were no instances of politically motivated disappearance, there was a serious rise in kidnaping for ransom. The UN Secretary-General wrote that in 1996, crime was an increasing concern, including previously rare crimes such as kidnaping and the use of firearms. Drug trafficking also increased. The crime problem endangered police as well as civilians. Five HNP officers lost their lives in one three-week stretch. The State Department reports that 11 police officers were killed over the course of the year. Numerous other incidents of violence between July and early September led the Secretary-General to state in both his October 1 and November 14 reports that there was "serious deterioration in Haiti's security situation." Some murders appeared to be politically motivated. For example, the
103
Critique 1996
opposition leaders as well as in the 1995 murder of Mireille Durocher Bertin, a lawyer and spokesperson for the coup regime.
In response to the rise in crime and the generally ineffectual police response, various armed grassroots groups or "vigilance brigades" continued their activities throughout the country. Some groups are attached to municipalities, but most tend to degenerate into little more than armed gangs which merely add fuel to the fire, and, in the words of the Secretary General, "undermine the established order and represent a potential for human rights violations."
Beyond being an immediate cause of violence, the rise of criminal and vigilante gangs has, in the words of the United Nations, "also given rise to abuse of authority and human rights violations by the HNP, which is struggling to meet ever-greater demands and expectations placed on it while confronting an ever-more sophisticated challenge from criminal elements." Thus the country is locked in a vicious circle of criminality, inexperienced police and vigilantism.
There were 86 reported cases of beatings during arrests or interrogations in the first seven months of 1996. One U.S. official quoted in Time magazine stated that in the spring of 1996 "we began receiving a lot of reports of killing and torture." The State Department reports, however, that the HNP tortured those in custody only in "isolated incidents." The report then contradicts itself, saying that police mistreatment "increased dramatically" in 1996. If it is drawing a distinction between isolated cases of torture and a dramatically increased incidence of mistreatment, it should articulate the basis for this distinction. Needless to say, the use of beatings and torture by police is still a serious concern. Twenty-five detainees claim to have been beaten by prison guards. In one case, a group of minors who were being transferred from an adult facility to another facility were allegedly beaten, resulting in one death. No full inquiry has yet been made into this incident.
The inexperienced HNP and the National Prisons Administration {Administration Pénale Nationale: APENA), also continue to process detainees improperly. While 1996 did show an increased compliance with the 48-hour limit within which a detainee must be brought before a judge,
104
Haiti
according to MICIVIH, "in spite of police efforts, there are still shortcomings in the maintenance of the registers and there are sometimes delays in medical treatment." These are due to the under funding of APENA, which does not have enough money to provide detainees adequate food or medical care. In September 1995, 1,504 of the 1,703 person prison population were awaiting trial. By the end of 1996, the nationwide percentage of pre-trial detainees to prisoners still hovered at about 80%. The figure at the National Penitenriary in Port-au-Prince remained in the mid-90s. At the beginning of 1996, the condition of Haiti's prisons was, according to the UN, "well below the level required by the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, adopted in 1955." This assessment was based upon evidence of such pervasive problems as inadequate nutrition, the near total absence of medical care, the existence of torture and sexual abuse and the incarceration of minors with adults. Although the discussion on prison conditions takes note of abuses committed by prison personnel, it neglects the widespread problem of violence among prisoners, which has been documented by the UN/OAS monitoring mission but which was hardly addressed by APENA.
Altogether the HNP has a mixed record; at its worst it brutalizes targeted groups, such as alleged drug dealers and cop killers, and neglects the needs of other detainees. One recent report, entitled 'The Human Rights Record of the Haitian National Police," by Human Rights Watch, the National Coalition for Haitian Rights and WOIA argued that "[i]f the Haitian Government does not address these issues promptly, it risks institutionalizing abuse and undermining the legitimacy of the new force." The United States has started a $500,000 fund to aid victims of the HNP's human rights abuses. The irony of the situation is all too clear; as a U.S. official told Time, "[h]ere's a force that we invested $65 million in, and from the same account, we're now using money to protect people from it."
Given the use of arrest pursuant to public denunciation rather than judicial warrant, the denial of human rights by arbitrary arrest is still of concern. The widespread practice of lengthy pre-trial incarceration not only violates Article 9 of the ICCPR (which requires that pre-trial detention shall be the exception and not the rule), and Article 14 (which
105
Critique 1996
provides for the right to a trial without undue delay); it also exacerbates the effects of arbitrary arrest. The extended detentions are due to inadequate prison management and backlogged courts. Together, arbitrary arrests and unjust detentions combine to create a prison population of whom 80% have never been tried.
While there are signs that the HNP is becoming more accountable, police crimes are rarely prosecuted. The Office of the Inspector General is the institution responsible for monitoring the HNP's compliance with its regulations. The HNP hierarchy has demonstrated a willingness to dismiss officers for their infractions, but little progress has been made in judicial investigation and prosecution. According to Human Rights Watch, "[wjhere the HNP removed officers in the most abusive precincts, reports of beatings reportedly declined." In July, when the joint UN-OAS mission released its report of police abuse, the police commissioner dismissed a number of policemen. As of November 1996, over 40 HNP officers had been dismissed and a total of eight former agents were in jail due to alleged human rights violations. However, these positive signs are tempered because, in the words of MICIVIH, "no progress has been made in judicial investigation into their cases." Although 24 police officers and agents faced criminal prosecution as of January 1997, no HNP officer had been convicted of murder. This may contribute to the fear that victims of police abuse have in bringing their complaints to the police force itself.
Beyond the problems related to arrest and detention, Haiti has a judicial system that is out of date, overburdened, understaffed and often counter-productive. As MICIVIH stated, "flaws in the administration of justice remained a major impediment to the full protection of human rights." The effects of these flaws stretch beyond courtiooms and onto the streets: an ineffectual judiciary undermines the credibility of the police, encourages civilian vigilantism, and gives police officers an excuse to take the law into their own hands.
The State Department refers generally to "unaddressed systemic weaknesses," and the resultant "huge backlog of criminal cases, with some detainees waiting years in pretrial detention for a court date." However, more attention ought to be paid to the actual weaknesses of specific institutions and especially to the causes of these weaknesses. As noted in
106
Haiti
the report, the actual prosecution of human rights abusers — whether or not they have been dismissed from the police — has been a stumbling block. A 1996 MICIVIH study found that since the return of constitutional order, a "considerable number of complaints" concerning human right violations had been filed by victims or their relatives. Several criminals were sentenced, a few small damages were awarded, some cases were dismissed, but the majority "languished before the courts."
Such delays are not caused solely by ineptitude or venality. Part of the blame lies with the vicious circle of fear that has gripped Haitian society. In particular, lawyers and judges dread retaliation for prosecutions once the UN mission leaves Haiti. ICnowing that the HNP is not yet able to deter violent criminals, they are not so eager to prosecute human rights abusers.
The record of prosecutions of human rights abuses committed by the de facto regime is no better. The report observes that "[t]he Government's limited effort to redress the legacy of human rights abuse from the 1991-1994 period met largely with failure." The most publicized trial ended in the most notorious of these failures. On July 24, two alleged assassins of former Justice Minister Guy Malary were acquitted, according to the courts, due to insufficient proof. Although the report mentions the poor preparation of the prosecution in the Malary case, the trial exemplified a broader problem. For example, the choice of certain jury members who were directly linked to the de facto regime raised questions about the court's impartiality. That the jury pool consisted overwhelmingly of lawyers and others associated with the legal profession suggests that the jury rolls are highly inadequate in obtaining a jury from the community at large. Although the Minister of Justice has created a new agency aimed at strengthening the investigative capacity of prosecutors, the Unité Pénale Nationale (UPENA), there is reason to doubt that the Haitian prosecutorial system can bear the burden of a complex or politically volatile trial. Fr. Daniel Roussière of the Gonaïves Justice and Peace Commission, who has worked extensively with the victims of the 1994 Raboteau massacre, emphasizes the insufficient preparation of the Public Ministry, which has the responsibility of gathering evidence. He fears that a trial of those implicated in the Raboteau massacre would suffer the
107
Critique 1996
same fate as the Malary trial. And while attempts to improve the organization of public prosecution registries are a positive step toward strengthening prosecutorial capabilities, it is only one small step on a long road.
Some institutions which might have eased the journey do not have the engines they need. Human Rights Watch found that "[t]he committee for the enactment of the Truth Commission's recommendations and the Office of Citizen Protection (Office de la Protection du Citoyen, a human rights ombudsman) both lacked staff and financial backing." Moreover, as noted by the State Department, the Commission's report was not widely circulated, nor was there much follow-up.
Building an effective and equitable judicial system begins with the humble tasks of increased case management and diligence in prosecution. The government must also provide resources and staffing to those officials responsible for resolving cases of human rights abuses, namely the prosecutors and the ombudsmen, officials who act as intermediaries between the public and the bureaucracy. Only by such incremental and determined action can the government minimize impunity.
Yet, to fully understand the difficulty of taking even such small steps, one must consider the full context in which Haitian public policy is framed, and, in particular, its relationship to U.S. politics. The report makes no mention of these issues, although events in 1996 exemplified the tangled threads of Haitian reform and U.S. politicking. As Human Rights Watch has pointed out, the lack of training of the HNP is partially due to "the compressed police reform timetable that was designed to satisfy domestic pressures in the United States [for a rapid U.S. troop withdrawal]." Furthermore, while steps toward judicial reform must be taken by the government of Haiti, they may be impossible if the United States wavers in its commitment to nurture democracy in Haiti. Ironically, in the spring of 1996, about half the U.S. aid to Haiti was blocked by a law sponsored by Senator Bob Dole, until the Haitian government could show progress in the investigations of the killings of various public figures. Such occurrences led one diplomat to remark to the press that "[a]gainst its will, and very much to its disadvantage, Haiti has been dragged into the American election campaign."
108
Haiti
In considering the state of the judiciary, the State Department contextualized the situation, stating that "[yjears of rampant corruption and governmental neglect have left the judicial system poorly organized and virtually moribund." The judicial system's dysfuncrionality has led to a massive backlog of cases, due in part to a judiciary that is too small to accommodate the number of cases filed and in part to too few trial days to move the docket, particularly the criminal cases, to resolution. The State Department reports that even though the court system held more sessions in more locations in 1996, the backlog continued to increase. Since detainees are held in prison until their trial, tiie backlog has contributed to prison overcrowding and the related health and personal security risl<s of such jail conditions. In a case that is not atypical, a man was imprisoned for one year and eight months prior to being released due to lack of prosecution. He was alleged to have stolen two pigeons. Haitian bureaucrats have stated that there are no alternatives to detention since there are no probation commissions, public works projects, or juges d'applications des peines. Moreover, a huge backlog and the snail's pace of case management makes eventual prosecution seem less likely, thus fostering a sense of impunity among criminals. As one UN report concluded, "[ejxperience to date indicates that fundamental reform and professionalization of the country's justice sector is required for the new police force to operate effectively."
The State Department's catalogue of the problems in the Haitian judicial system does not fathom the causes of the crisis. The authors should have done more to evaluate the government's policies, several of which have reflected a failure of management and commitment. For example, the human rights complaint offices were mismanaged, underfunded and finally closed, and the Ministry of Justice's judicial reform bill was woefully inadequate. Although it was sent to Parliament in August, it was still under consideration as of January 1997. The government of Haiti must move beyond simply stating goals and take the first difficult steps toward achieving them.
The Ecole de la Magistrature, another initiative aimed at reforming the judicial system, was established with U.S. and other international assistance. Unfortunately, it languished witiiout students for much of the
109
Critique 1996
year. And despite the time, effort and money devoted to training magistrates, one study showed that the use of illegal warrants in Port-au-Prince increased by 400% even after magistrates were trained in a program that included instruction on issuing proper warrants.
Beyond these structural considerations, the report addresses the issue of discrimination in Haitian society. It highlights the considerable rate of violence against women, citing a 1995 survey by the Haitian Center for Research and Action for the Promotion of Women which found that 37% of those surveyed stated that they or someone they knew had been raped or sexually abused and 33% reported that they or someone they knew had been the victim of other types of violence. As the UN's independent expert reported in January 1996, "[ajlthough there have been no politically motivated acts of violence against women [for their being women] since the return of President Aristide, it must be pointed out, on the other hand, that domestic violence remains a cause for concern." In fact, women's organizations have noted an increase in reports of sexual violence.
While the government has paid lip service to the rights of women, it has done little to foster these rights. Positive symbols include the April ratification of the Inter-American Convention on the Prevention, Punishment, and Eradication of Violence Against Women and the Ministry of Women's Affairs' recommendations for the reform of the Haitian legal code, including a redefinition of rape as a crime against the person rather than against morals. However, symbolic gestures must be weighed against actual deeds. According to Human Rights Watch the Justice Ministry has not yet acted on the proposals of the Ministry of Women's Affairs. Moreover, the State Department finds that the Ministry of Women's Affairs is ineffectual and reports that in December the Haitian parliament discussed its abolition. For the moment, this resolution seems to have been defeated. Whether the government of Haiti will act on its ambitious rhetoric on the status of women remains to be seen.
On the subject of the rights of children, the report appropriately draws attention to the restaveks, or child servants. However, the problems of Haitian children are much broader. While Haiti ratified the
110
Haiti
Convention of the Rights of the Child in 1995, much more is necessary to rescue children from the inadequate education, crushing poverty and rampant violence that define their daily lives. The UN's Independent Expert has suggested "the drafting and adoption of a children's legal code, the creation of children's courts, the inclusion of the basic principles of the rights of the child in school curricula, and the establishment of a national institution for the rights of the child consisting of representatives of the Government and of the public." Unfortunately, as the report notes, "[t]he Government's programs do not promote or defend children's rights."
Regarding the rights of workers, the report catalogues various statutory protections but does not attempt a serious assessment of their practical effect, despite a great deal of public attention to the plight of the Haitian worker. Various labor organizations, including the National Labor Committee, have documented the paltry wages that Haitian workers receive from multinational corporations that use Haiti as a processing area. Disney's Haitian laborers receive 36 gourdes — or, at recent exchange rates, about two dollars — per day. Contrary to the assertions of the State Department that this is an adequate wage, under current economic conditions in Haiti, it covers only 60% of a family's basic needs. As one oft-quoted statistic put it, it takes the average Haitian employed by Disney 16.8 years to earn what Disney CEO Michael Eisner earns in one hour.
If, as the report contends, export-sector assembly workers are paid better than other workers, then the situation is indeed dire. Noting that employers generally set wages unilaterally, the report explains that workers' anti-union sentiment and high unemployment frustrate union organizing efforts. Lawyers Committee interviews with workers suggest that employer intimidation and reprisals are prominent among the obstacles that labor organizers face. Workers add that unreasonably high production quotas govern pay, and make it virtually impossible in some jobs to earn even the minimum wage. Lack of enforcement makes the labor code little more than window dressing. The State Department report placed far too little emphasis on the plight of the Haitian worker. Poor working conditions, negligible wages, little hope of economic advancement, and blatant disregard for labor regulations are chronic
125
Critique 1996
sources of instability. The State Department would do well to focus more attention on such issues.
In the end, the State Department did an admirable job in listing instances of human rights abuses and attempts at reform in Haiti in 1996. However, one must keep in mind the larger, contextual issues — in particular, the shattered Haitian economy and its role in undermining Haitian institutions. In such a weak economy, there is little money to hire competent judges, ensure habitable conditions and medical care for prisoners, or fund important social initiatives. Prior to the increased violence from July through September 1996, a senior advisor to President René Préval said that "[c]ome the summer, there could be an explosion here unless the economy starts up... . The people are tired, hungry and disillusioned, and we can't continue much longer in this state of prostration." As both the State Department report and this Critique have shown, Préval's prescient warning went largely unheeded.
112
