Indonesia
nr^he 1996 State Department report on Indonesia provides a comprehensive description of the major human rights violations of the past year. The strength of the report lies in its broad scope and its attention to a wide range of human rights violations committed by the Indonesian government. Nonetheless, it suffers from many of the same weaknesses that marred previous reports, and that detract somewhat from its impact. While the overall reporting is comprehensive and generally accurate, in a number of areas the report understates the seriousness of abuses committed by the government and the military and exaggerates progress. Occasionally this bias is aggravated by the omission of key incidents. The report usually prefers to say the glass is half-full rather than half-empty. Thus it is quick to praise the government's more tolerant attitude toward critical press reporting and the vigorous performance of the government-appointed National Human Rights Commission. As the increasing harassment and intimidation of government critics and the large number of arrests all attest, the human rights situation in Indonesia has worsened considerably in the past year. This is far from apparent in the State Department report, which also neglects to point out that this deterioration is occurring at a time when the regime of General Suharto, his Gollcar party and the powerful Indonesian military give every sign of having ensured their continued rule.
The report's treatment of human rights violations in East Timor illustrates some of these weaknesses. Taken together, the report's references to events in East Timor present a contradictory overview of recent developments and leave the reader with little idea of the actual situation in the territory or the likely direction of change. In an introductory section, the report gives prominence to assessments of "respected observers" which suggest "a decrease in serious incidents" of human rights violations. It hails the "symbolically important" decision by the National Human Rights Commission to open a branch in the capital city, Dili, and in a later section cites the successful conviction of one military officer charged with killing an unarmed civilian. At the same time, however, it quotes a sobering statement by the Nobel Peace Prize co-laureate Bishop Belo on the lack of improvement in the East Timorese
119
Critique 1996
human rights situation, noting that "troop levels [in East Timor] remained unjustifiably high," and mentioning several specific incidents in which civilians have been detained and tortured or killed by military forces. The report should have tried harder to reconcile these contradictory statements.
In particular, the report fails to reflect the high level of tension that continues to prevail in the territory as a result of the presence of the Indonesian military and its continuing overt and covert actions. Reported disappearances, arrests and torture of East Timorese in 1996, though difficult to confirm given the Indonesian government's ban on independent human rights monitors in the territory, were far more numerous than the report acknowledges. Its characterization of the Indonesian military presence as "excessive" hardly does justice to the reality, which has been vividly described by Bishop Belo:
There are army posts in every village. Anyone entering or leaving must first report to the army post. Young people who want to go to Dili must report to the security post, show their ID and other documents. It's like a state of war.
Security forces continue to respond to disturbances and civilian challenges to their authority with severe retaliatory measures, including middle-of-the-night raids and arrests in civilian homes. Surveillance and intimidation of suspected activists continues to be heavy. The report might have mentioned one incident that garnered considerable attention in the Canadian press. In January 1996, the mother of a new East Timorese asylum-seeker in Canada was paid a menacing visit by the Indonesian ambassador to Canada, who was accompanied by military escort. The ambassador's gesture struck many East Timorese activists in Canada and elsewhere as a veiled threat against the safety of family members at home in East Timor.
Mentioned only in passing is the role of local militias which are trained, equipped and used by the Indonesian military "to intimidate and harass" government opponents. This understatement is surprising considering the terror inspired by the rampages of hooded "ninjas" in the
120
Indonesia
past and more recent reports of attacks, disappearances and killings of civilians at the hands of masked perpetrators. The regular presence of provocateurs has given rise to a palpable feeling of tension at peaceful demonstrations, funerals and other large gatherings. This atmosphere fosters ubiquitous fear and suspicion among the population and also contributes to outbreaks of civilian violence. The report describes one such outbreak: the fatal beating on December 24 of an out-of-uniform police officer during the mass welcome of Bishop Belo upon his return from the Nobel Peace Prize ceremony. It neglects to note, however, that this event was followed by a new wave of military detention, interrogation and torture of potential suspects. By underemphasizing the oppressive circumstances under which the East Timorese population continues to live, the report fails to illuminate the responsibility of the Indonesian military for eruptions of civilian violence, or the fact that circumstances conducive to violence in East Timor remain as severe as ever.
The report's tendency to gloss over the Indonesian government's increasing crackdown on dissent, and in particular the military's role in controlling civilian affairs, is evident in its handling of the July 27 raid on the Indonesian Democracy Party (PDI) headquarters in Jakarta. The violent takeover of the headquarters is variously described in the report as "government-assisted," "government-backed" or "government-sponsored." The ousting of Megawati Sukarnoputri from the party's leadership and her replacement by a more compliant successor, Suryadi, is characterized as a process "crudely engineered" by government forces. But a careful examination of the evidence would have yielded a more precise assessment of the role of the government, and particularly the military, in these events.
Perhaps the clearest sign of the government's role is the fact that forces including the head of Central Jakarta Police and the District Military Commander for Central Jakarta gathered at the site of the raid on the morning of July 27, but took virtually no acrion to protect the PDI building or its inhabitants from the rocks and Molotov cocktails thrown by a violent gang of youths outside the building. Eyewitness accounts and footage videotaped from behind police barricades document that after prolonged inaction, municipal riot police raided the building, dragging
121
Critique 1996
those inside to waiting police cars and allowing the violent youths outside to join the charge. As the report acknowledges, the July 27 raid and the ensuing riot in Jakarta was followed by a wave of arrests of students, labor activists and others whom the government believed to be associated with the People's Democratic Party (PRD), the group it accused of having instigated and organized the violence. Most of those arrested were interrogated at military centers, where many were subjected to severe beatings, electric shocks and other forms of torture, before being released or transferred to regular civilian jails.
The report is silent on the mystery surrounding the identity of the youths who launched the attack on the PDI office. Immediately after the raid, allegations were made that at least some of these youths were not members of a PDI faction, as the government claimed, but that they had been hired to instigate the attack. These suspicions have been heightened by the fact that the formal request made by the Indonesian Human Rights Commission for a list of the PDI members involved has not been honored by the current PDI leadership.
While the report does mention the ensuing wave of trials in which anti-subversion laws have been evoked, it neglects to point out that this is the first time in years that the government has used these laws. Its willingness to do so is a sign of its renewed efforts to tighten autocratic control over civil society, despite mounting pressure for greater democracy. But one would not appreciate the significance of the events of July 27 and their aftermath from reading the State Department report.
There are also some troubling omissions in the report's handling of the rights of workers to associate and advocate freely on behalf of labor interests. To its credit, the report does note the following developments: mounting government pressure on the independent union, Indonesian Prosperous Workers' Union (Serikat Buruh Sejahtera Indonesia, SBSI), since July; the arrest of SBSI's leader, Muchtar Pakpahan, in connection with his activism on behalf of Megawati Sukarnoputri and related efforts at democratization; the "unprecedented" reinstatement of an earlier, dismissed conviction against Pakpahan by the Supreme Court; and the detention of a number of SBSI members by the Attorney General's Office in the wake of the July 27 violence. On the other hand, while mentioning
122
Indonesia
the government's claim that Pakpalian's arrest was prompted by his "political activities, not labor activities," the report neglects to mention that many of those SBSI members detained outside Jakarta were taken into military, not civilian, custody for questioning, held incommunicado for several days at a time, and forced to renounce their membership in SBSI, sometimes under threat of beatings. Other thinly disguised government efforts to intimidate SBSI supporters since July are also overlooked, such as the sudden closing of SB Si's South Jakarta branch office in October.
The intensified suppression of SBSI has been accompanied by government attempts to keep tight control over union organizing through the only officially recognized union in the country, the All-Indonesia Employees' Union {Serikat Pekerja Seluruh Indonesia, SPSI), controlled by the Ministry of Manpower. Until this year the SPSI was a highly centralized organization: all monies went to the central leadership to be redistributed nationwide. The report notes recent government decrees aimed at giving SPSI locals limited autonomy by permitting them to collect dues. However, the report does not point out that the newly decentralized SPSI is unlikely to campaign for the welfare of its members while the leadership includes a large number of retired mihtary and Golkar officials who have little direct experience with unions other than putting down strikes. Despite the June decree instituting the new procedure for dues collection, by late 1996 the Ministry of Manpower still had control over these funds. Moreover, it is still common practice to deduct union dues from worker paychecks, while workers themselves remain unaware of the union's presence at their factories or even of their own membership in it.
Without greater transparency and real worker participation in the process of union organizing, SPSI's nominal decentralization and the redirecting of union dues within its structure are likely to do little to improve protection of workers' rights. Labor lawyers and activists are still officially barred from organizing unions, and those who attempt to do so are likely to become targets for severe harassment. Considering the number of people arrested and detained and the degree of military surveillance, it is clear that the government has not merely intensified
123
Critique 1996
pressure against independent trade unionists and labor activists, but has also made these individuals targets of the broader crackdown. As a consequence, there has been little growth in factory activism since late July 1996.
Curiously, while the report understates the degree of recent government harassment of independent labor activists, it neglects a number of significant improvements. For example, the report notes that factory owners commonly fail to honor agreements made with workers in the course of strike settlements and often fire strike leaders once normal factory operations have resumed. The fired strike leaders, the report argues, have little recourse in the courts and rarely get their jobs back. But in fact, an important court case belies the report's gloomy conclusion. Cidh Sukaeshi, a worker and strike leader in a shoe factory subcontracted by Nike in Serang, West Java, won favorable rulings from lower and mid-level courts requiring that his employers rehire him. These dedsions went against the Ministry of Manpower, which upheld the firing after the shoe company appealed. The case is awaiting final arbitration by the Supreme Court. In omitting this highly publicized case, the report overlooks the tendency of certain institutions to uphold basic rights for workers in the face of opposition by the military, the executive branches and factions dosely assodated with General Suharto.
The report's discussion of the Indonesian Human Rights Commission, known by the acronym Komnas HAM, while admirable in certain respects, is marred by some surprising omissions and an inexplicable complacency. The report claims that "despite limited resources, and occasional government pressure and intimidation, [the commission] vigorously undertook investigations and publicized its independent findings and recommendations." Later sections of the report make a number of references to the commission's activities, including investigations of military and police wrong-doing in Irian Jaya, Ujung Pandang (South Sulawesi), Yogyakarta (Central Java) and Jakarta, as well as the opening of a Komnas HAM office in Dili, East Timor. Noted carefully are a few incidents in which commission reports appeared to have at least contributed to disciplinary action against military personnel found guilty of abusive actions; these indude the successful conviction of
124
Indonesia
an armed forces member for brutality in Irian Jaya and the prosecution of several soldiers for excessive violence against student demonstrators in Ujung Pandang. These are encouraging signs, but the report wisely avoids the temptation to express unrestrained optimism about Komnas HAM's evolving role in Indonesia, acknowledging that government compliance with the commission's findings has been inconsistent. "In some but not all cases," notes the report, "the Government acted on [the commission's] findings." It is left to the reader to fill in the picture from scattered references to government noncompliance and a brief acknowledgment of two specific problem areas. While commission investigations did help lead to successful court action against four soldiers for the killing of three civilians in Irian Jaya, five other cases of military brutality confirmed by the commission went unaddressed. More recently, the government has "not responded to the Commission's report" on the events of July 27 and has failed to take disciplinary action against "government and government-backed personnel responsible for the violence." In response to the latter, the government issued "thinly veiled. . .rebukes and warnings" against the commission for its reporting.
The government's response to the commission's July 27 report follows a pattern reminiscent of an earlier, equally prominent case in Indonesia, that of murdered factory worker and labor activist Marsinah. In this case, Komnas HAM's findings were patently ignored by the government and the military, and what is even worse, subsequent measures were taken to underscore Komnas HAM's subordination to government and military authorities.
The report also overlooks the serious obstacles the commission continues to face during the investigation process. The sadly typical case of the July PDI office raid is instructive in this regard. Taking up their investigation immediately after the raid and riots, for over a week Komnas HAM members were denied permission to visit the PDI office headquarters. By the time permission was granted, the site was all cleaned up, key evidence having been disturbed, if not destroyed. More ominously, Komnas HAM interviews with those wounded in the incident were delayed and permitted only in the presence of military escorts. Military intimidation of other witnesses was evident as well. Eyewitnesses
125
Critique 1996
not directly arrested and charged in connection with the event reported being subjected to close surveillance by military personnel, phone taps and repeated detention, during which they received explicit warnings against providing information about the raid.
Although these issues raise concerns about Komnas HAM's effectiveness in investigating human rights abuses anywhere in Indonesia, they are particularly troublesome in the case of those areas where military presence and fear of military brutality are constant and more immediate — East Timor, Aceh and Irian Jaya. Given these problems, the report's vague remarks on the "symbolic" importance of the new Komnas HAM office in Dili, East Timor fall particularly flat; indeed, it would have been more appropriate to emphasize the symbolism of siting the Komnas HAM office directly next to the central military office in Dili. The report should also have noted that the poorly conceived Dili office, staffed by a former prosecutor who does not speak the local language, has jeopardized the ability of Komnas HAM to open any other field offices. The report also fails to note that the Komnas HAM account of the September 1995 riots in the East Timorese municipality of Maliana was disappointingly incomplete, biased and lacking in context. Focusing almost exclusively on problems of inter-ethnic conflict and abuses committed by Catholic Timorese against largely Muslim Buginese and Javanese shop owners in the riots, Komnas HAM failed to comment on the security forces' ensuing wave of arbitrary arrests, torture and intimidation of hundreds of East Timorese, many of whom had no involvement in the disturbances. Discussing the precedent of this important investigation would have helped shed light on the likely performance of the new Komnas HAM office in Dili.
The shortcomings of the report are particularly evident in its treatment of freedom of speech and the press as well as freedom of association. In several instances, the report claims or implies a "[greater] tolerance of public criticism," more "vigorous debate" on government corruption, and a "more open and outspoken [press]" in comparison to previous years. Nowhere are these important claims substantiated. While the report claims that the government has reached new levels of tolerance, the facts speak otherwise. Government attitudes in 1996 differ littie from
126
Indonesia
the rhetoric of openness which officials have been mouthing for much of the 1990s. Indonesian government control of the press and of vocal dissidents has not been particularly systematic for some time now. Rather, it is the very arbitrariness vsath which it is exercised that makes government control so effective. A certain level of criticism and press reporting on controversial issues is allowed. However, the government reserves the authority to clamp down on freedom of expression as it deems necessary, resorting to legally questionable bannings and vaguely worded laws (many of which date from the Dutch colonial era), to arrest, try and convict offending dissidents and vocal journalists.
A review of the events of 1996 does not demonstrate a greater level of government tolerance. Despite tiie report's claim to the contrary, recent evidence suggests that the Suharto regime is as determined as ever to repress and punish those dissidents and activists whom it sees as a serious threat to its hold on power. While the report discusses the confiscation of 5,000 copies of the most recent issue of tiie underground journal Suara Independen (Independent Voice), and the arrest of the printing shop manager and printer responsible for its publication, there is no indication of how the fate of this journal fits into the larger context. Indeed, the attack on Suara Independen was merely one in a series of government actions against critical and independent journalism during 1995. It is important to note in this regard that the issue of Suara Independen which provoked the most recent arrests contained a report on a survey indicating that a majority of Jakarta residents did not believe the official government account of the events of July 27.
In a further omission, the report makes only passing mention of the secret videotaping by undercover intelligence officers of speakers at the PDI "free speech forum" prior to the July 27 raid. However, its discussion on "Freedom of Speech and Press" fails to note that these videotapes were used as the basis for the charges leveled against at least some of those critics arrested or placed on trial in the aftermath of July 27. Among the most notable has been the case of Aberson Marie Sihalolo, a member of the Indonesian Parliament for PDI and a Megawati supporter, who was charged with insulting the president at the Free Speech Forum under Articles 134 and 207 of the Indonesian Criminal Code. A videotape of
127
Critique 1996
Sihalolo's speech was among the key evidence presented by the prosecution which led to his recent conviction and eighteen-month prison sentence.
By the same token, the recent wave of summonses against a wide range of Indonesian dissidents, regardless of their involvement in the events of July 27, can only be seen as government intent to maintain tight control over the level and type of open dissent allowed in the country. While noting that government officials denounce members of the PRD as "communists," the report omits the government's elaborate theory, which postulates — with no credible evidence — deep connections between the PRD and Filipino communists. Nor does the report mention that accusations of communist affiliation became an increasingly frequent government charge against its opponents during 1996. These accusations of course called forth memories of brutal repression against communist supporters and leftist sympathizers in earlier years of the New Order regime — and were a powerful reminder of the lengths to which the Indonesian military and government are capable of going to bring critics to heel.
Another organization that was the clear target of government warnings over the past year was the newly formed Independent Commission for Election Monitoring (Komisi Independen Pengawasan Pemilu: IGPP), established by human rights activists, NGO leaders and intellectuals to monitor the fairness of the general elections in May 1997 and 1998. On more than one occasion, the report describes the government's attitude toward the formation of the IGPP as "mixed," yet fails to pursue the matter or to predict the likely implications of the Suharto regime's stance toward the new group. In particular, the report neglects to point out the fact that while official government comments on the founding of I<JPP in Jakarta evinced some tolerance, attempts to open KIPP branches or other independent election monitoring groups in provinces outside Jakarta — where election procedures are very tightly controlled and least subject to the scrutiny of the press — were met with repressive government measures: IGPP meetings were banned, ICIPP members interrogated, and provincial military commanders warned against opening local ICIPP chapters or similar groups. On April 22, 1996
128
Indonesia
the Medan (North Sumatra) branch of the Indonesian Legal Aid Foundation (Yayasan Lembaga Bantuan Hukum Indonesia: LBH) was set on fire, one day after an election monitoring group meeting was broken up by stone-throwing youths; there have been other reports of physical attacks on group meeting sites by youths encouraged or contracted by government agents.
The report ignores the persecution of IGPP's Secretary General, Mulyana ICusumah — a prominent human rights activist in Indonesia — since April 1996, when a government social and political affairs office released a document alleging his involvement with an Indonesian Communist Party-affiliated youth group in his late teens. Military and government agencies have since warned newspapers and magazines not to publish Mulyana's writings. Despite the self-serving rhetoric of tolerance voiced by government and military leaders, the government is clearly displeased with KIPP and has issued unmistakable warnings. All in all, the report appears to have misinterpreted the existence of public debate among Indonesian citizens as a sign of real change in the political situation, when in fact the government is as intransigent as ever.
A number of other weaknesses in the report should be mentioned. Its discussion of women covers violence against women, sexual harassment, women's legal rights as spouses and citizens, and the problems confronted by women in the worl<force. One glaring omission in this section is the use of rape and sexual humiliation by military forces against women suspected of anti-government activities, particularly in heavily militarized areas such as East Timor and Irian Jaya. A recent example, ignored by the report, is the case of a 23-year-old farmer in Ermera district. As reported by independent observers and activist groups, the woman and seven relatives were arrested without a warrant on November 5, 1996 on suspicion of assisting East Timorese independence fighters. The woman was kept handcuffed and was beaten and raped on several occasions by military personnel. Another female detainee in the group was stripped naked in front of her husband and children and confined separately. A December 28 letter by Bishop Belo urging the Dili military command to investigate the incident met with little response, although the National Commission on Human Rights agreed in February 1997 to undertake an
129
Critique 1996
independent investigation. To its credit, the report makes passing reference to previous cases of rape by Indonesian soldiers in Irian Jaya, mainly to highlight the inaction of the military leadership thus far in disciplining troops for these violations. However, the persistence of sexual abuse against women by the Indonesian armed forces and the ongoing refusal of the military leadership to address the problem calls for much closer scrutiny.
In its coverage of the government's suppression of its critics and the problem of unfair court procedures the report ignores the increasing harassment of lawyers involved in the defense of dissidents facing trial. Defense lawyers have been charged with colluding with foreigners to foment revolution and expressing hatred for the government, or accused of unethical behavior such as involvement in political causes under the guise of legal practice; they are often interrogated in connection with student demonstrations. As the LBH has argued in a joint statement with other NGOs, such actions threaten lawyers' recognized immunity in defense cases and compromise their ability to guarantee client confidentiality. They also may intimidate and discourage lawyers from taking controversial cases.
The report's section on indigenous people commendably describes the problems faced by such groups in dealing with growing immigration, land seizures and large-scale mining and logging operations by government and private developers. However, although it discusses the March 1996 rioting by tribesmen "in the vicinity of a foreign mining concession" near Timika, Irian Jaya, the report fails to discuss the fact that a key element in the tension around the massive, U.S.-owned Freeport-McMoran mine in the Timika-Tembagapura area has been the charge by local villagers that toxic mine tailings are causing serious downstream pollution, killing fish and other sources of food and livelihood for indigenous people. The report's discussion of the specific obstacles faced by indigenous people in pursuing claims against destructive development projects is incomplete, given the involvement of U.S. businesses and the importance of such projects to the long-term viability of indigenous communities. It is also inexplicable that the report fails to name the U.S. corporation involved in this case, especially given its international notoriety.
130
Indonesia
The State Department report is a key document on current human rights violations in Indonesia. The unique character of this resource lies in its extensive coverage. Yet the report could have done more to elucidate the specific ways in which the Suharto government and the Indonesian military have acted to strengthen their grip on power, with very negative consequences for human rights. It would be a mistake to assume that greater protection of human rights is not possible in Indonesia and East Timor, or that determined measures by the international community would not make a difference. This year's State Department report, though admirably comprehensive, misses the opportunity to place the developments it describes in context, and so contributes less than it could toward an effective internarional policy.
131

•i«:'-.-'iti.
5'.' I-
I ■ •
ir ",i».c
If.l 1M)
