India
As in previous years, the report under review offers a generally fair and balanced account of the major human rights developments in India during 1996. Like its predecessors, however, it also suffers from some shortcomings, mostly in the form of omissions and, in places, imprecise wording and a lack of attention to detail. Some of these errors fail to reflect significant decisions by the Indian judiciary that will contribute to greater human rights protections. Others paint a misleading picture of how the Indian government is structured to deal with matters related to human rights problems.
In its opening paragraph, for example, the report says that the president of India "has special emergency powers." While this is literally true, it is also potentially rrusleading without the important qualification added that those powers can be exercised only on the written advice of the Union Cabinet. Similarly, in stating that the Union Ministry for Home Affairs "controls. . .the nationwide police service," the report runs the risk of leading non-specialist readers to believe that the police service in the country takes its orders from the central government, rather than from the state authorities as is in fact the case.
The authors of the report should have been more circumspect in their assessment of the pace and scale of economic liberalization and structural reforms being carried out in the country. They should have qualified their statement that these reforms, begun in 1991, have "continued largely unchanged despite a change of government," by noting the disappointment firequently expressed by many businessmen and economic analysts about the new government's unwillingness to open up certain key areas of economic activity, such as newspaper publishing, insurance and domestic air transport to foreign equity participation.
In its section on the right to life, the report discusses a number of extrajudicial killings. This is of course praiseworthy, but it could have also included a few examples of the punishments meted out by the courts to the perpetrators of such acts. On September, 13, for instance, a sessions judge in Gaya, Bihar, sentenced six policemen to death for murdering a cloth merchant for refusing to accede to their illegal demands for money three years previously. That same week, a magistrate in Delhi sentenced a butcher, Kishori Lai, to death for the murder of two Sikhs during the
113
Critique 1996
anti-Sil^ riots following Indira Gandhi's assassination in 1984. The magistrate also sentenced 89 others to five-year jail terms for diverse crimes, including arson, illegal use of explosives, rioting and looting, carried out in connection with those riots. These convictions were particularly welcomed by civil libertarians who had previously expressed frustration over the failure of the legal process to bring the 1984 rioters to justice. They are a highly significant acknowledgment by the Indian judiciary of the need for accountability for past human rights violations, and as such should have been given much greater prominence in the report's discussion of extrajudicial killings.
On the same subject, the report could also have noted an important order passed by the Delhi High Court on November 18, allowing some 535 widows whose husbands had been killed in the riots to have their informal requests for a proper police inquiry into those deaths treated as a writ petition. The court offered to appoint an amicus curiae to assist it in this case, but that offer was turned down by the applicants, who indicated their desire to appoint a lawyer of their own choice to argue their case.
Another significant omission in the report concerns an order passed by the Supreme Court of India on January 29 for the prosecution of 27 police officers for the murder of four Sikh youths in Punjab in 1994. According to the victims' families, who brought the case to the court's attention, the officers had falsely claimed that the youths died when police fired in self-defense. The court entrusted the case to the Central Bureau of Investigation for further action.
The report has, quite properly, highlighted the laudable role played by the National Human Rights Commission in investigating and adjudicating a wide range of human rights abuses. It could have profitably included some examples of cases in which the commission, besides prosecuting those responsible for abuses, has sought to provide monetary compensation to the victims. On June 30, for instance, it asked the government to pay Rs. 50,000 (approx. US$1,430) to a young man, Jugtaram, who had been castrated while in police custody. Under the commission's ruling, the government could recover the money from the policemen who carried out the castration.
114
India
The report would have done well to mention the National Human Rights Commission's willingness to name state governments which fail to meet their reporting obligations on human rights compliance. In its 1996 annual report submitted to parliament in September, for instance, the commission criticized the government of Jammu and Kashmir for concealing information about human rights abuses in that strife-torn state. The government's action compelled the commission to take up the matter with the state's governor, said the report.
The report's section on fair trials and the judiciary is far too brief. In its discussion of the inaccessibility of legal procedures to the poor, there is no mention at all of the causes for this inaccessibility, namely the prohibitive cost of litigation and the appalling state of government-sponsored legal aid. Nor is there any discussion of the threat the government poses to the independence of the judiciary by its controversial policy of transferring high court judges from one state to another. This policy has provoked increasingly sharp criticism from the bar in recent years on the grounds that it provides the executive with a ready and convenient weapon to punish judges who may be too independent for its liking. Moreover, the policy has, according to its critics, failed to achieve its stated purpose, namely the eradication of corruption in the higher judiciary.
In its treatment of the right to privacy, the report fails to note a landmark judgment delivered by the Supreme Court in December in which it directed the government to lay down guidelines, including procedural safeguards, for telephone taps. In the absence of such guidelines, said the court, wire-taps could amount to a serious invasion of the citizen's right to privacy and a violation of the constitutional guarantee of the rights to life and personal liberty. The court ruled that pending the drafting of the guidelines, all wire-taps must be authorized by a senior officer not below the rank of joint secretary in the government; they could only be in use for up to two months unless expressly renewed by that officer for a further period not exceeding six months. The government was also obliged, said the court, to maintain proper records of all intercepted material, including the names of persons to whom it was disclosed; furthermore, it was required to destroy the
115
Critique 1996
intercepted material as soon as possible after the purpose of the wire-tap had been accomplished.
In the section on Freedom of Speech and Press, the report states that: "[t]he press as a whole champions human rights and criticizes perceived government lapses." This may be true as far as it goes, but it does not adequately address the severe limits placed on the press or the persecution of individual journalists, particularly in areas of conflict. For example, shortly before the May parliamentary elections in Jammu and Kashmir, the state government imposed a ban on any reporting which "directly or indirectly express [ed] lack of faith" in the state or federal constitutions, or was deemed "prejudicial to the unity and integrity of the state and country." The Committee to Protect Journalists recorded 24 incidents of "harassment and threats" and another 20 "attacks" on journalists in 1996, a marked increase over the previous year. In part, these incidents may reflect the lack of a strong central government authority after the May parliamentary elections, enabling political leaders to attack the press with virtual impunity.
The report also fails to note that, despite the liberal regulatory regime governing the press, there are still serious restrictions on access to foreign news agencies. No Indian newspaper is allowed to subscribe directly to any foreign news service, except for financial news and related services. They can obtain these services only through the Press Trust of India (PTI), a news agency owned cooperatively by the country's leading newspaper companies. The PTI's monopoly, granted by the government in 1956, is seen by many as an anomaly, especially in the current climate of increasing liberalization.
The report is similarly remiss in not registering the deep dissatisfaction expressed by many free speech activists over the government's refusal to allow Indian newspapers to enter into agreements with foreign companies for the publication of Indian editions of international newspapers. One such proposed venture, between the Calcutta-based Business Standard and Britain's Pearson Group, which publishes the prestigious Financial Times, was barred by the Union Cabinet in August, even though it had been approved by the government's own Foreign Investment Promotion Board previously. This
116
India
decision was vigorously criticized by several commentators who questioned the government's commitment to freedom of the press.
The report correctly observes that international satellite television, widely received across the country, is gradually eroding the government's monopoly on television. It fails to note, however, that Indian producers of TV programs are not allowed to transmit material to these satellites from Indian soil, but have to do so from other countries, including Hong Kong. This is an unjustifiable restriction on freedom of expression.
In its treatment of the participation of women in the political process, the report contains a significant omission: it makes no mention at all of a controversial bill introduced by the government to reserve one-third of parliamentary seats for women. When the government decided to drop it in the winter session of Parliament, many women MPs accused the government of insincerity of purpose: the bill had been introduced, they said, merely with a view to attracting women's votes in the elections for the Uttar Pradesh legislative assembly, the largest in the country, which were to take place shortly after the measure had been announced. The government continued to insist that the bill would be re-introduced in a future session of Parhament.
The report can also be faulted for not noting an important policy statement made by the Indian government in September on the issue of alimony for divorced Muslim women. Responding to a case brought before the Supreme Court, the government expressed its unwillingness to heed the court's suggestion of enacting a uniform civil code which would compel all husbands (including those from the Muslim community) to pay maintenance to their divorced wives. This policy was strongly criticized by women's rights activists all over the country, who saw it as a cynical attempt on the part of the government to preserve its electoral advantage by not offending Muslim traditionalists, of whom there are a sizeable number.
The report also fails to discuss the government's rejection of a comprehensive law drafted by the National Commission on Women which, as well as introducing a uniform civil code, would also have helped to stop the growing traffic in young Indian girls who are frequently sold against their wishes to elderly Middle Eastern men, by their impoverished
117
Critique 1996
parents. Tiie government's refusal to promote this measure was seen as further evidence of its desire to appease fundamentalist Muslim opinion.
In its treatment of the 1992 Hindu-Muslim clashes in Bombay, the report correctly states that the government of Maharashtra first disbanded and subsequently reinstated an official commission of inquiry. It could have added that when a civil rights group petitioned the Supreme Court against the government's alleged inaction in bringing to justice those responsible for the violence, the court rejected the charge and ruled that the government had taken all reasonable steps to investigate the incidents and prosecute the culprits.
The report cites various estimates for the number of child workers in India, but it omits the estimate provided by the United Nations Children Fund (UNICEF) which, in December, put the figure at 100 miUion, adding that this represented the largest number of child workers in any country in the world. This is a significant omission.
In discussing a December 10 decision by the Supreme Court on child labor, the report should have pointed out that the court ruling on free education applied to children in non-hazardous as well as hazardous industries. The court asked the government to ensure that such children did not work for more than four to six hours a day and received at least two hours of education, at the employer's expense, each day. The court also directed the government to carry out a survey on child labor within six months, set up a separate cell to monitor the practice, and submit a compliance report in one year's time.
118
