Iraq
During 1996, two major developments significantly changed the situation in Iraq. In May, the Iraqi government accepted UN Security Council Resolution (UNSCR) 986, allowing a limited sale of oil under UN control for the first time since 1990. And in September, Iraq staged a military incursion into Arbil in conjunction with the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP), effectively ending its five-year long isolation of the Kurdish region. These events highlighted several difficult issues which have arisen as a consequence of international intervention in Iraq since the Gulf war, to wit: the unpredictable effects of internal and regional political dynamics on the situation in northern Iraq and on human rights in that region, the credibility of international claims of providing protection for this region, and problems with "targeting" sanctions and monitoring humanitarian aid.
This year's State Department report is quite long, but it is nonetheless a disappointment. Except for an outline of the agreement on UNSCR 986 and a detailed description of Iraq's September incursion into Arbil it is largely a reiteration of material from previous years' reports. The UN Special Rapporteur's staff visited Jordan in 1996, and their report appears to be the State Department's main source of new information on Iraqi government-controlled areas. Neither the Special Rapporteur nor any other human rights groups have had access to government-controlled areas of Iraq.
In spite of the acknowledged difficulty in documenting abuses, the State Department states that Iraq's "abysmal record on human rights worsened in 1996." In light of the lack of reliable information, this seems a questionable assertion. Perhaps the authors have in mind the Iraqi government's incursion into northern Iraq at the invitation of the KDP. But in all fairness, the incursion raised as many questions about the nature of international "protection" as it did about Iraqi intentions.
The year 1996 has drawn attention to the increasing ineffìcacy of allied no-fly zones in protecting the Iraqi population from human rights abuses. Since the Gulf War, the declared goal of the no-fly zones has been to protect the Kurds and the Shi'as; the events of September 1996 ended any illusions that the strategy could work. The report erroneously claims that both no-fly zones were imposed in 1992. In fact, a first no-fly zone
133
Critique 1996
was imposed in April 1991 in northern Iraq down to the 36th parallel, and then in August 1992 the second zone was imposed in southern Iraq up to the 32nd parallel. Two years ago the State Department report admitted that in southern Iraq, the no-fly zones, while preventing aerial attacks, had no effect on ground troop movements. This year, the report conceded as much for northern Iraq.
Human Rights Watch points out in its World Report 1997 that the U.S. response to the Iraqi September incursion in the north gave priority to protecting U.S. "vital interests" in the south, ie., the security of the Gulf and its oil fields, by a regional strategy of dual containment in Iraq and Iran. The protection of the Kurds (described by Secretary of Defense William Perry as "a humanitarian interest") was of secondary importance.
As part of its response to the September incursion, the U.S., in conjunction with the U.K., decided to extend the southern no-fly zone northwards to the 33rd parallel — almost as far as Baghdad. No mention of this is made in the report. The extension will do nothing to improve the human rights situation — as the report admits in recognizing that it affords no meaningful protection to civilians from government ground actions. The decision seems to be a signal to indicate where U.S. strategic interests lie, and it has received little international support. France, for example, continues to participate in the southern zone, but only up to the 32nd parallel.
A further significant change in the northern no-fly zone took place at the end of 1996. While it was only implemented on January I, 1997, it seems sufficiently significant to deserve mention, as the guidelines for those preparing the Countiy Reports suggest. The report states that Operation Provide Comfort is "a multinational coalition made up of the United States, United Kingdom, France and Turkey." However, it does not mention that in December 1996, the State Department announced that as of January I, 1997, the designation "Operation Provide Comfort" would no longer be used for overflights of northern Iraq following the closure of the Military Coordination Commission (MCC) in Zakho in September and "the shift of humanitarian assistance in the north under UNSCR 986 to international organizations."
134
Iraq
Two days later, France announced that it would no longer participate in overflights of northern Iraq. Its stated reasons were: "The Turkish and U.S. governments have. . .decided to establish, with the participation of the United Kingdom, a new surveillance system for northern Iraq, exclusively aerial, beginning on January 1, 1997. This new system does not include the humanitarian component initially contained in 'Provide Comfort.' France will therefore not participate in it."
The State Department report also does not mention that the minimal coalition ground presence, represented by the MCC in Zakho, was withdrawn during the Iraqi incursion. Though the report does not allude to the withdrawal of either the MCC or of U.S. intelligence personnel, it does note the evacuation from northern Iraq of all Kurdish and international personnel who worked for U.S. organizations. The Iraqi government excluded those working for foreign organizations from an amnesty announced in September, and issued threats against international and local staff of aid organizations working in northern Iraq. The initial summary section of the report seems to imply that the threats were directed at aid agencies working all over Iraq, and only later does the report clarify that they apply to aid workers in northern Iraq alone.
The government of Iraq seized upon revelations of U.S. covert operations in the north to cast suspicion on the activities of NGOs. The presence of CIA operatives in the north has also complicated matters in terms of the protection allegedly being provided for the region.
The mostly European aid agendes that have stayed are under pressure to leave, and they face increasingly severe constraints on their daily work. The government of Turkey, which faces a Kurdish insurgency, has become suspicious of NGOs, occasionally accusing them of supporting the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK.). Most NGO workers enter the Iraqi Kurdish region through Turkey, but NGOs are not permitted to bring into the country the goods and equipment they need. Since August 1996 the Turldsh government has refused to issue travel visas to NGO staff. Some agendes have managed to reach Iraqi Kurdistan through Syria, but not all have been able to obtain Syrian visas.
After mid-1992, most NGOs active in northern Iraq (with the exception of Care and Oxfam, both of which have since pulled out of the
135
Critique 1996
region) did not sign the Memorandum of Understanding of October 1992 agreed to by the UN and the Iraqi government. As a result Baghdad deems that both local and international NGO staff are operating illegally in that region. If the government were to extend its authority further in northern Iraq, employees of international NGOs might well be at risk.
Thus the withdrawal of these personnel appeared judicious from the U.S. point of view. However, this action added to the difficulties of other international aid agencies which wished to remain — creating fears among their Kurdish staff.
The report accurately describes the conduct of Iraqi troops and their ICDP allies during the attack on Arbil, giving details similar to those included in reports by the Special Rapporteur and Human Rights Watch. Essentially Iraqi forces, with KDP cooperation, used the incursion to target all opposition parties — including the Iraqi National Congress (INC), Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq (SCIRI), the Iraqi National Turkoman Party (INTP), the Islamic Action Organization (lAO) and, of course, the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) — arresting personnel who were still in the Arbil area. On August 31 or September 1, advancing Iraqi forces executed 96 members of Brigade No. 3 of the INCs forces near their camp at Qushtepe. According to Human Rights Watch, 19 INC officers were executed at military headquarters in Arbil. The INTP gave names of 36 of their members who had been arrested, while the lAO said 40 of its members had been arrested and later executed.
These events were a preview of what could be expected from an eventual Iraqi return to the region. However, since the incursion it is unclear who is really in control of the area. Iraqi regular troops have for the most part withdrawn south of Arbil to a line some miles in advance of the position they held before September. There has been no formal agreement between the Iraqi government and the IGDP, which is nominally in control and seems to be juggling pressure from both Baghdad and Washington. However, despite the pullback of Iraqi troops, there is concern that they might have established their own security and intelligence personnel in KDP-controlled areas. Since their presence is not formally acknowledged, it will be very difficult to establish their responsibility for any abuses which occur.
136
Iraq
The internal embargo on KDP-controlled areas seems to have been partially lifted since September 1996, at least where travel and trade are concerned. The report alludes to "some areas" still being subject to embargo, but does not specify that the relaxation appears to apply mainly to the KDP-controlled areas (i.e. Dohuk and most of Arbil govemorates). Reports suggest that the areas of Sulaimaniya govemorate controlled by the PUK are still subject to restrictions.
The UN Special Rapporteur's mandate is confined to monitoring abuses by the government of Iraq. However, according to the guidelines for the Countiy Reports, "actions contrary to basic internationally recognized humanitarian standards by non-govemment elements" should also be discussed. In 1994 and 1995 the State Department report's treatment of abuses committed by the two main Kurdish parties was disappointingly cursory. This year the report is to be commended for acknowledging such non-government abuses.
One must be cautious in assessing information on abuses in northern Iraq, where a climate of rumor and mutual recrimination prevails. As the report points out, the absence of impartial observers is a major problem. However, some important developments are mentioned, including a major attack by the KDP in June 1996 on the Surchi dan, leading to the death of one of its leaders, Hussein Aga al Surchi. In its World Report 1997, Human Rights Watch discusses yet another alleged extrajudicial killing: on January 11,1996 near Arbil, members of the PUK ambushed leaders of the Labor Party for the Independence of Kurdistan, "a small pro-independence Kurdish party." Twenty people died in the attack, including Muhammad Amin al-Hallaq, a well-known activist.
It is similarly difficult to ascertain the number of casualties from several skirmishes between the PUK and KDP in August, September and October of 1996. However, when the report maintains that the fighting resulted in "the deaths of several fighters and civilians" it is probably underestimating the loss of life. The scale of the September-October clashes can be judged from the number of prisoners taken on both sides: the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) reports that 900 are currently held by both the PUK and the KDP.
137
Critique 1996
Unfortunately, the characterization that no impartial court system exists in the Iraqi justice system now applies to the north, where the parties have restored their hold on most of the apparati of justice, administration and finance which they had before the 1992 elections. As Human Rights Watch points out, the PUK and KDP have reverted to a situation where the parties operate not only separate military forces, but also separate secret police and security apparati and separate detention centers.
The State Department report says the Kurdish parties are "considering" exchanging prisoners as a confidence-building measure. However, by April 1997, relatively few prisoners had actually been returned. According to the ICRC, which has been able to visit the detention centers, about 1,500 prisoners, including civilians, were being held by both sides as of February 1997. The ICRC knew of only 100 exchanges up until March. It was reported that 132 prisoners, divided between the two parties, were exchanged in April, but this leaves both parties still holding a large number of prisoners, some from the period of fighting and some detained subsequently.
The division of the region into two spheres of influence has caused problems for Kurds identified with the "wrong" party, some of whom have had their property expropriated and been prevented from returning to their homes. As the report suggests, the scale of this displacement since 1994 is difficult to determine, particularly since many displaced people stayed on with relatives.
The Special Rapporteur quotes figures from the UN Department of Humanitarian Affairs claiming that some 20,000 people have been displaced within Iraq, and an estimated 39,000 fled to Iran during the September-October fighting. The State Department report indicates that after the October ceasefire, most people returned to their homes. And indeed, by January 1997 most of the refugees appear to have returned from Iran. However, information from the ICRC and aid agencies suggests that internal displacement — involving 40,000 people or more — occurred after the October ceasefire agreements, when the two parties consolidated their hold on areas under their control.
138
Iraq
The State Department report discusses the increased ability of Iran and Iraq to act within northern Iraq, but does not mention Turkey in this respect. While its role is somewhat different, it exercises a significant amount of influence in the region, and its role in northern Iraq seems to have further increased in 1996.
The report again plays down concerns about Turkish military incursions into the region, compared to the activities of the PIGC. Both are threatening the rights and safety of local people. A formulaic paragraph is repeated from the last report to cover Turkish military actions. "On several occasions in 1996, Turkish armed forces entered northern Iraq in pursuit of PICK terrorists and bases. Human rights organizations and political organizations charged that these operations resulted in some civilian deaths and destruction of residences. Turkish government authorities stressed that the operation sought to avoid civilian casualties."
Evidence from several sources suggests that since 1991 in some areas near PKIC strongholds along the Turkish border, both sides have attacked civilians, and the Turkish armed forces have bombed and shelled villages. Some residents have been displaced by the conflict. Aid agencies have also experienced frequent disruptions of their work.
As in past years, the report raises the issue of anti-personnel mines in northern Iraq. In a 1996 report the UN Department of Humanitarian Affairs claims that during an incursion in 1995, Turks left behind antipersonnel mines, adding to the millions of mines planted by Iraqi forces.
In December the UNHCR closed its camp at Atroush, which housed some 14,000 Turkish Kurdish refugees. On December 21 the UNHCR issued a statement explaining that "The humanitarian and non-political nature of the camp has been compromised to such an extent that UNHCR is no longer in a position to provide services at this location" — a clear reference to PICIC interference.
The Turkish government has made no secret of its wish to see the camp disbanded and the refugees return home. However, current conditions in southeastern Turkey may deter many refugees from returning. Their option is to remain in Iraqi Kurdistan outside any camp structure; one group has reportedly moved into government-controlled
139
Critique 1996
areas of Iraq. UNHCR has said that it will not set up new permanent camps, but will provide for the refugees individually. If a substantial number opt to remain, it is difficult to see how both aid and protection can be extended to them, considering the frequent Turkish military incursions into the region.
The severe effects of prolonged sanctions on the Iraqi civilian population was a cause for concern in some international and Arab quarters. UNSCR 986 was intended to relieve these pressures by providing a portion of the revenues from the limited sale of oil for the purchase of humanitarian goods.
The Iraqi government's agreement to UNSCR 986 in May is mentioned briefly in the report. Implementation of the resolution was first delayed by objections (mainly by the US and UK) to Iraq's initial implementation plan, submitted in June 1996, and then by the events of September-October in northern Iraq. Oil finally began to flow in December 1996.
There were subsequent disagreements on the freedom of movement of UN observers, Iraqi demands to appoint local UN staff, and the role of NGOs in the north. Delays in dispatching monitors and the Sanctions Committee's slow approval of orders for humanitarian goods meant that by March, no food or other goods had reached any part of Iraq. In early 1997, the Iraqi government made several complaints to the UN about Sanctions Committee delays; deliveries finally began to arrive in early April.
It is too early to say what impact limited oil sales will have on the situation in Iraq. Increasing imports will probably relieve some of the inflationary pressures and devaluation of the dinar which have made it so difficult for the increasingly destitute urban populations to afford the basic necessities of life. In northern Iraq, the implementation of UNSCR 986 is expected to enable the restoration of a system of rations which was interrupted in 1991. Humanitarian agencies expect nutritional levels eventually to rise, while an increased supply of medications and medical equipment may improve the health of the population. However, it is unlikely that the infrastructure will be restored, especially the water, sanitation and electrical systems which have been devastated by the
140
Iraq
economic sanctions of the past seven years. An adequate basic infrastructure is as necessary as food and medicine for the well-being of the population.
The other major long-term issue is how long the UNSCR 986 arrangement will last, and what will come after. Humanitarian agencies are worried that donors seem to be reducing their already meager contributions to UN and NGO aid programs. While the principle that Iraq should pay for itself though oil sales is generally accepted, it is not clear in the short term whether funds will be made available for humanitarian projects such as opening schools and restoring the water and sanitation systems.
The report provides little new information on other human rights abuses in government-controlled areas, except for detailed accounts of alleged arrests and executions in connection with attempted coups and internecine conflict in the Iraqi leadership. In particular, the report chronicles the return from exile and subsequent assassinations of Hussain Kamil and Saddam Kamil in February 1996; the discovery of a coup attempt by the Jordan-based Iraqi National Accord group, allegedly backed by the CIA; and an assassination attempt against Saddam Hussein's son Uday in December 1996. The failure of the security services to find the perpetrators has not prevented them from arresting large numbers of people. Opposition sources suggest that the arrests as well as sporadic fighting continue.
In March 1997, Saddam Hussein rescinded the penalty of cutting off the outer ear of military service deserters and draft-evaders. Al-Qadisiyah, a newspaper that specializes in military affairs, reported that the government decided to release "deserters and shirkers" after they had paid a 500,000 dinar bail and attended a 27-day rehabilitation course.
As the Special Rapporteur and the State Department report both point out, amputation is still the prescribed punishment for a range of crimes, including certain kinds of theft. Recently, however, neither the Special Rapporteur nor Amnesty International has received any reports of such punishments being imposed, leading them to conclude that since 1995 there has been a general decline in brandings and amputations.
141
Critique 1996
There may have been pressures from within the ruling drcle to limit these punishments as counterproductive.
In December 1996, the UN Commission on Human Rights Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances gave details of several recent unconfirmed allegations of disappearances not included in the State Department report. These are allegations only and have not been independently corroborated. As the report says, "[t]hese cases reportedly included government officials who were suspected of trying to locate the whereabouts of persons who disappeared during the Gulf War, persons who openly expressed opposition to government actions in quelling the al-Ramadi uprising in 1995, and those who supported newly-established parties engaged in Islamic activity." The report identified eight cases which reportedly occurred in 1996, and four in 1995. Most of the disappearances reportedly occurred in Baghdad and al-Ramadi. The 1997 State Department report should devote attention to this issue.
142
