Israeli Occupied Territories/ Palestinlw Authority
If the theme of last year's report on the Israeli Occupied Territories was "the peace process has solved human rights problems," the theme of this year's report appears to be "the fight against terrorism justifies human rights violations." Throughout the report, human rights violations are presented in the context of Israel's struggle against political violence. This juxtaposition seems to suggest that given the importance of the ultimate goal, the violations are justified.
The suggestion that human rights violations can be justified by even the most extraordinary situation contradicts a fundamental principle, one which has particular force in the case of those rights from which no derogation is possible, including the right to life and freedom from torture. The Convention Against Torture (which both Israel and the U.S. have signed) states that "no exceptional circumstances whatsoever, whether a state of war or a threat of war, internal political instability or any other public emergency, may be invoked as a justification of torture."
The report describes a wide range of human rights abuses in the context of measures to combat terrorism. In some cases, the report simply states that the measures were taken following bombings. For example, in the section on "Freedom of Speech and Press" we read: "Israel closed for six months at least six colleges, universities and recreational and welfare institutions in Jerusalem and Israeli-controlled areas of the West Bank in March after a series of terrorist incidents. . .[ejducational institutions in the West Bank and Jerusalem also closed for periods of time as a result of internal closures in the West Bank that Israel imposed after terrorist attacl<s... ." Elsewhere the report states that "[t]he government responded to terrorist and security incidents by tightening existing restrictions on movement... ." While these chronologies are correct, the repeated use of such constructions to contextualize human rights abuses suggests that the measures are justified.
Sometimes the justification is even more explicit, as when the report states that: "Israeli authorities demolished eight homes for security reasons... In fact these houses were destroyed to punish the families of
143
Critique 1996
suicide bombers, a measure which clearly amounts to collective punishment.
Most disturbing, given its absolute prohibition in international law, is the contextuahzation of the use of torture and ill-treatment in interrogation. The report states that "Israeli authorities in some cases mistreated prisoners to obtain information on further terrorist attacks" and that "[t]hese methods have been applied against Palestinians suspected of involvement in planning terrorist acts." Again, these constructions imply that under the circumstances, torture is justified.
The report also appears to excuse human rights violations committed by the Palestinian Authority (PA): "[i]n its intensive efforts to counter and prevent terrorism, the Palestinian Authority used excessive force on occasion in its searches of homes, and ordered two opposition newspapers closed." This juxtaposition is ludicrous; it is hard to understand the connection between the suppression of free speech and the legitimate struggle against political violence. Yet the report seems to suggest that the measures are legitimate. The report also states that "[t]here were credible reports that PA authorities mistieated prisoners to obtain information on further terrorist attacks." "Mistreated" is a gross understatement of the facts presented by the report itself. Furthermore, many cases of torture as well as deaths due to torture had absolutely no connection to terrorist attacks.
In blatant disregard of the guidelines for preparing reports, the summary of the human rights situation in the annex on the Occupied Territories begins with a discussion of violence by Islamist groups after only a brief acknowledgment that "[both] Israel and the PA were responsible for serious human rights abuses." Again, while this approach is chronologically correct, it belies the principle — expressed repeatedly in the guidelines — that governments are bound by international law.
The report discusses at length both actual terrorist attacks and planned attacks by various groups which did not occur. While it is important to include these incidents in the report, they should be mentioned only in the introduction and in the section on political and extrajudicial killings. It is irrelevant and manipulative to include them
144
Israeli Occupied Territories/Palestinian Authority
throughout the report in discussions of torture and human rights violations.
The discussion of torture by Israel is characterized by euphemistic language and excuses. As in previous years, the report relies on "credible reports" regarding "widespread abuse, and in some cases torture." In fact, virtually all human rights groups have documented the wide scale and systematic application of measures which constitute torture.
The report continues the pattern of previous years' reports of providing the government's rationale for the use of torture. As in last year's report, with regard to the permission to use more intensive and forceful interrogation methods, the report states that "the Government has approved the continued use of 'special measures,' arguing that they were vital because their use had prevented terrorist attacks." There is no consideration of the response of human rights groups to these claims.
On numerous occasions, both in the section on Israel and in the annex on the Occupied Territories, the report refers to "ticking bomb" cases. For example, the report states that Government Security Services (GSS) interrogators are allowed to use measures which exceed '"moderate physical and psychological pressure' when it is deemed necessary to obtain information that could potentially save Israeli lives in certain 'ticking bomb' cases." This hypothetical situation, in which a detainee knows the whereabouts of a bomb which is about to explode, constitutes the Israeli Government's primary rhetorical justification for using torture in interrogations. The report's repeated references to the "ticking bomb" suggests that torture is used only in the most extreme of situations, and that such use may be justified. In fact, Israel uses the hypothetical "ticking bomb" to justify the systematic torture of thousands of Palestinian detainees. In 1995, the late Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin estimated that 8,000 Palestinians had been subjected to violent shaking in GSS interrogations.
The report states that the High Court authorized the GSS to use "force" against a Palestinian detainee, an "alleged terrorist. . . whom the Israelis believed had information concerning imminent terrorist attacks, making [this a] 'ticking bomb' case." The report fails to mention that on December 24, following over a month of intensive interrogation which the
145
Critique 1996
authorities and the High Court acknowledge included the use of physical force, the detainee was issued a four-month administrative detention order. In other words, the GSS had not succeeded in extracting any information from the detainee which could support a prima facie case of wrongdoing, nor had any "ticking bombs" exploded.
The report fails to follow up on the Israeli Supreme Court decision, cited in last year's report, to issue an injunction against the use of physical force in interrogation. Unfortunately, the court revoked this injunction on January 11, enabling the GSS to continue torturing the aforementioned detainee. The report states that "the show-cause orders [issued by the Supreme Court] constitute some restriction on the use of the method [of forceful shaking]," when in fact the court has never issued a ruling against the wishes of the GSS prohibiting forceful shaking or any other interrogation methods.
Given the extensive documentation of Israel's interrogation methods, including information from official Israeli governmental and judicial sources, the U.S. State Department can state without hesitation that Israel routinely tortures Palestinians in interrogation. Any discussion of torture should be framed in terms of the categorical prohibition on torture in international law, rather than in the context of Israel's euphemisms and ostensible justifications.
Last year's edition of the Critique criticized the State Department's decision to divide the discussion on Israel into two sections: one on the situation inside Israel and an annex on the Occupied Territories. The Critique argued that such a division is artificial and misleading, since many of Israel's human rights violations against Palestinians take place inside Israel. Unfortunately, the structure of the report has not changed. Even events which took place inside Israel are discussed in the annex, and some serious abuses are not mentioned anywhere, including the military court decision to fine four Israeli soldiers less than $0.01 for killing a Palestinian in 1993, or the administrative detention of over 400 Palestinians in facilities inside Israel. Although all GSS interrogations take place inside Israel, the practice of torture and related court cases are only discussed briefly in the main text on Israel. To relegate these issues to the annex on the Occupied Territories suggests that abuses committed in the
146
Israeli Occupied Territories/Palestinian Authority
Occupied Territories can be neatly divorced from events in Israel. It would be more appropriate to address all of Israel's obligations and practices in one chapter, with a separate section on the practices of the Palestinian Authority.
Occasionally, the report simply states — without citing "credible reports" or using any other qualification — that human rights abuses occurred. So, for example, the introduction to the annex asserts that "both Israel and the PA were responsible for serious human rights abuses." The introductory paragraph on the Israeli security forces concludes, "[mjembers of the Israeli security forces committed human rights abuses," and an identical sentence also concludes the paragraph on Palestinian security forces.
But all too often the report relies unnecessarily on "credible sources." In some of these instances, the report itself presents conclusive evidence for its hesitant statements. For example, we read that there were "credible reports that the PA continues to abuse and torture detainees." This is confirmed by the subsequent unqualified assertion that "four Palestinians died in PA custody, two after having been tortured... ." In other instances, the report inejq)licably attributes events the Israeli authorities themselves do not dispute to "credible sources." For example, we read of "credible reports that Israeli undercover units, disguised as Palestinians, operated in Palestinian areas during 1996" and that "an alleged undercover unit shot and killed a 28-year old Palestinian man outside his home in...Jerusalem." In the latter case, the "credible reports" come from the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF). The office of the IDF spokesperson issued an official version of events which confirmed that an undercover Border Police Unit was responsible for the killing. Confirmed facts should be stated without qualification.
The report does not adequately examine the issue of accountability for human rights violations. It neglects to mention, for example, that the Israeli Justice Department's investigation into the killing of a civilian by a Border Police undercover unit was closed due to an "absence of wrongdoing"; or that in February 1996, the Military Advocate General's office closed the investigation into a March 1994 undercover unit killing of six Palestinians in Jabalya, Gaza Strip, due to a "lack of evidence." The
147
Critique 1996
report inexcusably neglects to discuss the July publication of an interview with former GSS officer Ehud Yatom, in which he acknowledged that he was acting on official instructions from Avraham Shalom, then-head of the GSS, when he murdered two Palestinian bus hijackers in 1984. Nor does the report mention that the government initiated no action in response to the revelation of these extrajudicial executions. That Yatom was granted immunity by government authorities for two extrajudicial executions constitutes a serious human rights violation, and it ought to be discussed. By failing to provide updates on extrajudicial killings from previous years, the report ignores State Department guidelines.
With regard to the Palestinian Authority's accountability for human rights violations, the report correctly states that "[f]ive members of the Palestinian security forces who allegedly killed suspected Palestinian collaborator Muhammad Al-Jundi in Gaza in 1995 have not yet been tried for the killing... ." However, with regard to deaths in custody, it is misleading to state that "[t]he PA disciplined the officers involved in three of the four deaths." In fact, the circumstances of these disciplinary procedures — extremely rapid prosecution and no investigation into whether they were following orders of superiors — suggest a cover-up rather than genuine accountability. On the conviction of three coast guards for the death by torture of Mahmoud Jmaiel, the report does state that "[t]he Mandela Institute for Political Prisoners alleges that the three .. .officers did not have adequate legal representation or time to prepare their case." These claims, together with the issues regarding the responsibility of their superiors, should be stated with regard to all the cases of deaths in detention.
In the case of 10 Bir Zeit students whom the Palestinian High Court ordered released, the report does state that "Senior PA officials.. .ignored and failed to enforce the order in a timely fashion." However, it does not mention that the High Court judge who issued the ruling was removed from his position. Judicial independence is crucial to ensuring accountability for human rights violations, and the judge's ouster should have been mentioned.
In the section on human rights monitoring, the report would have done well to mention that a social worker for the Palestine section of
148
Israeli Occupied Territories/Palestinian Authority
Defense of Children International was placed in administrative detention. In general, the report's treatment of administrative detention is inadequate and evasive. For example, it excuses the administrative detention of Ahmad Qattamesh, now held without charge or trial for over four years, "to enable the Government to prepare a case against him." In discussing the deficiencies of the appeal of administrative detention orders, the report fails to note that since August detainees have boycotted the process. At present, administrative detentions are carried out with no judicial oversight whatsoever.
The report also fails to mention the death of Nahed Dahlan from Gaza, who apparently committed suicide in August after being summoned for a week of nightly interrogations by the Palestinian Intelligence.
In its discussion of the violent events of September, the report mistakenly attributes all casualties to clashes between armed Israeli and Palestinian security forces. "Both sides used excessive force," the report concludes. However, in the incident at the Dome of the Rock complex in Jerusalem, Israeli police used live ammunition, rubber bullets and clubs, killing three Palestinians and injuring over 100; no Palestinian security force members were involved. This particular incident, which was not a battle between the two security forces, should be discussed separately from the other events of September.
The report does a good job of discussing discrimination against Palestinians citizens in a wide variety of areas. Following a discussion of restrictions on residency rights of Palestinians in Jerusalem, the report correctiy states that "[n]o such restrictions are applied to Israeli citizens." The report also discusses discrimination against Palestinians in the imposition of travel restrictions and curfews, and in the right to a fair trial.
As last year's edition of the Critique pointed out, the State Department report no longer characterizes the transfer of Palestinian detainees to prisons inside Israel as a violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention, nor does it indicate that Israel is not recognized as having sovereignty over any of the Occupied Territories. The report's decreasing references over the years to applicable international human rights and humanitarian law is unfortunate; it suggests that diplomatic negotiations
149
Critique 1996
between Israelis and Palestinians have made international standards irrelevant.
The United States is a central actor in the diplomatic process between Israel and the Palestinian Authority. Its financial and political investment in Israel and in the peace process affects its ability to report objectively on human rights violations. The report certainly provides a great deal of accurate information and states conclusively that Israel and the PA perpetrate serious human rights abuses. At the same time, however, it is seriously flawed by its apparent acceptance of the euphemisms and excuses which both sides invoke to justify their human rights violations.
150
