ICenya
With the approach of muhi-party elections in late 1997, the Kenyan government is as determined as ever to silence its critics and to flout internationally recognized human rights. During 1996, dozens of peaceful opposition and civic meetings were disrupted by government authorities, who were often dressed in riot gear and used tear gas. In one such incident, 21 members of a human rights organization were arrested when they tried to meet and jailed for 19 days before bail was set. The government continued to arrest and imprison journalists critical of the regime, to fine them and pressure them to reveal their sources. Church officials who called for constitutional reforms and fair elections were accused of subversive activities and planning to indte ethnic clashes, and NGOs that promoted civic education were regularly accused of being "anti-Kenyan" and agents of unnamed foreign entities. In September 1996, the government charged several leading political and human rights activists with engineering a "guerrilla plot" to overthrow the government and assassinate President Moi.
The 1996 State Department report details each of the governmental and police abuses described above, and it admirably chronicles many more. In particular, the report offers illuminating discussions relating to infringements on freedom of assembly, speech, and the press. However, this year's report continues to suffer from the same weakness as found in the 1994 and 1995 reports. The evaluation offered in the 1995 Critique holds for the most recent report as well: "it takes a laundry-list approach to the recitation of abuses instead of providing an overarching framework within which to analyze and understand these disconnected facts." This weakness of the State Department's reports on Kenya is particularly troubling in light of the approaching multi-party elections.
Placing events in the historical and political context — specifically, presenting a more coherent analysis of the institutionalized hostility for the rights of Kenyans opposed to the government — would have made this chronicle of seemingly random events more valuable. After Kenya gained its independence in 1963, it was ruled effectively as a one-party state for almost 30 years. It was not until 1991, after millions of dollars of foreign assistance had been withheld, that President Daniel arap Moi reluctantly agreed to allow the formation of opposition parties. The first
151
Critique 1996
multi-party elections were held in 1992. As the State Department's 1996 report notes, the "1992 presidential and parUamentary elections were marked by violence, intimidation, fraud, and other irregularities... ." President Moi and his ruling party, KANU, retained their positions of power. The next presidential and parliamentary elections are scheduled for late 1997. In a significant error of omission, the 1996 State Department report makes no mention of the upcoming elections. This suggests an unwillingness to point out the connection between the elections and the repression suffered by opposition leaders, journalists critical of the government, human rights activists and proponents of civic education. The following passage is typical of the report's failure to place events within a larger context:
In a 1-week period in mid-October, Lokitau police broke up a civic education seminar on voting. . . , Turkana police disrupted a civic education seminar sponsored by the Catholic Justice and Peace Commission, Gachako poUce dispersed a meeting to inaugurate a new [opposition party] office, and ICitui police disrupted a dvic education meeting and detained and allegedly beat M.P. Charity Ngilu and two female journalists.
The report goes on to list several other examples of dvic education workshops and a "Values of Democracy" seminar that were halted by the police.
Similarly, the report notes that "[s]ecurity forces continued to harass, follow, inconvenience, and occasionally briefly detain opposition [members of parliament] and other government critics" and that "[t]he Government continued to. . .block opposition leaders' access to their supporters and electronic media." While such flagrant abuses are always troubling, they are particularly egregious when a country is preparing for parliamentary elections; as such, they need to be understood and criticized in context.
The laundry-list approach highlights another deficiency of the report. More than once, a recital of abuses is accompanied by a sentence whereby the State Department distances itself from the topic, and thereby subtiy
152
Kenya
downplays the gravity of the abuses. For example, in its discussion of police torture, the State Department states, "Several persons died in police custody, reportedly as a result of torture" (emphasis added). The report then discusses several examples of people who died while in police detention, whose autopsies revealed that the cause of death was severe internal bleeding brought on by beatings while in custody. With such categorical evidence there seems no good reason for the State Department's conclusions to be so qualified.
Curiously, the report also softens its criticism of abuses perpetrated by members of the youth wing of the ruling party, I<ANU. After noting the lack of investigation into the beating death of a young man by ICANU youth, the report says only: "Opposition supporters claim that [members of the KANU youth] usually operate with tacit or explicit police approval." In a subsequent discussion of police torture, the report dtes an allegation by a woman that she was detained and raped by KANU youth; it goes on to say that "a number of similar incidents have been reported in Nakuru, with police making no effort to intervene or prevent." Later, in a discussion of attacks on journalists, the report recounts two violent attacks by KANU youth on journalists, and acknowledges that the police offered no protection in either case: "Nakuru is notorious for its rampant and unrestrained KANU youthwingers and lack of police interference, verging on œlïusion" (emphasis added). To acknowledge the repeated failure of the authorities to interfere when KANU "youthwingers" commit serious abuses, but then to downplay the matter by saying that it merely verges on collusion diminishes the report's credibility on the topic. The abuses by "youthwingers" demonstrate the need to explain the relationship between recent patterns of abuse and the upcoming elections, since the KANU youthwingers often target opposition candidates.
In an unfortunate change from years past, the 1996 report does not provide numbers of specific abuses. For example, the report notes that the government continued to restrict the right of peaceful assembly but that the "number of meetings dispersed was substantially fewer than in 1995"; "[o]vert harassment and occasional detention of journalists continued but at a reduced rate from the previous year"; and "the number of opposition M.P.'s arrested for sedition or incitement decreased." If the number of
153
Critique 1996
M.P.'s arrested is only two or three fewer than last year, the significance of the lower number is minimal. While the report does provide a statistic for meetings dispersed by the police in the first nine months of 1996, it compares the statistic to the number of meetings dispersed in all of 1995. A comparison of equivalent periods would be more appropriate.
Similarly, some sweeping statements need to be qualified or supported with evidence and a clear definition of terms. According to the report, the "Government continued to harass and intimidate the political opposition, although less frequently than in 1995." It is not clear from this how the State Department quantifies harassment and inrimidation. Does it refer to detention and questioning by the police? Or does it mean that fewer opposition activists were followed, fewer had their phones tapped, or their correspondence read and documents seized? The statement quoted above seems particularly odd given the State Department's acknowledgment earlier in the report that "[s]ecurity forces continued to employ various means of surveillance, including a network of informants to monitor the activities of opposition politicians and human rights advocates."
The report's discussion of governmental attitudes toward international and non-govemmental investigations of alleged violations of human rights is marred by significant omissions. While this section of the report lists several "well-organized and active human rights organizations" and praises specific examples of their achievements, it does not mention that numerous NGO members were arrested during the year, or that a leading figure of one of the most outspoken NGOs (Release Political Prisoners) was murdered under circumstances that suggest government involvement. The structure of the report tends to undermine the significance of these events. Although the arrests and assassinations are mentioned in earlier sections of the report, failing to refer to them in a discussion of government attitudes toward NGOs minimizes the severity of official repression of the NGO sector. Indeed, the only reference in this section of the report to the government's frequently negative attitude toward NGOs is the first clause in the following statement: "While the Government often criticized domestic and international human rights NGOs, it also made some efforts to reach out and engage them." Arresting
154
Kenya
21 members of RPP and holding them in jail for 19 days before setting bail amounts to significantly more than mere criticism. Moreover, accusing NGOs involved in civic education of being "anti-Kenyan" and agents of unnamed foreign entities amounts to more than "criticism." If the government were honestly interested in fostering human rights and engaging with human rights organizations, it would follow through on President Moi's promise of May 1996 to replace the Public Order Act with a Peaceful Assembly Act, which would allegedly liberalize the right to freedom of assembly and association in Kenya.
The report is grossly misleading when it states that a "large pool of attorneys represent the poor and human rights defendants without charge." While many outstanding lawyers try to make time to represent such clients without charge, the number of such lawyers is woefully inadequate to meet the need of a huge number of indigent clients. Moreover, as the State Department itself acknowledges earlier in its report, "free legal aid is not usually available outside Nairobi." The State Department is also incorrect in stating that defendants are at least entitled to government-provided legal counsel in capital cases. A large number of accused Kenyans, even when facing the death sentence, are tried without the benefit of legal counsel. According to Amnesty International, the majority of offenders convicted of the common charges of "robbery with violence or attempted robbery with violence and sentenced to death do not have legal representation because they cannot afford lawyers." To suggest otherwise gravely minimizes the significant problem of inadequate legal representation for thousands of Kenyans.
Despite these deficiencies, the State Department report should be commended for its analysis of the government's newly created Standing Committee on Human Rights. According to the report:
The Committee does not have sufficient funding to track human rights cases and investigate complaints. Moreover, its attention to mob violence, human rights education, and its lack of authority over government officials has led some observers to question its objectives and ability to affect the human rights situation.
155
Critique 1996
Yet even here, the statement is not as forthright as it should have been. Rather than citing "some observers," the report should have used the active voice to call into question the objectives and the ability of the commission. Nevertheless, this criticism is a testament to the fact that the State Department is not taking ostensible human rights initiatives by the Kenyan government at face value, and this is to be applauded. The report should also be praised for those instances where it goes beyond government statistics, juxtaposing them with statistics compiled by the Kenyan Human Rights Commission (KHRC) and other human rights organizations. For example, KHRC statistics are cited in discussions of lethal force in the apprehension of criminals, mob violence and police torture and brutality.
Another high point of the report is its presentation of thorough statistics and information regarding the deplorable state of Kenyan prisons. The report rightly rejects the government's claim that the life-threatening conditions in prisons are simply due to insufficient resources, attributing such conditions instead "in part to the Government's unwillingness to address deficiencies in the penal system." The report is correct in rejecting the official line when it comes to confinement policies in the prisons:
Officially, there is separate confinement for men, women, and children. However, there are cases in which men and women have been put in the same cells, and youths (as young as early teenagers) are frequently kept in cells with adults in overcrowded prisons and remand centers.
With some facilities overcrowded by several hundred percent, and increasing incidences of rape and AIDS, as the report documents, the Kenyan government is clearly failing to protect the human rights of its growing prison population.
The report's coverage of arbitrary arrest and pre-trial detention is also admirable, addressing several key issues in a forthright manner. The Preservation of Public Security Act empowers the government to detain
156
Kenya
a person indefinitely without charge or trial if it is deemed necessary for "the preservation of public security," and the Chiefs Authority Act allows local officials, called "chiefs," to restrict a person's movement without trial. Not surprisingly, over the years these powers have been used by authorities to suppress critics of the government. Recognizing the potential for continued abuse of these privileges, the State Department investigated whether any persons had been detained pursuant to either of these repressive acts this year. The State Department, which reported no such detentions in 1996, should be commended for tracking the application of these laws.
However, the State Department should be taken to task for not placing greater emphasis on the fact that prisoners "may be visited by family members and attorneys only at the discretion of the State." Given the government's propensity to detain its critics, sometimes holding them "from several days to as long as several months" as the report notes, the ability of the government to deny lawyers and family members access to prisoners is a powerful tool in the government's arsenal for suppressing dissent. This is especially true in a penal system that condones the torture of prisoners.
The State Department should be commended for its discussion of abuses suffered by women in Kenya specifically as a result of their gender. Though the report cites police statistics concerning violence against women, it correctly surmises that such statistics "are probably under-reported. . .since social mores deter women from going outside their families or ethnic groups to report sexual abuse." The report addresses the ambivalence of both traditional culture and the judicial system on the seriousness of spousal rape, and it provides several specific examples of "both legal and actual discrimination" against women. Importantly, the report identifies several NGOs active in the field of women's rights.
The report does a fine job, too, in its discussion of the challenges faced by Kenyan children. By linking high dropout rates with exorbitant tuition fees it recognizes a problem faced by many ordinary Kenyan families. As the report notes, "the shortage of schools also obviates the legally required universal schooling." Also of significant import is the report's focus on the growing problem of homeless street children, the
157
Critique 1996
prevalence of female genital mutilation, and child rape and molestation as "rapidly growing human rights abuses." The State Department is to be commended for focusing on these problems.
Overall, the State Department's 1996 report on Kenya provides many illustrative examples of the range of human rights abuses suffered by Kenyans. It does not shy away from identifying serious problems faced by critics of the government and the disenfranchised. However, the impact of the report is undermined by its failure to place the government's abuses within a broad political context, particularly with regard to the upcoming elections, and by distancing itself from direct criticism of some of the abuses it describes.
158
