Liberia
^ I'^he 1996 State Department report is generally accurate in JL describing the extensive violence that continued to ravage Liberia. It is less successful in noting the frequency of attacks directed against political figures and in examining the causes of the violence, and it fails to provide the historical, political and legal context necessary for a comprehensive analysis. Instead, as in previous years, it characterizes the crisis in Liberia as uncontrollable savagery caused solely by ethnic factionalism. For example, the report states, "[f]actionally affiliated Government forces, factional forces, and agents were responsible for numerous human rights abuses." It goes on to say: 'The factions committed summary executions, torture, individual and gang rapes, mutilations and cannibalism." One may conclude from this that Liberia is a country where there is nobody in charge who can properly be held accountable for the violations.
To understand the present civil strife in Liberia, it is important to aclcnowledge the historical link between Liberia and the United States. The original, deep-rooted connection between Liberia and the United States has helped the elite, descended from the freed American slaves who founded Liberia, maintain economic, social, and political control over the country's indigenous populations. The result was a climate of envy and distrust, which culminated in the 1980 coup that toppled President William Tolbert's True Whig party and brought to power Samuel IC Doe and the People's Redemption Council. Doe, an ethnic ICrahn, consolidated his power by appointing Krahns to major government positions and suppressing other ethnic groups. U.S. military and economic aid sustained the Doe government and exacerbated the existing tensions in the country. When the dvil war broke out in 1989, several factions fought for control of the country.
The largest of these factions is the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL) led by Charles Taylor. The NPFL consists of Mano and Gio peoples. The United Liberation Movement for Democracy in Liberia (ULIMO) is Liberia's second largest faction and is divided into ULIMO-K and a breakaway group, ULIMO-J. The leader of ULIMO-K, Alhaji Kromah, is an ethnic Mandingo and a Muslim. Many of the group's members are former Doe government officials and army officers. NPFL
159
Critique 1996
and ULIMO-K joined forces in 1996. Ethnic ICrahns, led by Roosevelt Johnson, make up ULIMO-J. The Liberia Peace Council (LPC) also consists mainly of Krahns, as does the Armed Forces of Liberia (AFL), the country's former national army. ULIMO-J, LPC and AFL are referred to as the joint ICrahn forces. The Lofa Defense Fund (LDF) is a small faction that holds no significant territory, and the Central Revolutionary Council (CRC) is an offshoot of the NPFL. The report makes no mention of the relationship between Doe and the United States, nor does it sufficiently discuss the various factions vying for power. This is unfortunate since the United States' continued support of Doe's repressive regime, and its refusal to denounce his promotion of ethnic conflict and human rights abuses, are among the principal causes of the country's seven-year civil war.
Instead of explaining the current human rights situation in Liberia, the report simply enumerates abuses committed by the various factions. This approach tends to lead the reader to view the situation in Liberia as too complicated and confusing for rational analysis. Moreover, the report is so intent on painting the picture of a country sunk in chaos that it overlooks a number of promising developments, such as the emergence of the Liberian Alliance of Seven Political Parties. The AlUance is not affiliated with any armed faction and indicates the potential for Liberian civilians to become constructively involved in the political process. It is a civilian group of seven separate registered political parties that joined in a coalition in November 1996 to nominate candidates for the general and presidential elections in May 1997. The report's failure to acknowledge the Alliance is consistent with its tendency to ignore civilian efforts to promote democracy.
As in previous years, the report praises the Economic Community of West African States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) for its attempts to maintain the Abuja Peace Accord and to control the various armed factions in Liberia. However, credible sources reported that ECOMOG soldiers did nothing to prevent or stop the fighting that erupted in the capital, Monrovia, in April and May. According to the UN, ECOMOG justified its non-intervention by claiming that the violence was a factional matter. ECOMOG also declared that its lack of manpower and resources
160
Liberia
prevented it from assuming a more active role. The report should have noted that ECOMOG's failure to stop the fighting is a clear violation of its mandate as a peacekeeping force. ECOMOG was also unwilling to prevent the mass movement of fighters in and out of Monrovia, and completely withdrew from the towns of Gbamga, Bo, Tienne and Sinje. In September 1996, 20 people were massacred in Sinje. ECOMOG has a mandate to investigate such crimes. However, even though an investigation by the UN Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) revealed that ULIMO-K fighters were responsible for the massacre, there have been no arrests.
Curiously, the report states that there have been no confirmed accounts of ECOMOG forces committing human rights abuses, yet it refers to some ECOMOG soldiers participating in looting during the fighting in April and May. According to the Liberian human rights community, some individual ECOMOG soldiers were involved in purchasing many of the looted items, and in trading goods with the Congo Defense Fund (CDF). ECOMOG soldiers may even have provided weapons to fighters. There was also an unconfirmed UN report that an ECOMOG soldier severely beat a street child. Such misdeeds would violate the 1995 Abuja Peace Accord as well as ECOMOG's obligation as a peacekeeping force to remain neutral and facilitate the country's reintegration.
The report does not mention that in August 1996, in response to the failures of ECOMOG, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) assigned a new field commander, General Malu from Nigeria, to oversee the operation and restore discipline. He has reportedly been successful in disarming fighters in Monrovia and throughout the countryside in conformity with the 1996 Abuja Peace Accord.
The report does not recognize a worrisome new development, the emergence in early 1996 of the CDF as a shadow military faction headed by former members of the AFL. The Liberian human rights community reports that the CDF is an offshoot of, or at least is affiliated with, either ULIMO-K or the NPFL, which supplies it with arms and ammunition. Since its emergence in early 1996 the CDF has been responsible for a pattern of ceasefire violations and human rights abuses, such as an
161
Critique 1996
ambush by CDF members on Bomi Highway in December in which six people were Idlled. The State Department's silence on the CDF is unfortunate because its activities seriously threaten the peace process, especially since it is not a signatory to the Abuja Agreement.
The report accurately states that the civil war has taken an immense toll on Liberia's civilian population, noting, for example, violence against women that is widespread, institutionalized and committed with official impunity. However, the report is full of contradictions when it attempts to assign responsibility for specific violations. For example, it says that there were no confirmed accounts of disappearances committed by the AFL, the Liberian National Transitional Government (LNTG), the police or security forces. Yet in the very next sentence we read that "[t]he major factions were also responsible for many unexplained disappearances... ." This conclusion goes against the wealth of information from Liberian human rights advocates indicating that the AFL, LNTG, the police and security forces are linked to all the factions and may therefore be considered responsible for forced disappearances and other human rights violations.
The report asserts that the LPC and NPFL forces have been accused of various human rights abuses against civilians such as beatings, torture and killings, and throughout the report there are many general statements referring to all the major factions participating in cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, directed especially toward women, children and the elderly. Regrettably, very few concrete examples are provided. Although the report admits that NPFL forces are undisciplined and are responsible for confiscating and stealing food intended for starving civilians, there is no mention of the Bloun Town massacre of December 1996 perpetrated by ULIMO-J fighters in which 11 people were mutilated and killed. Nor is there any mention of the civilians Idlled in Western Liberia because they were caught in fighting between the CDF and ULIMO-J. Customary principles of international humanitarian law require that fighters distinguish at all times between combatants and civilians, that only military targets be attacked, and that precautions be taken to avoid harming civilians. The failure of the CDF and ULIMO-J even to attempt to comply with these rules resulted in needless civilian casualties, and the
162
Liberia
two groups should be condemr\ed for this serious breach of humanitarian law. Attacks against hospitals by the warring factions revealed a shameless disregard for the internationally recognized principle of medical neutrality. Liberia is a party to the 1949 Geneva Conventions and the warring parties must be made to comply with common Article III of the Convention, which prohibits the following: terrorizing the civilian population, torture and humiliating treatment, murder, unjust imprisonment and civilian hostage-taking during an internal armed conflict.
The report downplays human rights abuses committed by the LNTG. According to the Liberian Alliance of Seven Political Parties, in 1996 the LNTG II and III Government Forces indiscriminately killed thousands of innocent men, women and children and were responsible for mass looting and destruction of property. Much of the violence was politically motivated. For example, when Roosevelt Johnson refused to turn himself over to authorities in April after the LNTG accused him of murder, NPFL and ULIMO-K forces attempted to arrest him forcibly. They were then attacked by ULIMO-J fighters who received support from the AFL and LPC. In December, Charles Davis, Special Assistant to the Minister of Education, was allegedly abducted and murdered by the NPFL because he was perceived as a political enemy. Every faction targeted individuals believed to be affiliated with or supporting opposing forces. Even after the ceasefire, according to Alliance reports, killings continued throughout the country.
The report does not cite the murders and decapitation of two young women in the neighborhood of Congotown in July by unknown persons. Nor does the report cite the August murder of Seh Vincent, a Bomi County legislator, in the Gardnerville neighborhood; the murders and subsequent burning of residents of Sayon Town in September; and the arson attack on a small business in Paynesville, all by unknown groups or persons. Contrary to the State Department's statement that cannibalism was widely practiced, there have been no confirmed reports of this practice, although it was common in April for NPFL forces to wave human body parts in front of civilians to intimidate them and discourage them from supporting other factions. These acts seriously threatened the
163
Critique 1996
fragile peace process, undermined the security of Monrovia as a safe haven, and jeopardized the lives of thousands of civilians.
Other incidents not mentioned in the report include ongoing fighting between ULIMO-J's two splinter groups and the LPC and NPFL which threatened the lives of many citizens because the fighters did not spare noncombatants. The factional conflicts have severely limited the movement of the civilian population and has led to the exodus of thousands of people from the country. An estimated 60,000 have been left homeless by the fighting in Monrovia, and virtually every home, business, hospital and office building has been looted and destroyed.
The report explains that the various factions used forced labor to exploit natural resources such as timber, but it downplays the fact that all factions forcibly recruited men, women and children for combat roles. The warring parties exploited child soldiers in particular as scouts. The UN indicates that faction commanders use both alcohol and drugs to control and manipulate child soldiers, creating an atmosphere in which children roam the streets looting and harassing civilians. The Convention on the Rights of the Child stipulates that children should be respected and protected from indecent assault and that warring parties must provide children with the care and aid they require. By using children as combatants, the factions in Liberia have failed to abide by international human rights and humanitarian law.
The report pays little attention to the situation of refugees. In the section on freedom of movement we read that there are many Liberian refugees in neighboring West African countries, but there is no mention of the fact that many fleeing the country have not succeeded in finding refuge. The report is silent on the approximately 3,000 to 4,000 Liberian refugees who fled the country on a leaking Nigerian tanker. Bulk Challenger. After being turned away by the Ghanaian government the tanker wandered from port to port. Ghana finally agreed to accept the refugees after foreign governments promised assistance. There are also some 123,000 Sierra Leonean refugees in Liberia who have suffered in the war.
Two other noteworthy incidents in which Liberian refugees were refused assistance are also omitted from the report. The first incident
164
Liberia
involved 150 refugees on the ship Victory Re^, which remained at sea for three days after its passengers were refused the right to seek asylum and access to shore by the government of Sierra Leone. Only Sierra Leone nationals were allowed to disembark. The second incident involved a Russian tanker, Zolotitsa, carrying 434 passengers from Liberia, Ghana, Nigeria, Guinea and Sierra Leone. After being denied permission to dock in Togo and Ghana and drifting at sea for three weeks, the tanker was forced to return to Monrovia.
The report makes no mention of a radio announcement by NPFL leader, Charles Taylor, in which he stated that it would be a criminal act for any vessel or airline to transport any Liberian out of the country. This statement represents a further hindrance to the movement of civilians, in violation of the country's 1986 Constitution.
The report touches briefly on prison conditions and the existence of clandestine jails established by the warring factions. But there is no mention of the absence nationwide of proper detention and correctional facilities. Monrovia Central Prison has been only partially rebuilt since being destroyed during the fighting in April and May. Since the government is unable to feed prisoners, many have been allowed to go free.
Except for a brief reference to the Supreme Court there is very little on the administration of justice. The report neglects to point out that the judges on the bench, all nominees of the various factions, were unqualified for the position. The Liberian Bar Association did recommend qualified individuals, but the factions reportedly refused to appoint them. According to the Justice and Peace Commission, a local NGO affiliated with the National Catholic Secretariat, the courts are gradually reof)ening, but they are still filled with factional appointees, many of whom have no training in the law and have participated in serious abuses. To make matters worse, the government has not provided financial or logistical support for the justice system. It is therefore imperative that honest and competent judges and other judicial officials be appointed.
There is widespread lack of public confidence in the local security forces because they act as agents of the various factions and operate under the control of the fighters or unqualified personnel. Law enforcement
165
Critique 1996
agents, therefore, cannot be counted on to protect human rights. The report says that police officers took bribes because they had not received salaries all year; this is true, and the police were not the only public servants who did not receive wages. The Alliance of Seven Political Parties reports that many other government workers have also not received salaries for over a year. The Alliance charges that members of the transitional government have appropriated public funds for their personal use.
The report seriously understates the problems faced by humanitarian relief missions. During the April-May crisis, UN vehicles and equipment were stolen and the offices of the Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) and the World Health Organization (WHO) as well as UNOMIL's warehouses were looted. None of the stolen property has been returned. For most of the year, all the factions restricted the movement of relief workers attempting to transport food, water and other supplies to civilians in Monrovia and throughout the countryside. In an October 1996 report the UN Department of Humanitarian Affairs (DHA) noted the detention and harassment of an inter-agency humanitarian assessment team by ULIMO-K fighters in Cape Mount County. The team was released after DHA, UNOMIL and ECOMOG pressured the high command of the ULIMO-K and ULIMO-J to intervene. During most of 1996, rival ULIMO factions denied access to Cape Mount County to humanitarian agencies. As a result, hundreds of women, children, and elderly persons died of starvation and lack of medicine. In September, a memorandum of understanding between the Chiefs of Defense Staffs and Field Commanders of the rival factions was signed, guaranteeing safe passage for relief workers into areas controlled by the factions. However, the factions have not abided by the memorandum of understanding, and relief workers continue to be harassed and threatened. In one instance, in October, four CARE staff members were arrested and accused of espionage by the National Security Agency. They were later released after negotiations with the DHA. Also in October, vehicles and equipment belonging to the World Food Program and the Lutheran World Federation were seized, their staff harassed and detained. There were also reports that ECOMOG troops harassed human rights workers.
166
Liberia
At a feeding center in Vonzula village, OXFAM workers were forced to serve as porters for fighters in the village until a village elder negotiated their release. ULIMO-J troops, objecting to an OXFAM cholera center, halted construction of the building. Again village elders intervened, and the construction was allowed to continue.
Local NGO offices were not immune to factional violence. The branch offices of Liberia Watch for Human Rights in Buchanan, Tubmanburg and Senji, and the offices of the Catholic Justice and Peace Commission were looted. All furniture and equipment were stolen. One of Liberia Watch's representatives in Tubmanburg was killed by ULIMO-J fighters. Many local human rights activists had to seek shelter in the ECOMOG base when the fighting erupted in April. Some international relief personnel were also evacuated during this period, while others who stayed maintained only skeleton staffs.
The report states that freedom of the press was "generally exercised in Monrovia," but goes on to present considerable evidence to the contrary. It mentions that several radio stations were looted and destroyed during the fighting in April and May, and that a number of journalists were arrested, detained and beaten for writing articles disparaging NPFL members. Yet the report also claims that the press was generally able to operate freely, even if this freedom was limited in a significant way.
The list of attacks on the media is a long one: there were threats against newspapers for publishing pictures of the bloody April events; 90% of media establishments were looted and set on fire; and the ELCM and the ELWA radio stations as well as the offices of the New Democrat and the Inquirer independent newspapers were burned down. Many other independent newspapers and radio stations, including stations operated by religious organizations, were destroyed, as were the offices of the Press Union of Liberia. It is suspected that the NPFL is responsible for the attacks since only the NPFL-owned radio station and newspaper remained intact. The report makes no mention of the Press Union of Liberia's courageous efforts to defend the rights of all Liberians by exposing corruption and human rights abuses.
167
Critique 1996
As a resuit of the attacks on the press there was a complete breakdown in mass communication throughout the country. In particular, local journalists working for international news organizations were singled out as targets. For example, James Seitua and Stanton Peabody of the Daily Observer were imprisoned in January by the former director of the National Police, Joseph Tate, and Nyenati Allison, a reporter with the Associated Press and the BBC was forced to flee Liberia with his family after he was threatened and harassed by both the NPFL and ULIMO-J. The Press Union of Liberia is calling for international assistance to help rebuild Liberia's independent press.
The 1996 report is very cautious in its discussion of threats directed at the clergy for speaking out on human rights abuses committed by the warring parties and for providing shelter to civilians seeking refuge. In April, the home of the Catholic Archbishop, Michael Kpakala Francis, was attacked. The Archbishop, along with two other clergymen, was harassed and held at gun-point by three separate armed groups who demanded money and automobiles. Many priests have been forced to leave the country, and many Catholic institutions were looted or damaged during Easter week. Nuns in several convents have been harassed and intimidated, while in Monrovia, churches and missions were ransacked. Under the command of the former police chief, affiliated with the NPFL, the police forged the tities for vehicles owned by the Episcopal Church and appropriated them for their own use.
Finally, the State Department report fails to discuss election preparations and efforts to secure an arms embargo and disarmament. It also fails to provide a detailed analysis of the role of UNOMIL. In November, the UN Security Council extended UNOMIL's mandate until March 1997, and in December, it appointed a new Chief Military Observer. UNOMIL's mandate requires that it assist ECOMOG in implementing the Abuja Agreement by facilitating disarmament and demobilization efforts, repatriating refugees, and investigating ceasefire and human rights violations. UNOMIL's work is hindered, however, by insufficient personnel and an inadequate budget. During the April crisis, UNOMIL staff was drastically reduced. In addition, the Security Council has been hesitant to authorize additional funds to the Mission given the
168
Liberia
continued lack of security in the country. As a result, UNOMIL has been operating with minimal resources and it is not clear if the UN has appointed the two additional UNOMIL human rights officers as mandated.
In keeping with the renewed Abuja Peace Accord, a UN technical survey team arrived in Liberia in December and drafted recommendations for establishing inclusive free and fair elections, but the report makes no mention of this significant development. There are many concerns that the election will be fraudulent because all factions have representatives on the election commission, which is headed by an NPFL appointee. Factions controlling embassies in neighboring countries may also attempt to affect the outcome of the election by providing citizens from other African countries with Liberian passports so that they may vote in the presidential election.
According to reports, because of deep mistrust among the factions, certain local commanders have been discouraging their fighters from disarming. Nonetheless, according to many sources in Liberia, ECOMOG's disarmament efforts, which began in November, have been successful, and fighters from all the factions have been surrendering their weapons. Unfortunately, arms are still entering the country through Liberia's open and unguarded borders with the Ivory Coast and Guinea. Given that the arms embargo was never enforced, disarmament may be of littie consequence. It is widely believed that Charles Taylor of the NFPL is still receiving arms from Burkina Faso and Libya, while ULIMO-IC is getting arms from Guinea.
Liberian human rights activists maintain that the situation in Liberia remains unstable. Suspicion and mistrust persist among the parties., with sporadic outbursts of violence, and the current transitional government has been unable to ensure disarmament. In general, the government's effectiveness in combating human rights violations is quite limited. The peace process in Liberia will survive only if the factions truly commit to peace, and if peace is accompanied by a real commitment by each faction to rebuild civil society. This will mean encouraging the development of democratic organizations such as the Alliance, prosecuting human rights violators, and facilitating the implementation of the Abuja Agreement.
169
Critique 1996
Future State Department reports need to examine human rights violations within their proper historical, legal and political context, and should speak more forthrightly on the need for those responsible to be held accountable.
170
