Mexico
^ I ^he text of the 1996 State Department report on Mexico JL manifests, as in previous years, a fundamental contradiction. It concludes that the Mexican government has generally respected the human rights of its citizens, while presenting ample evidence to the contrary. On the one hand, the report represents the human rights practices of the government in the best possible light, often in a manner which is incomplete or misleading. On the other hand, the report also presents undisputable evidence of systematic human rights violations, without actually saying that this is the case. The report acknowledges that government agents engage actively and systematically in torture, extrajudicial killings, arbitrary arrest, disregard for due process, corruption and impunity, but fails to state unequivocally that the government is responsible for these violations. While detailed in its description of government reform efforts, the report is vague and sometimes inaccurate in its presentation of abuses. Such inconsistencies result in a report which tends to diminish the government's participation in human rights violations, and is unduly laudatory of reform efforts which are widely reported to have had little impact on the escalating abuses committed by the police and the military and are in fact themselves threats to individual liberties.
This year's report repeats some of the problems identified in last year's edition of the Critique, including over-reliance on official sources, indifference to the findings of international bodies such as the UN and the OAS, superficial discussion of rural violence, selective citation of NGO information and insufficient attention to the expanding role of the military in traditionally civilian matters. The report fails to underline several fundamental circumstances which explain much about the human rights situation in Mexico. These include:
•	a justice system which is complidt in the violation of basic rights due in large part to the practices of the police and the prosecutorial forces operating under the Attorney General's office, and the abdication of judicial responsibility to address these problems;
•	regional variations in the nature and context of human rights abuses;
171
Critique 1996
•	increased political instability and armed guerrilla activities leading to the militarization of civilian police functions throughout the country, accompanied by increased human rights abuses by the military; and
•	a disproportionate number of violations affecting the poor, indigenous people and other marginalized populations — a pattern which is exacerbated by government economic policies.
The 1996 report cites a greater number of independent sources than in previous years; however, the governmental National Human Rights Commission {Comisión Nacional de Derechos Humanos: CNDH) continues to be the report's primary source for statistics on violations. The 45 references to the CNDH are significantly greater than the total for all NGOs, media and inter-governmental sources, despite the fact, partially acknowledged for the first time by the State Department, that the CNDH does not compile the figures it receives from its 31 state-level counterparts. Therefore, the CNDH is an inherently unreliable source for statistical information and conclusions on human rights conditions throughout the country. The State Department should make a comprehensive effort to collect information more broadly. Human rights advocates believe that many Mexicans are fearful of complaining to the CNDH when an allegation involves state actors. Moreover, many Mexicans avoid the CNDH because of its reputation for failing to respond to violations that do not attract media attention. The State Department's reliance on data from the CNDH reflects an ingrained pro-government bias, and casts serious doubt on the report's optimistic conclusions.
The report draws erroneous conclusions and inferences from CNDH investigations and recommendations. For example, the report states that 95% of the CNDH's recommendations have been totally or partially followed by the federal government. This statistic obscures the fact that only 15% of all recommendations are related to egregious abuses. For example, the most common subject area for CNDH recommendations concern problems in the delivery of health care services.
172
Mexico
In a major omission, the report neglects to discuss the government's attempts to limit victims' access to international human rights mechanisms. The Center for Justice and International Law (CEJIL), based in Washington DC, has reported that the Mexican government was promoting procedural changes within the Inter-American Commission of Human Rights (lACHR), which would increase political control over the admissibility of complaints. CEJIL representatives said the former president of the CNDH, Jorge Madrazo, even proposed the involvement of Mexico's Attorney General {Procurador General de Justicia: PGR) in the decision-making process of the lACHR. The report also ignores the fact that Mexico is currently the object of more than 100 complaints submitted to the lACHR alleging human rights violations. (Reports from a June 1997 OAS summit suggest that the Mexican government was unsuccessful in pushing many of these "reforms" in part because of opposition from the United States.)
The report misses two opportunities (in its sections on freedom of association and investigation of human rights abuses) to comment on legislation passed in Oaxaca that has the potential to restrict greatly the work of NGOs, including human rights groups. Minnesota Advocates for Human Rights (MAHR) has reported that the Law Regarding State Assistance, Human Promotion and Social Development Institutions authorizes excessive government interference in the formation and day-to-day work of NGOs. The law creates an oversight board funded by an excise tax on NGOs, with far-ranging and invasive powers. For example, NGOs must submit monthly reports on all court cases in which they are involved; the board can decide on its own initiative whether to intervene if it does not believe that a particular NGO is handUng the litigation properly. The board can dissolve NGOs for a wide variety of reasons, can modify an organization's charter and must approve rentals of office space for periods longer than three years. The Mexican Supreme Court rejected a legal challenge to these oppressive regulations by NGOs, and the lACHR is currently reviewing a complaint filed by Oaxacan NGOs. In the meanwhile, a coalition of Oaxacan NGOs succeeded in obtaining an injunction against the enforcement of the NGO law, and
173
Critique 1996
pressured the state government to begin negotiating a modification in the law. The government continues to delay action.
The government became increasingly antagonistic toward independent human rights monitoring in early 1997, and there were many ostentatious official displays of hostility toward national and international monitors. The State Department should discuss this problem in next year's report.
This year's discussion of rural violence is, like its predecessors, woefully superficial; the authors seem to have ignored widely available documentation which establishes a far greater degree of official responsibility than the report acknowledges. For example, the report portrays rural land disputes as local confi'ontations between squatter peasants and property owners. In fact, the problem of land and violence in Mexico is deep-rooted and nationwide, and involves a complex assortment of parties, including governmental authorities and security forces. The State Department does not cite reports from local and international human rights organizations, such as the Miguel Agustín Pro Juárez Human Rights Center {Centro de Derechos Humanos Miguel Agustín Pro Juárez: PRODH) and MAHR, which have documented the government's failure to adequately address land disputes, its protection of the perpetrators of violence related to disputes, and its instigation of several violent confrontations involving paramilitary groups.
The report's discussion of land disputes appears to contradict the State Department's own characterization of the paramilitary groups Paz y Justicia and the Chinchulines as autonomous groups loosely affiliated vvdth the PRI. Information dating back to 1994 indicates that Pazy Justicia is under the tight control of PRI officials in northern Chiapas, who receive blanket protection from prosecution. In 1996, Paz y Justicia and the Chinchulines received military training from off-duty soldiers.
The State Department's account of incidents in Bachajon, Chiapas is inaccurate, according to local human rights monitors. Like Paz y Justicia in Tila, Chiapas, the Chinchulines operate in Bachajon under overt protection from the local authorities. Despite the State Department's mention of an unsuccessful attempt on the part of Chinchulines to burn a Jesuit residence in Bachajon, the report does not mention that the town
174
Mexico
church was set on fire, and several priests forced into hiding. The pastor of Bachajon, Father Martonio Meneses, has frequently been harassed for monitoring human rights violations in Bachajon for the past three years, and is an outspoken critic of the impunity that the ChinchuHnes enjoy.
The State Department concludes its reporting on Bachajon by stating that "[s]tate police were sent to the area and arrested 28 people for the violence." According to the Fray Bartolomé de las Casas Center for Human Rights {Centra de Derechos Humanos Fray Bartolomé de las Casas) and Father Meneses, the 28 were peaceful protesters, Bachajon residents who had blockaded a road which leads to the tourist resort of Palenque on May 23, 1996 to protest the government's failure to prosecute the ChinchuHnes. Father Meneses reports that the contradiction between the arrests of peaceful demonstrators and the practice of allowing the ChinchuHnes to remain free has added to tensions in Bachajon.
The report's discussion of political and extrajudicial killings is extensive. Nevertheless, more attention should have been paid to the obstacles facing the investigation and the prosecution of the many documented incidents highlighted in the report, especially considering the impunity which the police, the military and other government actors still enjoy.
The State Department correctly reports that the PRODH has attributed nine killings to drug trafficking in San Lucas Atoyaquillo, Oaxaca, noting that the terror benefitted "[IJocal political bosses" who seized land that had been abandoned by frightened residents. This wording fails to specify that these "local political bosses" — the highest elected officials of city government and law enforcement in San Lucas Atoyaquillo — were later arrested on drug charges in December. No one has been investigated or arrested for the nine homicides.
The bland observation that "the army is responsible for external security but also has domestic security responsibilities" is a drastic understatement of the Mexican military's usurpation of the role constitutionally delegated to civilian security forces, for example in drug interdiction and civilian police work. In fact, troops have been deployed with increasing frequency throughout the country. Hundreds of soldiers were recently transferred to units of the federal judicial police in the
175
Critique 1996
northern states of Tamaulipas and Nuevo León. In Mexico City, NGOs dispute the report's characterization of the militarization of the metropohtan police force as an ". . .effort to instill a greater sense of professionalism and root out corruption in the Mexico City police... ." Mexican NGOs fear that public protests such as the May teachers' strike, which ended in confrontations between protestors and police, could turn especially violent when soldiers are substituted for civilian police. The militarization of civilian police functions represents the government's "quidc fix" for problems of crime and insurgency which have deep roots in poverty and disenfranchisement.
The discussion of army activities is marred by some inexplicable omissions. Various allegations of extrajudidal killings, rape and torture by the military in Chiapas and Guerrero are noted but not evaluated. Oaxaca is mentioned only in passing, and Veracruz and Puebla do not appear at all in the section on excessive force and humanitarian law violations. References elsewhere to Veracruz acknowledge only citizen complaints of "perceived militarization" in the area caused, not surprisingly, by "the presence of army troops." Indeed, the military's substantial presence has resulted in widespread human rights violations in Oaxaca and Veracruz. Unlawful house-to-house searches, interrogations, torture and theft of livestock and food are common. Hundreds of residents, mostiy indigenous, have fled their homes in fear after the army moved into their communities. Human rights advocates in northern Mexico have reported a surge in the number of displaced southern families fleeing north to seek refuge.
The army's increased role in law enforcement has led to serious abuses. NGOs have denounced the activities of army troops who have littie or no experience in performing toward security functions. They have documented threats and intimidation tactics against voters by military personnel in and around voting centers in Chiapas, Oaxaca and Guerrero.
The report's brief section on freedom of peaceful assembly and association states that the government respects such rights. Press reports and human rights organizations offer a very different picture, one in which the government violentiy represses public demonstrations. On April 10, police injured 21 people and killed a community leader when
176
Mexico
residents of Tepoztlán, Morelos, peacefully protested the construction of a golf course on their communal lands. Although this incident was alluded to in the discussion on extrajudicial killings, it was omitted from the section on the right to assembly. As are other episodes: In May, 40 striking teachers suffered injuries when riot police violently broke up a demonstration in Mexico City; on November 10, Chiapas state police killed three peasants who were peacefully demanding a higher price for their corn. No police officer has been investigated, tried or sentenced for the killings. Two members of the Revolutionary Democratic Party {Partido Revolucionario Democrático: PRD) were arrested while protesting in front of the municipal court house in Tlacoachistlahuaca, Guerrero in July; they subsequently disappeared.
The report's statement that "[t]here were no new developments in the 67 cases of violence (including murders) against PRD activists in which CNDH has issued recommendations since 1992" could lead to the erroneous inference that only 67 incidents of violence were directed against PRD activists during that time period. In fact, the Human Rights Office of the PRD filed more than 300 complaints with the CNDH concerning violence against its members since 1992, including several in 1996.The PRD asserts that the actual number of its CNDH complaints reflect an alarming level of political violence directed toward opposition parties, compounded by the shortcomings of a governmental human rights commission which does not accurately report the number of complaints submitted to its office. The section on torture makes one important stride forward by acknowledging that CNDH statistics reflect only a minority of reported complaints. Indeed its figures do not reflect any of the cases reported to 31 state and federal district human rights commissions. The report notes that few cases are prosecuted, and that many victims have abandoned hope that a complaint will lead to anything more than reprisals. Despite the government's responses to complaints of torture, which receive ample space in the report, positive results are, in fact, rare. The government has not prosecuted a single case under the federal statute against torture. Moreover, NGOs have charged that the use of torture by government security forces is at its highest level since 1968, a year marked by harsh government repression. The report does not
177
Critique 1996
mention that the judiciary and prosecutors have failed to address the pervasive problem of coerced confessions.
The report does not mention the widely reported case of over a dozen indigenous men from the Loxicha area of Oaxaca who were arrested in September and charged with being guerrillas of the Revolutionary People's Army {Ejército Popular Revolucionario: EPR). All have reported being tortured, and they remain in detention.
While the report is generally accurate in its description of poor prison conditions, it often relies on government statistics that appear to be outdated and incomplete. The State Department cites the government's Program for Prevention and Social Readaptation as reporting an excess of 2,025 prisoners for the space available as of December 1995. However, the same institution reported in 1997 that in the preceding year, the excess prisoner population had increased by 10,306 — an increase of 500% over 1995. The report vaguely states that prison visits by NGOs are "allowed and are common," and gives examples of visits with alleged members of the Zapatista Army of National Liberation {Ejército Zapatista de Liberación Nacional: EZLN) by the National Association of Democratic Lawyers {Asociación Nacional de Abogados Democráticos: ANAD) and the International Committee of the Red Cross. In fact, the ANAD reports great difficulty in gaining access to clients detained in the high security prisons of Almoloya and El Puente in the state of Mexico. In violation of the Constitution, lawyer-client interviews are regularly audiotaped and videotaped, and a guard is required to be physically present. One ANAD attorney, Pilar Noriega, was strip-searched and subjected to a body-cavity search before she was permitted to interview her client.
Female prisoners in many federal prisons are subjected to cavity searches upon returning from conjugal visits outside the prisons. Prison officials say this is done to prevent the smuggling of narcotics, but Mexican lawyers say only women are subjected to these exams and often endure sexual abuse as a result. Lawyers who often visit female clients in detention take issue with the State Department's account of the plight of female prisoners: "Officials sometimes encourage women to form sexual liaisons with male prisoners and guards. In some cases, officials coerce
178
Mexico
women into sexual relationships." It would be more accurate simply to say that women prisoners are raped.
The report contains the confusing assertion that "[d]etention of opposition political activists is neither widespread nor systematic but does occur frequently for short periods of time." Information from international and domestic human rights advocates indicates that arbitrary arrest and detention is commonly used by state actors against members of opposition parties and anyone who disagrees with government policies, including human rights advocates, union activists, peasants and members of indigenous organizations.
According to these sources, officials commonly conduct legal investigations against social and political activists under the pretext that they have committed common crimes. Two leaders of the Peasant Organization of the Southern Sierra {Organización Campesina de la Sierra del Sur: OCSS), Benigno Guzmán and Hilario Mesino Acosta, were arrested in 1996, during peaceful protests organized by the OCSS. According to the OCSS, PRODH and Amnesty International, Guzmán and Mesino were accused of common crimes and severely tortured; they remain in detention. CNDH officials deny that Guzmán and Mesino were tortured, and question the credibility of the aforementioned organizations, despite their international reputations.
Law enforcement officials arbitrarily detain individuals and coerce them into testifying against other social and political activists, sometimes under torture or threat of torture. Indeed, one Mexican human rights organization has aptly described 1996 as the year of "containment and dirty war" against political opponents of the PRI. Nevertheless, the report concludes that the government respects the right to "organize or affiliate with political parties."
The report's piecemeal discussion of the law enforcement system, to be found mainly in the sections on arbitrary detention, denial of fair public trial, extrajudicial killings and torture, evinces a healthy skepticism about the formal legal guarantees enshrined in Mexican law. The report recognizes government responsibility for the police massacre of 17 peasants at Aguas Blancas; the rise in allegations of torture by people in police custody; and the practice of arbitrary arrests and coerced
179
Critique 1996
confessions. It also holds the government responsible for "rampant" police corruption; "common" police involvement in robberies; "[cjommonplace" judicial corruption and inefficiency; "judicial disregard of public trial rights"; and inadequate legal representation and language translation for indigenous defendants. Also noted is the impunity enjoyed by police — including the use of a "golden parachute" system which allows violators to find work in other branches of the security forces — and the frequent abuse of prisoner rights by prison guards and other prisoners.
One practice, though noted, deserves closer attention. Unlawful arrest and wrongful prosecution of "likely suspects" affect many ordinary citizens who are arrested in lieu of culpable parties who have bought immunity through money, connections and influence. According to human rights advocates, police regularly detain individuals who appear to be poor and charge them with crimes, including robbery and drug trafficking, to draw attention away from local organized crime syndicates that rule communities throughout Mexico with impunity and with the tacit approval of government officials. Without money or connections, these victims are frequently convicted and sentenced as a matter of course.
The report accurately states that pre-hearing detention for periods longer than constitutionally permitted is common. It should have analyzed the implications of such lengthy detentions — often up to 15 days — during which detainees suffer further abuses, according to human rights activists. The period between arrest and a court hearing is when most forced confessions are extracted from detainees, often under torture. Almost in passing, the report alludes to legal reforms the government has recentiy proposed which would restrict individual due process guarantees. For example, detained persons could be held up to 96 hours before being charged, and confessions made to the police — confessions which are often obtained under torture — would have legal weight. Currently police, with the complicity of judges, manage to circumvent the legal nullity of confessions by reporting them as spontaneous statements made by defendants, which the judges then receive into evidence. Warrantless detentions also would be permitted under questionable legal grounds.
Some government measures are excessively praised. The report describes recent police reforms as "an effort to instill a greater sense of
180
Mexico
professionalism" and as "part of a wide-ranging package to reduce corruption and promote professionalism" — characterizations which are belied by anecdotal and statistical evidence. Perhaps the most closely watched criminal investigation in Mexican history, that of the murder of PRl Secretary General Francisco Ruiz Massieu, is rife with examples of prosecutorial misconduct. On another front, Mexican NGOs report a record number of complaints against federal, state and municipal officers that include arbitrary arrest, torture and corruption. The fact that allegations of torture have increased in absolute terms even as they dropped as a percentage of total complaints of abuse is in itself an indication that the ambitious reforms are, so far, more hype than help. As a consequence of the government's practice of using the security forces to quell social unrest, the number of human rights violations committed by the police has increased along with the incidence of public protests.
The report appears to shield the government from direct responsibility for a number of disappearances. In reference to reported disappearances during miUtary sweeps in the states of Oaxaca and Guerrero, the report states: "While denying that any individuals have been illegally detained, the government offered to investigate each alleged disappearance." Merely offering to "investigate each alleged disappearance" does not constitute compliance with domestic or international obligations. In fact, an alarming number of disappearances reported in Oaxaca and Guerrero, attributed by religious and human rights observers to military forces, remain unresolved. Specific examples include the disappearance of journalist and human rights activist Cuauhtémoc Ornelas Campos and several members of the EPR. The report states that local human rights organizations often report as missing individuals who are picked up for questioning by police and later released. It claims that in Oaxaca, for example, "all those reported as missing under such conditions were later accounted for." This is misleading. The Union of Indigenous Communities of the Northern Isthmus Area {Unión de Comunidades Indígenas de la Zona Norte del Istmo: UCIZONI) and PRODH have reported dozens of cases in 1996 of individuals who disappeared in Oaxaca and Guerrero who have not been found, and for whom the government has not searched. The report's misleading conclusions on
181
Critique 1996
disappearances stem largely from its reliance on the incomplete statistical database of the CNDH.
The report ignores the growing problem of pollution and its impact on human rights. It praises the government's efforts to enforce laws governing hazardous waste handling and disposal, but fails to mention that environmental enforcement is woefully underfunded, and hazardous waste and other environmental laws are regularly violated with impunity. In 1996, numerous examples of pollution, serious enough to compromise basic rights to life and physical integrity, were documented by the press and by Mexican NGOs. Petróleos Mexicanos (PEMEX), the state-run petroleum giant, has polluted many lands, rivers, streams and lakes and rendered them unfit for crop cultivation or fishing. Reports abound of individuals and entire communities who have suffered gastro-intestinal illnesses and even cancers as a result of such contamination. Furthermore, government forces have used repressive measures against those who protest against such threats to health and safety. For example, in February, hundreds of peasant farmers, mostly indigenous, were routed by soldiers and police in riot gear after they blocked access to PEMEX facilities in the state of Tabasco in protest against severe petroleum-related contamination damage to people and property.
Violations of environmental laws often go hand in hand with the violations of related civil liberties. Citizens are systematically denied access to environmental information concerning public and private development projects. Public participation by affected populations in decisions regarding such projects is virtually non-existent. Effective judicial remedies for environmental harms are not readily available.
The report presents a very laudatory assessment of the impact of Mexico's free market policies on the country's economy, but it ignores the social impact of these policies. According to recent studies, the purchasing power of the minimum wage shrank by over 10% in 1996 alone. Some reputable observers claim that the minimum wage is now 20% of what it was in 1970. In 1996, the situation became more desperate for the poor even though Mexico was emerging from its worst recession in 60 years. About 40 million people lived in what is considered "extreme poverty," surviving on less than $5 a day. In the poor southern states, nearly two-
182
Mexico
thirds of the people lived in one- or two-room shacks without running water. The national unemployment rate was estimated to be as high as 20% of the worlcforce.
The report's discussion of worker rights continues to be a recitation of labor laws and constitutional provisions mingled with a few facts about selected cases. Legal actions pending before the U.S. National Administrative Office (NAO), which question Mexico's labor practices under NAFTA's labor side agreement (the North American Agreement on Labor Cooperation: NAALC), are not mentioned. Criticism of government policies and practices is extremely muted. The report offers little critical analysis and reaches few conclusions. The result is an obfuscation of the overall picture of government practices and emerging trends in these areas.
It is important to understand the role of "official" unions under Mexico's labor laws. The main national union confederation, the Mexican Confederation of Workers {Confederación de Trabajadores Mexicanos: CTM), which boasts 8-10 million members, has been a close ally of the PRÏ for decades and an important source of the government's stability. As a consequence, the government has favored the registration of new unions, a prerequisite for legal existence, that are affiliated with the CTM. Similarly, the government has discouraged — or even prevented — the registration, and thus the formation, of independent unions or confederations of unions which are not CTM affiliates. The legal registration of CTM unions without the knowledge or consent of the workers who are ostensibly being represented is a common and effective tactic used to snuff out the efforts of independent labor organizers. Nevertheless, in recent years, some independent movements have made gains, such as the Revolutionary Workers' Confederation {Confederación de Obreros de Trabajo-. COR), the Authentic Workers' Front {Frente Auténtico de Trabajo: FAT) and the Union of Telephone Workers of Mexico (Sindicato de Trabajadores de Teléfonosy Telégrafos de México: STTTM).
Since the implementation of the NAALC in 1994, there has been much debate over whether provisions of Mexican labor law pertaining to employees' rights to organize satisfy the agreement. In June 1996, several groups from Mexico and the United States, including Human Rights
183
Critique 1996
Watch/Americas, the International Labor Rights Fund, Communications Workers of America, the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers and the ANAD, filed complaints with the U.S. NAO claiming that Mexico was in violation of the NAALC. They charged that Mexico's Federal Conciliation and Arbitration Tribunal had repeatedly blocked free association rights; that the tribunal was flawed by a conflict of interest adversely affecting independent unions; and that the federal workers' code mandated restrictions on freedom of association that violated international law. In July, the Mexican NAO urged the U.S. NAO not to investigate the charges, and to defer to the Committee on Freedom of Association of the International Labor Organization (ILO), which was investigating the charges. The U.S. NAO went ahead with its investigations, and in August recommended a ministerial consultation — top-level talks between labor secretaries.
In May, Mexico's Supreme Court upheld the right of a group of workers to organize a labor union and obtain the requisite registration. At issue was a law in the state of Jalisco which stipulated that no more than one labor union could represent state or municipal workers. The Supreme Court pronounced the law unconstitutional and issued a ruling favorable to the workers. On the same day, the Supreme Court held that a group of employees from Oaxaca could apply for union registration, even though there already was a union at their workplace. The Supreme Court's explicit recognition of the constitutional right of association may lead to the formation of more independent unions.
In October, the STTTM filed a complaint against the Mexican government before the U.S. NAO, with support from other U.S. and Mexican unions. It charged that the government had quashed the STTTM's organizing drive when the tribunal in the state of Sonora recognized the right of a CTM-affiliated union to represent workers at the Maxi-Switch company, a subsidiary of a Taiwanese-owned company incorporated in Arizona. In April 1997, the tribunal reversed its decision and recognized the independent Union of Maxi-Switch Workers as the official bargaining agent for Maxi-Switch employees. The decision was made two days before the U.S. NAO was to commence hearings in Arizona on the STTTM complaint. As a result, the hearings were
184
Mexico
canceled, and the Mexican government avoided a negative U.S. NAO report and possible consultations between U.S. and Mexican labor officials.
Labor organizers in Mexico and their U.S. allies say that efforts to organize genuine unions in Mexico have been stymied by industry officials, the government and the pro-government CTM. Local groups constantly face fierce opposition. By allowing an independent union to be registered over the wishes of management and of the CTM, the Mexican government may have signaled its acceptance of some independent unions — at least in the maquiladora sector.
The report states without comment that Mexican law requires employers to observe occupational safety and health standards. The uninformed reader might be misled into believing that these standards are adequate, and that the government enforces them; however, statements scattered throughout the report and accounts from the press and credible outside sources indicate that such standards are ineffective and inadequately enforced. According to one labor lawyer, Mexico ranked among the worst nations for workplace accidents as recently as 1993. The report mentions that pregnant women are often subjected to conditions hazardous enough to force them to quit, thereby relieving the company of the obligation to provide maternity leave and compensation. Fatal industrial accidents involving PEMEX are numerous, as are complaints from workers in the maquiladora sector. Workers charge that government environmental inspections are infrequent and ineffectual.
The report praises the government for its "commitment" to children's health and education, but admits that insufficient funding leaves the commitment unfulfilled. Even where children have access to Mexico's fi'ee public education system, many are unable to attend school because they cannot afford uniforms or supplies. Children from poor families often must work full time and so cannot attend school. The report says that 13,000 children live on Mexico City's streets; however, the actual number may be higher. The problem is serious outside the capital as well, but the report presents scant information. While it may be true, as the report claims, that many street children are homeless because of family violence, this explanation ignores the myriad economic factors which have forced
185
Critique 1996
children out of their parents' homes. According to officials of the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the percentage of street children working full-time has nearly doubled in the last four years from 35% to 61%; the number of street children under the age of five has risen from one percent to almost 20%, and the proportion of street children who are girls has jumped from less than four percent to one-third. Many street children work around cars stopped at red lights, washing windshields, selling candy and even performing as fire-eaters to entertain motorists. According to children's rights advocates, 90% of street children are sick on any given day. Government programs to address the problem of street children are poorly designed, underfunded and ineffective.
The report disregards the negative effects of increased free trade on the children of Mexico. Five to ten million children are illegally employed, often in hazardous industries which produce goods for export to the United States. Thirteen-year-old girls have been found working 48-hour weeks at U.S.-owned factories in the northern border area.
The report neglects to mention the government's failure to solve the growing problem of kidnaping rings which have sold hundreds of children for adoption or forced them into a life of begging. According to Rafael Lubiano of the Mexico City Legislature, the kidnappers often organize the begging and have even mutilated children to arouse pity and increase profits. Some children are forced to smuggle drugs to the United States. Parents of the missing children have complained that the authorities are unresponsive to complaints.
The report does discuss discrimination against women in the more than 3,000 maquiladora plants along the U.S.-Mexico border, many of which are U.S.-owned. In fact, the Women's Rights Project of Human Rights Watch, the Coalition for Justice in the maquiladoras and the American Friends Service Committee have documented many cases of discrimination against female workers, including interviews on sexual habits and contraceptive use as conditions for employment and compulsory pregnancy testing. The Mexican Labor Ministry {Secretaría del Trabajo) claims that there are no recorded cases of women being denied a job because of pregnancy. Women in difficult economic circumstances
186
Mexico
are forced to choose between their rights and work. Few complain for fear of not obtaining employment or of losing their jobs.
The report provides an accurate depiction of domestic violence, but falls short in its treatment of rape, especially on the subject of the government's inadequate response. In Mexico, a rape victim must file a report and have an exam performed by a government doctor. This requires victims to be inspected by an individual who may be partial to the government, and it precludes victims from reporting crimes committed after a substantial period of time. Claudia Rodriguez spent 1996 in jail for killing a would-be rapist. Her incarceration caused a nationwide protest by women's advocacy groups who objected to the double standards of justice in Mexico. In 1996, Celia Rodríguez, a U.S. citizen, human rights activist and EZLN representative in the United States, was raped and sodomized by four masked men after she condemned the Mexican government's detention of an EZLN member. Peace activists in the area suspect the attackers were hired members of a paramilitary organization which works for Chiapan ranchers. Upon being informed of the incident, Vice-Consul Nicholas Manring of the U.S. Embassy promised to inform the proper authorities, but warned that they "never prosecute here in Mexico."
Reports of sexual violence have increased with the militarization of Chiapas. Over 50 rapes of indigenous women in Chiapas were reported by the National Commission for Peace {Comisión Nacional por la Paz: CONPAZ), a Chiapan human rights group which believes such acts are part of a deliberate strategy of low-intensity warfare. According to Women of Mexico {Mujeres de México), army soldiers are also contributing to higher rates of prostitution among young women in Chiapas.
The report does a shoddy job of putting the stalemated Chiapas uprising in context. Mexico's 12 million indigenous inhabitants, belonging to more than 50 ethnic groups, are the most disadvantaged sector of society. The frustration and dismay of indigenous people have only increased as the government backed away from peace accords signed in February, which had been hailed as a major victory for indigenous rights in Mexico. The EZLN has attempted to continue negotiating despite the
187
Critique 1996
government's apparent disregard for the terms of the accord. Efforts to restart the dialogue have frequently been halted by sporadic killings.
Chiapas remains heavily militarized. There have been no significant investigations into the numerous rapes of indigenous women and the persecution of EZLN members and indigenous leaders. Contrary to what is asserted in a report which Mexico submitted to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD), the government has not submitted any of its promised reform bills to Congress. In this report the government also explained the Chiapas indigenous uprising as an ideological war, an unfortunate symptom of a country in the throes of rapid development. CERD found that the conflicts were partly the result of racial discrimination. Human rights NGOs continue to submit dozens of reports of violence directed at indigenous peoples throughout Mexico.
The State Department may be commended for its broad coverage of human rights practices in Mexico during 1996. However, the report continues to rely excessively on governmental sources, and it suffers from a lack of critical analysis, especially with respect to government responsibility. The report regrettably fails to address a number of human rights violations. As has been suggested in previous editions of the Critique, future reports would benefit from greater attention to non-governmental sources, and in particular Mexican human rights NGOs. Information from independent perspectives may lead to a much-needed improvement in the quality of analysis.
188
