Nigeria
V igeria received cor\siderable attention from tlie international -- ^community in 1996. Fact-finding missions from the United Nations, the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group and the African Commission on Human Rights all issued reports on human rights conditions in Nigeria, largely focussing on the proposed transition to civilian rule and on the execution in November 1995 of Ken Saro-Wiwa and eight other Ogoni activists. In addition, U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for Democracy, Human Rights and Labor, John Shattuck, visited Nigeria in May 1996 and called for improvements in the country's deteriorating human rights record.
Nevertheless, the government of General Sani Abacha made few attempts to improve Nigeria's human rights record during the year. The State Department report provides an excellent account of the many violations of international standards that took place in 1996. However, it suffers from a general failure to point out serious incidents of violence in which strong circumstantial evidence points toward the government's complicity. In addition, Nigerian journalists and human rights activists remained a significant target of abuse by the Abacha government, and the report omits incidents of such abuse.
The State Department clearly faced a dilemma in its reporting of the June assassination of Kudirat Abiola, the senior wife of M.K.O. Abiola, who was the reported winner of the June 12, 1993 presidential elections which were annulled by the military government of Gen. Ibrahim Babangida. Abiola has been in detention since shortly after June 12, 1994, when he declared himself to be the legally elected president of Nigeria. Mrs. Abiola had been a vocal campaigner for her husband's release, and given her activities on behalf of her husband, it is widely believed that the government was responsible for her murder in a drive-by shooting. The State Department, however, notes only that Mrs. Abiola was killed under "mysterious circumstances" and that the government's investigation of her death was "perfunctory." Certainly, it is difficult for the U.S. government to confirm who was responsible for Mrs. Abiola's death when the Nigerian government failed to conduct a proper investigation. Nevertheless, in the death of a prominent opposition figure in such highly politicized circumstances, it is remiss of the State
189
Critique 1996
Department not to acknowledge widespread concerns, even if unconfirmed, tiiat the killing was state-supported.
Following Mrs. Abiola's death, the government did arrest a number of people, but it is unlikely that any of them were actually involved in the killing. Those arrested included Abiola family members, their personal staff and four members of the opposition group NADECO. The State Department reports that seven of those arrested were family members; this is inaccurate: in fact, only five were, including Mr. Abiola's brother, his sister and his eldest son. Two other persons who were part of the Abiola family's personal staff were also arrested. One of them, Dr. Olufemi Adesina, was reportedly in the car with Mrs. Abiola when she was killed. On July 16, Justice Okosun Eigbedion of the Federal High Court in Lagos ordered the government to free the family members and staff. After initially refusing to comply with the court order, the government did eventually release them. One of the NADECO representatives was released after three weeks for medical reasons, but the other three, all of whom were at least 63 years old, were detained until October 14. No one was ever put on trial for Mrs. Abiola's murder, and the State Department's treatment of this entire incident is perfunctory in the extreme.
Intimidation of the press by the Abacha government increased in 1996, and scores of journalists were detained throughout the year. In December, the Nigerian Minister of Information announced that his ministry was going to set up "press courts" in which it would try journalists who wrote "false" reports. The State Department report has left out quite a number of such incidents of harassment and should pay more attention to this area, where information from other journalists is often available.
In discussing journalists detained in 1996, the report fails to note that Bayo Onanuga, a founding editor of The News Magazine, was arrested along with two staffers of A.M. Newspaper in June. They were later released, but Onanuga was arrested again on August 11, along with fellow founding editor Babfemi Ojudu. Two days later, John Bagu, deputy National Secretary of the Nigerian Union of Journalists (NUJ), was also arrested. All three men were released after several days in detention.
190
Nigeria
Bunmi Aborisade, editor of a monthly magazine called June 12 (the date of the annulled 1993 election), was arrested on April 11 and released on May 6. Okina Deesor, a Radio Rivers producer, was arrested on July 31 and remained in prison at the end of year, apparently in connection with his station's broadcasting of the Ogoni national anthem. Richard Akinnola, the judicial correspondent for National Concord, an independent daily, was arrested on October 13 and detained without charge until November 20. Godwin Agbrako, editor-in-chief of The Week, was arrested in December in connection with an article about a dispute between Army Chief of Staff Ishaya Bamaiyi and Guard Brigade Commander Yakubu Mu'azu. Finally, even a reporter for the Middle East News Agency, Hassan Anwar, was detained on June 24 and expelled from the country on July 1.
Some journalists have suffered more than harassment: the Committee to Protect Journalists reported that Baguda ICaltho, a ICaduna-based senior correspondent with The NEWS, has been missing since early March and is presumed dead. Chinedu Offoaro, a reporter for The Guardian, has been missing since the third week of May, and the State Security Service has refused to cooperate with his family or answer questions about whether they detained him. Two journalists managed to survive attempts on their lives. On February 2, Alex Ibru, publisher of The Guardian, was shot by gunmen, and Dele Alake, editor of National Concord, escaped a similar attack in Lagos on October 13.
Like the death of Kudirat Abiola, these disappearances and attacks on journalists remain unsolved, and it is difficult to confirm the government's complicity. Nevertheless, given the constant harassment of Nigerian journalists, the State Department should not have ignored some of the more serious incidents of such harassment merely because there has been no independent confirmation of government involvement. The State Department should at least have scrutinized the quality of the official investigations of these incidents.
Abuses against the Ogoni people and protests over the execution of Ken Saro-Wiwa and eight other Ogoni continue. The report omits a number of incidents that took place in 1996. For example, Kemedi von Dimieari was arrested on January 5 and released 13 days later. Dimieari,
191
Critique 1996
president of a cliapter of the National Union of Rivers State Students, was detained in connection with protests over the November 1995 executions. On January 4, which the Ogoni celebrate as Ogoni Day, at least 19 people were arrested for unlawful assembly.
A number of Nigerian human rights activists and Ogoni were reportedly detained in order to prevent them from meeting with a factfinding mission sent by the UN Secretary General that visited Nigeria in April. Approximately 30 Ogoni were arrested in April, as were Bola Ige and Frederick Fasehun, representatives of the opposition group NADECO. Ige and Fasehun were picked up as they attempted to meet with UN representatives at a Lagos hotel; they were released later the same day. Anyakwee Nsirimovu, director of the Institute for Human Rights and Humanitarian Law in Port Harcourt, was detained for four days in March and then again picked up by police on April 9, during the UN team's visit to Ogoniland.
The Abacha government continued to harass members of human rights organizations and other NGOs by detaining and torturing them, and confiscating their travel documents. The report notes that by year's end, a number of prominent human rights and pro-democracy activists were released after prolonged detentions, including Abdul Oroh, executive director of the Civil Liberties Organisation (CLO), Tunji Abayomi, chairman of the Founder's Council of Human Rights Africa, and Ayo Opadokun, general secretary of NADECO. This year's report shows a marked improvement over previous reports in noting whether and when individuals were released from detention. Nevertheless, a number of political detainees escaped the State Department's attention. For example, Godwin Uyi Ojo, a project officer with Environmental Rights Action (ERA), was arrested on January 25 in Lagos and detained until February 10. Similarly, Steve Aluko, a regional director of the CLO, was arrested by the State Security Service in Zaria on February 1, released the next day, and then rearrested on February 5 in ICaduna. Aluko was finally released on March 8. Nnimmo Bassey, chairman of ERA and regional chairman of the CLO, was detained on June 5 in Ikoyi, Lagos, and not released until July 18. Also in June, Mahmoud Abdul Aminu, a CLO staff attorney, was arrested and released the next day. Finally, the report fails
192
Nigeria
to note that Chima Ubani, secretary-general of a pro-democracy group and a staffer of the CLO, was released in 1996, having been detained since July 18, 1995.
On May 8, five human rights workers were arrested at the site of a workshop on the relationship between human rights and the churches. Tunde Oladunjoye, national publicity secretary of the Committee for the Defense of Human Rights (CDHR), Tunde Olugboji of the Constitutional Rights Project (CRP) and three members of the CLO were detained for three days before being released. Nigerian police refused to permit seminars organized by the Friedrich Ebert Foundation in May and June to take place, and also suppressed two seminars sponsored by the Southern Minorities Movement scheduled for March and June. On August 3, State Security Service officers prevented Amnesty International's Nigeria Section fi"om holding a one-day forum.
The report continues to provide generally the same description of extrajudicial killings in Nigeria as it has in past years, noting that the "Government seldom holds police and security forces accountable for their use of excessive, deadly force or for the death of individuals in custody." According to the State Department's own guidelines, any known incidents in which a policeman, military officer or government security agent was actually held responsible for illegally killing someone should be reported. Otherwise, the report should acknowledge that it is not aware of anyone being held accountable for extrajudicial killings. The State Department's reluctance to make a stronger statement about the use of force by Nigerian police and military is at odds with the Department's own travel advisory to American citizens, which states that "violent crime, practiced by persons in police and military uniforms, as well as by ordinary criminals, is an acute problem. Harassment and shake-downs of foreigners and Nigerians alike by uniformed personnel and others occur frequentiy throughout the country." To be consistent, the State Department should have acknowledged the seriousness of this problem in the country report as well.
The report does point out the frequency of extrajudicial killings at checkpoints, particularly of drivers or passengers of public transportation. Although these checkpoints are often set up under the guise of preventing
193
Critique 1996
crime, the police and the armed forces use them more frequently to extort money from citizens. Those unwilling to pay for passage risk severe consequences, as the report details. In addition to the incidents noted by the State Department, the CDHR has also reported the killing of Hakeem Ibrahim, 24, by police officers in May at a checkpoint in Apapa, Lagos State, and the September 19 shooting of Akinwunmi Olatunde, who was reportedly traveling in a commuter bus when he was killed by police. CDHR also reported several other disturbing incidents, including the killing of Olushola McCarthy, a worker at the Supreme Court of Nigeria, inside a police station. Kehinde Ehindero, the manager of a gas station, was allegedly killed by officers of the Nigerian Drug Law Enforcement Agency because his service station was out of gas.
The report should be commended for its detailed account of the government's violations of international standards on workers' rights. The Abacha government took a number of outrageous actions against trade unions in 1996, and the State Department has talcen pains to describe these actions and their relation to international standards. Unfortunately, the report is less meticulous in its discussion of the treatment of religious minorities. It states in the section on Freedom of Religion that Sheik Ibrahim Al-Zakzaky was charged "with an alleged attempt to set up a clandestine radio station," but then says, in dealing with religious minorities, that Sheik Ibrahim Al-Zakzalcy "remains in detention and has not been charged with an offense." The Lawyers Committee understands the latter to be the case. Like many other Nigerians in detention. Sheik Al-Zakzaky has not been charged with any criminal offense.
Another indication of the government's lack of respect for human rights is, ironically, its establishment of a National Human Rights Commission. As the report says, the commission "lacked credibility as an independent monitoring body," had limited funding, no permanent office and no working telephones. Leading Nigerian NGOs were not familiar with the members of the commission who were supposedly appointed to represent their groups. Furthermore, the Nigerian government submitted a report to the UN Commission on Human Rights claiming that section 4 of Nigeria's 1979 Constitution includes protection from violations of human rights. The government's report failed to acknowledge that section
194
Nigeria
4 has been suspended by military decree since at least 1993, a fact which did not escape the UN commissioners. Finally, General Abacha reportedly refused to meet with Assistant Secretary Shattuck during his May visit to Nigeria, in a clear indication of the government's attitude toward Mr. Shattuck's office.
Given the number of Nigerians srill being detained for strictly political reasons, and the increasing skepticism about whether the current transition process will ever lead to a civilian government, the State Department should pay particular attention in future reports to the current military government's suppression of political dissent and the reporting of dissent in the press. And finally, the State Department should not permit the likely complicity of the Nigerian government in serious acts of political violence to go unnoticed merely because that same government has failed to conduct a proper investigation into the crimes committed.
195
.1.
