Venezuela
T^he standard of living in Venezuela continued to decrease during A 1996. The population living in extreme poverty increased to approximately 80% of the total population and the middle class continued to diminish. As a consequence of the deterioration of economic standards, economic, social and cultural rights have suffered severely and endemic violations of civil and political rights have increased, in particular extrajudicial killings, torture, inhumane prison conditions and lack of due process guarantees.
In April, the government signed a debt-restructuring agreement, the so-called "Agenda Venezuela," with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), which prioritizes macroeconomic over social policies. Thus, despite successfully controlling inflation, the program imposed by the IMF has drastically worsened the lives of the majority of the population.
The 1996 State Department report presents a generally accurate and well-documented description of the continuing civil and political rights abuses in Venezuela including "extrajudicial killings by the police and the military, torture and abuse of detainees, failure to punish police and security officers accused of abuse, arbitrary arrests and excessively lengthy detentions, illegal searches, corruption and severe inefficiency in the judicial and law enforcement systems, and extremely harsh prison conditions, [vjiolence against women, abuse of children and discrimination against the disabled. . . ." The report draws much of its information from local human rights organizations, in particular, the well-respected Venezuelan Program of Action and Education in Human Rights (Provea).
However, the report is not without fault. In particular, the report's coverage of human rights violations of the indigenous populations is very weak. Too general at times, the discussion fails to analyze the reasons for ongoing violations and pervasive impunity enjoyed by government agents. Given the gravity of the problem, the government's crimes of omission should have received sterner treatment.
The report would have done well to articulate the links between economic and social conditions and violations of civil and political rights. The pattern of violence and abuse of procedural rights shows a class, rather than an ideological prejudice, falling on poor communities, it
273
Critique 1996
seems, almost because of their poverty. In addition, violence among private citizens, including lynchings, is exacerbated by a pervasive sense that the law enforcement apparatus distorts rather than upholds justice. This belief is founded on poor communities' direct experience with the Venezuelan police, who have surpassed many of their more notorious Latin American counterparts in creating havoc among the civilian population.
The report correctiy notes that extrajudicial killings continued unabated. Though the report does not mention it, the number documented by Provea in the first ten months of 1996 had increased slightiy from the same period in 1995. Furthermore, the report's discussion is disappointing because it fails to analyze the reasons underlying the pattern of extrajudicial killings. It only mentions in passing that the victims are criminal suspects and gives some examples of suspects who are killed while in police custody. The report should have strongly criticized the government's failure to design and implement strategies to guarantee the right to life and reverse the growing trend of extrajudicial killings. It is an alarming contradiction that those charged with protecting the personal security of the country's inhabitants are primary violators of the right to life.
The report accurately notes that "[m]ob lynchings of supposed criminals is a growing problem." Contextual analysis would have helped here. Mob lynchings, like most extrajudicial killings, take place in the poorest urban neighborhoods. The level of criminality and delinquency — by private citizens and the police — has reached the point where people in the communities take it upon themselves to protect their own lives and property. The mob lynchings are another example where the report should have drawn attention to the government's inability or unwillingness to guarantee the personal security of its inhabitants.
As in previous years, the report fails to mention a particular category of extrajudicial killings: those of members of the security forces at the hands of other members. Provea recorded 12 such incidents from October 1995 to September 1996. Of these, six occurred in military or police quarters. One example is the killing of Denys José Mora. His family accuses members of the Judicial Technical Police (PTJ), of which Mora
274
Venezuela
was also a member, of his murder. They claim that he was murdered to prevent him from continuing investigations of criminal acts in which members of the PTJ were involved.
Other incidents involved members of security forces who were murdered while off duty by rogue security officers. For example, Edgard Salazar, a member of the National Armed Forces (FAN) died in a hospital from injuries he sustained eight days earlier fi-om members of the Cuman^ state police. Salazar was walking by a police station one evening when some of the officers made rude comments to his female companion. Salazar responded and a fight ensued. Salazar punched one of the officers. As he ran away, officers shot him several times in the back. Government failure to investigate and prosecute such cases is especially pernicious because these killings represent the most acute disincentive for security officers to act against official misdeeds. The State Department should pay heed to these issues in next year's report.
Impunity is a theme to which the report appropriately returns again and again. It notes that "[t]he police often fail to investigate crimes allegedly committed by their colleagues and characterize incidents of extrajudicial killings as 'confrontations.'" It also properly criticizes a special pretrial procedure called nudo hecho which "essentially shields members of the security forces from prosecution." Local and international human rights organizations repeatedly accuse the police forces of exploiting this special procedure to ensure state agents of virtual immunity from prosecution during the months or years which these investigations typically last. The nudo hecho procedure is one of the great engines of impunity in Venezuela. It should be highlighted in the discussion of the legal system and the State Department should call for its abolition.
The report correctiy notes that "[t]orture, like extrajudicial killings, continues because the Government does not ensure the independent investigation of complaints needed to bring those responsible to justice." This situation is exacerbated by the control that the Institute of Forensic Medicine, which is attached to the PTJ, wields over cases that involve members of that police force. Future reports should extend analysis of this
275
Critique 1996
phenomenon and provide more details about the flaws in current procedures.
While the report states that constitutional protections are still suspended in the border region with Colombia for the second year in a row, it fails to note that complaints about human rights abuses have increased. Two cases described by Human Rights Watch illustrate the gravity of the problem. José Anicasio Rojas was detained at his home outside the city of Guasdalito. He was taken to the PTJ police station, blindfolded, handcuffed and beaten. Police tortured him by placing a plastic bag over his head.
Another case, also in Guasdalito, is that of Victor A. Diaz Ojeda. According to Human Rights Watch, he was detained by members of the National Guard and army, who accused him of being a member of a Colombian guerrilla group. He was tied to tree, blindfolded and tortured with electric current to his testicles.
The report accurately .notes that, despite the reinstatement of constitutional guarantees in the rest of the country, a large number of arbitrary and illegal detentions occurred during anticrime sweeps in impoverished slum areas. However, the report distances itself from any direct criticism by writing that "the press and human rights groups continued" to report on these arbitrary detentions. It is disappointing that the report shields itself behind the press and human rights groups to discuss the violations committed during these anti-crime sweeps.
The National Security Plan, implemented in 1995, calls for a crackdown on delinquency and authorizes the security forces to physically locate, detain and arrest adult delinquents. Its vague language and design fails to articulate a coherent policy and invites abuse. Thus, the report should have analyzed the abuses committed in terms of the policy that permits arbitrary police action, and assigned particular responsibility to the government.
According to human rights groups, the plan is a blanket authority to raid and intimidate the poorest communities in the country. In this light, the report should have taken note of the conclusion by the Venezuelan Senate's Interior Policy Commission that the anti-crime sweeps are "operations that produce massive searches in the poor sectors with the
276
Venezuela
idea to intimidate these sectors and give the impression to the middle class that the government is effectively fighting delinquency." This problem is on the rise. Provea documented an increase in abusive detentions of individuals in the poorest and most marginalized areas of the country.
Although the State Department repeats its criticism from prior reports, it fails to analyze the abusive results of the law that provides for a judicial review of the legality of detention. In particular, it should have criticized the lengthy eight-day pre-arraignment period during which human rights groups claim most torture occurs.
The report should also have analyzed, in greater detail, the reasons for the pervasive abuse of detainees in addition to the excessively lengthy pre-arraignment period, such as the heavy emphasis given to confessions as evidence in court, the routine violations of safeguards prohibiting incommunicado detention, and the practice of moving detainees between different locations. All these routine abuses should have been condemned as violations of Venezuela's international obligations under human rights treaties.
As in prior years, the report accurately describes the 1939 Vagrancy Law which permits detention for up to five years, without a warrant, trial or judicial appeal, of people deemed by the police to pose a danger to society. Under this law, it is not necessary to present any evidence that the detained individual has committed a punishable crime. There are few, if any, more flagrant invitations to subjective, discriminatory and abusive law enforcement practices.
The State Department should have devoted more attention to discussing police abuse of the Vagrancy Law used to round up "undesirables" in poor neighborhoods in the "anti-crime" struggle. Also missing from the analysis is Venezuela's focus on "status" misdemeanors, such as loitering and lack of proper identification, to mask its inability to stem the rising incidence of crime. The report notes that "Provea documented the application of this law against 552 detainees from October 1995 through September 1996." The application of the Vagrancy Law offers a dramatic example of how quickly constitutional principles can give way under the pressure of socio-economic insecurity. A more
277
Critique 1996
coherent summary of Venezuela's human rights problem would have situated measures such as the Vagrancy Law at the center of discussion.
Another consequence of the rising incidence of crime is the dramatic overcrowding of prisons and the inhumane conditions and violence that prevail in them, as the report accurately notes. However, given the general condemnation by local and international human rights groups of some of the worst prison conditions in the world, the report is disappointingly restrained. Although it is true that "[t]he Government acknowledged the poor conditions of the prisons and made plans to improve the situation," it did so only after the situation became explosive and of international concern. In its 1997 World Report, Human Rights Watch states:
The extreme overcrowding, exacerbated by severe understaffing, inadequate material support, and violence, meant that the majority of Venezuela's prisoners were forced to endure appalling and degrading living conditions, in violation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the American Convention on Human Rights, which established Venezuela's responsibiUty to treat inmates with dignity.
The report should have noted that the large majority of inmates were pretrial detainees, who were mixed with convicted prisoners, a direct result of abusive aspects of law enforcement, including the broad and arbitrary "anti-crime" sweeps, insufficient judicial resources, corrupt practices which require bribes to move cases along and systematic indifference to the plight of poor detainees.
The report should have addressed Venezuela's failure to take concrete steps to reduce prison bloodshed and to investigate and bring to justice the security agents responsible for extrajudicial killings of prisoners. The problem is severe, and the comment that "[a]t least two deaths were attributed to guards" is an unconscionable understatement. The very human rights organizations from which the State Department draws much of its information report that at least 130 cases of extrajudicial killings were related to excessive force by security forces in prisons. For example, Jesus Lizardo O. was completing a 28-month prison term when.
278
Venezuela
on January 28 1996, he was shot point blank in the head by a guard as he was dutifully mopping the prison floors. He died several hours later waiting for transportation to the hospital.
The report repeats its accurate description, from last year, of the judicial system as being "overburdened and inefficient, suffering from widespread corruption, and lacking public credibility." The problem, however, is that the report softens its criticism in objective descriptions. The report should have analyzed the reasons for the system's inefficiency and corruption. It also should strongly criticize the government's failure to bring the judicial system into compliance with international standards. It fails to describe accurately and analyze the fundamental politidzation of the judicial system that accounts for its corruption. Additionally, it should have analyzed the lack of access most people have to the justice system and the serious lack of credibility it has among the general population as a result.
Although, as noted in the report, fi^eedom of speech is constitutionally guaranteed, Venezuela's Criminal Code contains a desacato clause allowing criminal prosecution of public statements deemed offensive, insulting or threatening to government functionaries. Such legislation continues to restrict free expression. For example, an author was sentenced to a year in prison for criminal defamation because he wrote a book about judicial corruption called How Much Does A fudge Cost? {¿Cuanto vale un juez?). The ruling, which further called for the confiscation of the book, is reflective of the judiciary's wagon-circling mentality in the face of documented fact. This is particularly evident as criminal defamation (i.e. the desacato law) was deemed incompatible with the American Convention, to which Venezuela is a party, by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights.
Similarly, the report describes the 1994 Journalism Law that makes it compulsory for all persons who wish to practice journalism to have a journalism license. A suit was brought by several newspaper owners to have the law repealed. The case is still pending. The Inter-American Court found that the compulsory licensing of journalists is incompatible with the freedom of expression guaranteed under the Inter-American system.
279
Critique 1996
The report's description of freedom of assembly and association downplays police brutality during peaceful demonstrations. Although there were no reported deaths during demonstrations, Provea and other human rights groups reported that the police arbitrarily and indiscriminately used firearms to quell public demonstrations, resulting in many injuries. For example, during the mayor's inauguration in Caicara del Orinoco on January 16, there was a demonstration to oppose what many believed was a fraudulent election result. A unit of the National Guard opened fire and threw tear gas into the crowd. More than 40 people were seriously injured.
The report also fails to discuss the many incidents in which public demonstrations were prevented from occurring. For example, a national student demonstration was to take place June 12, 1996 in Caracas. The marchers had planned to march from the Central University to the city center to protest the economic adjustment plan that went into effect in April. Despite the fact that the protesters had received prior government approval for their activities, the government of the federal district revoked permission for the march 24 hours prior to its commencement, citing a visit of foreign dignitaries as reason for the change.
Soon after the eleventh-hour decision, the police surrounded the university. Busloads of students traveling in from around the country were detained by the National Guard. The police also closed off the highway between the dties of Valenda and Caracas to prevent the arrival of students from the Universities of Carabobo, Zulia and the Andes, the Politécnico de Barcelona and the Technological Institute of Valencia. That same afternoon, four busloads of students already gathered at the Central University were prevented from traveling to the Attorney General's Office by police. When the students descended from the buses to walk, they were attacked with tear gas and water hoses.
The report totally ignores the increasing deployment of the military to resolve public disputes and strikes. For example, the Defense Minister announced that the military would take over the subway system if the subway workers proceeded with their strike to demand increased social benefits. The report should have criticized the use of the military to intimidate and undermine the right to strike.
280
Venezuela
The report accurately states that "government officials were often critical of human rights groups, accusing them of seeking to discredit the State and undermine the country's image." Human Rights Watch reports that "[o]n several occasions government authorities labeled human rights monitors as criminals interested in spoiling Venezuela's international image." In light of this official intolerance, the report should have included an analysis of the broader effort to discredit non-govemmental organizations.
The report's description of the situation of indigenous peoples is accurate, but it fails to analyze the reasons why the lives of these people are threatened. It states that the "Constitution provides special laws governing 'the protection of indigenous communities and their progressive incorporation into the life of the nation.' Nonetheless, local political authorities seldom take into account the interests of the indigenous people when making decisions affecting their lands, cultures, traditions, and the allocation of natural resources." Although it notes the impunity enjoyed by those abusing indigenous peoples' rights, it fails to condemn the government's inability or unwillingness to abide by its constitutional duties and comply with international standards that protect indigenous peoples' basic freedoms.
According to local human rights groups, indigenous communities are the most marginalized, abused and vulnerable populations in Venezuela. They are being systematically annihilated and their lands, culture, traditions and natural resources are being depleted, facts which the report should have stated directly. The mining and tourist industries as well as ranchers are increasingly encroaching upon their lands. For example, the Piaroa de Cucurital brought a claim against thç owners of a tourist center, Alchiven, for illegal invasion of their land. They argue that the tourist center has infringed upon their means of livelihood — fishing and hunting. The Piaroa have complained before many legal and administrative bodies to no avail.
The report also fails to discuss the repression and reprisal suffered by indigenous communities that organize themselves to counter incursions into their lands. Provea reported that the Commission of the Kari'na, comprised of Kari'na from several states, was repeatedly defamed in the
281
Critique 1996
government-sponsored press. They were accused of espousing anti-government ideology and partaking in violent acts which the government said implicated them in guerrilla activities. The Minister of State Boundary Affairs went so far as to associate the struggle for indigenous rights in Venezuela with the armed insurrection in Chiapas, Mexico. The report should have criticized these irresponsible and unfounded statements and their role in eliciting violent repression against the indigenous communities by the security forces.
To this effect, the report was negligent in failing to report and analyze the human rights abuses committed by the armed forces and security forces against the indigenous peoples. Human Rights Watch states:
The situation was especially serious in the states of Zulia, Amazonas, Bolivar and Delta Amacuro.. .members of the Baniba, Curripaco, Piaroa and Puinabe ethnic communities frequently reported to local human rights groups that state security forces arbitrarily detained and mistreated them. For example, in January, Durifa Da Silva, an indigenous man from the community of Guarinuma, was arrested by police. The officers handcuffed and harshly beat him, then left him with serious bruises on the banks of the Atabo river.
The report accurately discusses the prevalence of violence against women and the legal and cultural prejudices that prevent the prosecution and convictions of their abusers. It is disappointing that the report does not analyze the reasons for the violence. It mentions, in passing, that domestic violence "has been aggravated by the country's economic difficulties." But it fails to criticize the government for its inability or unwillingness to enforce existing legislation and to bring its laws into conformity with international standards, namely the Inter-American Convention to Prevent, Punish and Eradicate of All Forms of Violence Against Women and the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women, to both of which Venezuela is a signatory.
Similarly, although the report accurately describes the plight of children, it fails to analyze the reasons why "one in four children is
282
Venezuela
malnourished." It states that "[mjany government agencies responsible for the welfare of children are plagued by corruption and government funding often does not reach the children it is intended to help." This assertion should have been followed by a strong criticism of the government's unwillingness or inability to comply with its international obligations under human rights treaties.
The report refers to "the increase in poverty [which] has raised the level of stress within families and led to a rise in a number of abandoned children and to more child abuse." However, it fails to analyze the general effect poverty has on the lives of children. For instance, when it discuses that children are involved in illicit activities and many are exploited sexually, it fails to associate their situation with the desperation of poverty.
The report accurately discusses the abuse of children in prisons as part of the general inhumane prison conditions. But it should also analyze the correlation between poverty, children's illicit activities, the general intimidation of the marginalized sectors of society discussed above, and the government's failure to design and implement measures to protect children. As part of "anti-crime" measures, many states have imposed curfews for minors. The report states that many children's rights advocates claim the curfews "permit the police to act arbitrarily in detaining persons who have committed no crime." Here again, the report fails to criticize the government's efforts to combat deUnquency with measures that violate human rights guarantees.
In its discussion on labor conditions, the report accurately states that "even with bonuses and benefits the minimum wage is not sufficient to provide a decent standard of living for a workef and a family." The report describes the legal protections but is disappointing in its analysis of the real life consequences of the insufficiency of the laws to guarantee a decent standard of living and /or the lack of enforcement of the laws. For example, it describes the labor code and health laws; yet fails to mention that almost 50% of the population is unemployed and working in the informal sector where labor laws and protections are not enforceable. In addition, it does not mention that the level of unemployment was the
283
Critique 1996
highest since 1989 (women's being higher than men's: 12.8% to 10.2%, respectively).
It also states that the minimum age for employment of children and the legal workweek are enforced in the formal sector, "but much less so in the informal sector." And it reports that according to a 1992 survey, more than one million children were worldng in the informal sector, mostly as street vendors, and in large numbers as beggars and bootblacks. Given the impressive size of the informal sector, the report should have vigorously criticized the government's failure to guarantee adequate work conditions and benefits, and prevent the exploitation of workers, particularly children.
Throughout the report, vague references are made to the effects of poverty on the human rights situation. It also fails to mention the economic crisis that is, in part, a result of policy decisions that prioritize macroeconomic principles over social policy. Because of its silence about the crippling effect of poverty and the government's failure to respond to the population's economic and social needs, the 1996 State Department report only tells half the human rights story in Venezuela. It glaringly neglects to discuss what local human rights groups call the "criminalization of poverty."
284
Since 1978, the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights has worked to protect and promote fundamental human rights. Its work is impartial, holding each government to the standards affirmed in the International Bill of Human Rights, including
•	the right to be free from torture, summary execution, abduction and "disappearance";
•	the right to be free from arbitrary arrest, imprisonment without charge or trial, and indefinite incommunicado detention; and
•	the right to due process and a fair trial before an independent judiciary
The Committee conducts fact-finding missions and publishes reports which serve as a starting point for sustained follow-up work within three areas: with locally-based human rights lawyers and activists; with policymakers involved in formulating U.S. foreign policy; and with intergovernmental organizations such as the United Nations, the Organization of American States, the Organization of African Unity and the World Bank.
The Committee's Refugee Project seeks to provide legal protection for refugees including the right to dignified treatment and a permanent home. It provides legal representation, without charge, to indigent refugees in the United States in flight from political persecution. With the assistance of hundreds of volunteer attorneys, the Project's staff also undertakes broader efforts — including participation in lawsuits of potential national significance — to protect the right to seek political asylum as guaranteed by U.S. and international law.
If you would like more information about the Lavyers Committee, write to us at: Publications Department Lawyers Committee for Human Rights 333 Seventh Avenue, 13th Floor New York, NY 10001 USA
Tel: (212) 845-5200 E-mail: comm@lchr.org Fax; (212) 845-5299
itìTAnq o? iE^yM foò^otH saguHH ì^ * irafitns^ s bft« îairaîKni	OJ id^iî
iiîi ifjiWl^L! Äittq icjööüq mwà i^g® náyásjjtíX r
pc^ìW«	5ifc .ìf^amaiJi sMJniijicrv ki
^^ lo	ni aoòft^hfiieq ^^libubns — anoïb T^biiOfd isÀ&n^oJn
^ Ioaibq Ì9i» "idi ^	i^ftoijjif«
Ìftm>j»ìbPMnl IM» ^	» imiih^





m:'
i. ' il













/a'is
tóv V « Í ^
livr-' *
'^ifiiJji






f#S
