AFGHANISTAN
As in previous years, the country report on Afghanistan accurately portrays the widespread brutality visited on the Afghan people by the Kabul regime and the Soviet forces that are backing it. It mentions the harsh measures taken against political opponents, including executions, tortxu-e and arbitrary detentions under harsh conditions. In addition, in a new section on violations of hiunanitarian law in armed conflicts, it describes numerous attacks and reprisals against civilian targets through the use of aerial bombing, murder and mutilation, antipersonnel mines, and reported chemical weapons.
The report's principal flaw with regard to these governmental violations is that it fails to note the few beneficial developments and the modest reduction in abuses that seem to have occurred in the past year. For example, referring to the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (DRA), as the government was called before becoming the Republic of Afghanistan (RA) on December 1,1987, the report states perfunctorily that "the DRA released some political prisoners." But the report omits any hint that many of these releases were pursuant to several amnesties announced in 1987 as part of a "national reconciliation" program which also included inducements to the refugees to return home. While there is no way to verify the many thousands of releases announced by the government, the fact that amnesties have occurred should have been noted with approval.
Moreover, the report should have mentioned that among those released in March 1987 were three Kabul University professors who had been arrested for membership in a human rights monitoring group, including the prominent historian Hasan Kakar. But the section on governmental attitude toward human rights investigations contains no reference to this positive development, and thus misses an opportunity to stress the importance that the State Department should attach to the protection of human rights monitors.
Afghanistan
As is proper in the case of an armed conflict, the report also addresses abuses committed by the resistance forces, including executions of prisoners of war, kidnappings of civilians, and indiscriminate bomb attacks against civilian areas. In certain instances, however, the report downplays resistance abuses. For example, the State Department asserts that "[tjhere have been reports that ... mujahedin have occasionally executed prisoners in the field." In fact, there is extensive documentation of such executions, including photographs and, in one case, a videotai>e of a mass execution of captiu^ed Afghan army officers. A number of the resistance organizations do not consider that captured government troops are entitled to protection, and thus execute these captives after Islamic trials for such crimes as apostasy. The State Department should have reported and condemned these killings in more forceful terms as gross violations of the laws of war.
The report must also be faulted for failing once again to distinguish among the different resistance groups, despite past criticism of this blurring of their human rights practices. Whenever the subject of abuses by the resistance arises, the report refers to the resistance groups as a whole, using the label mujahedin, rather than identifying the particular offending group. This lack of discrimination obscures the fact that the most serious abuses are being committed by the resistance group that has been the largest beneficiary of U.S. military aid, the Hezb-e Islami, led by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. This obvious effort to obscure responsibility among the resistance groups serves to help groups such as Hezb-e Islami escape accountability and thus persist with abusive practices.
Similarly, although the report details the Afghan government's initial opening and later closing of its prison doors to the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), no comparable attention is paid to the resistance groups' attitudes toward the ICRC. The report correctly states that the ICRC has had access to some Afghan and Soviet prisoners held by the resistance, such as a visit in May 1986 to 106 Afghan army prisoners held by Commander Jallaluddin Haqqani of Heqb-e Islami (Khales), a group that is distinct from Gulbuddin Hekmatyar's Hezb-e Islami. It also correctly reports that the refusal of the Kabul government to grant permission for internal travel has prevented the
Critique
ICRC from visiting other such prisoners held deep inside Afghanistan. The report neglects to mention, however, that since some initial cooperation by the resistance in 1981 and 1982, which fell apart when efforts at prisoner exchanges proved to be one-sided, resistance groups have shown a lack of enthusiasm for cooperating with the ICRC and have also prevented the ICRC from visiting prisoners held inside Pakistan.
Finally, in its discussion of attacks on journalists, the report neglects to note mounting evidence that all such attacks do not come from the Soviet or Kabul forces. During the past year, several Western journalists have disappeared or been killed in Afghanistan under circumstances which strongly implicate the Hezb-e Islami of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar.
