ARGENTINA
Consistent with its failure ever to express support for the decision of the Argentine civilian government to bring to trial the perpetrators of the massive crimes of the "dirty war," the Reagan Administration ejqjressed no concern in 1987 when a mutiny at Easter time by disgruntled Army officers in Campo de Mayo forced President Raúl Alfonsín to back down from that decision and limit prosecutions to a few high-ranking officers. Thus, while the Administration has at key moments made general statements in favor of Argentine democracy, it raised no protest when military pressure compelled the Alfonsín government to enact a due obedience law that exculpated members of the military for heinous crimes so long as they were following orders. This silence, rooted in the support that the Administration gave the Argentine generals before the advent of democracy, is particularly significant because the Argentine case is seen aroimd the world as an important precedent for democratic transitions that are burdened with the heritage of unspeakable crimes against humanity, and because President Alfonsin's decision to reestablish the rule of law by proceeding with prosecutions of those who committed these crimes has prompted the military to mount serious challenges to democratic stability, including the Easter rebellion.
Statements made by U.S. Ambassador Theodore Gildred to the Argentine press in December 1987 are the most recent reminder that the Reagan Administration has not abandoned its sympathies for the Argentine men of arms who were responsible for the "dirty war" and more than 10,000 disappearances. Although the Easter uprising posed the most serious challenge to Argentina's fledgling democracy since President Alfonsín assumed office, Ambassador Gildred showed a disappointing acceptance of it by alluding in sympathetic terms to the "frustration" felt by the military after having shouldered the "unfortunate responsibility" of dealing with a "situation of near anarchy, with extreme terrorism." He then expressed the need to stop the resulting discrediting of the
Critique
military so as to avoid situations like the one in Easter, which are "understandable for all of these reasons." ("Mi Tarea Clave es Brindar Apoyo a la Democracia," La Nación, December 24, 1987, by Germán Sopeña). In this defense of the mutineers, Ambassador Gildred could not bring himself to say a single word of disapproval for the methods that had caused the military to be discredited: the disappearances, the secret concentration and torture camps, and the murder in cold blood of thousands of yoxmg men and women.
The 1987 country report on Argentina is faithful to this policy of acquiescence. It avoids attacking the record of the military, and is quick to justify the decision to limit prosecutions. It blurs the fact that most if not all attacks against the stability of the country are now coming from the same quarters that either supported or comprised the military dictatorship, and it even repeats an unfounded charge of press manipulation made by those sectors against the government.
In its discussion of the due obedience law, the report notes criticism by "^some human rights actiNists and opposition leaders" (emphasis added), and then adds, "but all agree that it was adopted in full accord with constitutional requirements." This is a serious misrepresentation: all human rights organizations and all prominent human rights leaders that we know of, including the well-known personalities that served in the National Commission on the Disappearance of Persons (CONADEP), went on record objectmg to the law and its enactment under military coercion. So did many close presidential advisors.
As for the law's purported constitutionality, prominent legal scholars have pointed out that it indeed is plagued by serious constitutional inñrmities. The issue is, of course, settled, since the Supreme Court affirmed the law's constitutionality, by a divided vote, within three weeks of its enactment. But the State Department is simply wrong to say that there was no disagreement about the law's constitutionality, for several reasons. First, in enacting the law. Congress took away functions that properly belong to the judiciary, in that it mandated an irrebuttable presimiption, namely, that all members of the military below a certain senior level must be presumed mistakenly to have believed that orders to kill and torture, and to suppress information about those crimes, were legal. Second, in allowing a military defendant's due obedience to the orders of
10
Argentina
a superior to function as an excuse, the le^lation is contrary to international customary law on crimes gainst humanity, and specifically violates the U.N. Convention Against Torture, which Argentina has ratified; under Argentine law, an act that violates a treaty is unconstitutional. Third, the due obedience law arguably violated the equal protection clause of the Constitution by creating a privileged class of criminal defendants — those who happened to wear military uniforms — and granting them procedural and substantive benefits not accorded to other criminal defendants.
The Supreme Court's decision reflects the difficulty of these issues. While the majority opinion maneuvered around them, two concurring opinions did not. One, by Justice Enrique Petracchi, found the law constitutional only by reinventing it as an act of amnesty, which President Alfonsui and Congress had avoided doing for political reasons. Under these circumstances, it is difficult to see why the State Department portrays the dispute as political and not legal. The matter is important because it shows how pressures from the military uprising not only threatened stability but also went so far as to strain the fabric of democratic institutions. The due obedience law can only be understood as a concession to force, and as such it should be deplored, not presented in lighter colors.
It is also not true, as the country report asserts, that tensions between the civilian government and the military decreased after the enactment of the law. In January 1988 there was an even more serious uprising by the same group of officers, resulting in some minor skirmishes before they surrendered. Although the results were less damaging than in 1987, in that this time the military chain of command responded to President Alfonsin's orders to quell the rebellion, most observers predict that dissatisfaction in the armed forces will continue to breed episodes of this sort. In the meantime, the leadership of the armed forces has tempered its pledge of loyalty to the government with the vow to demand total vindication of its role in the "dirty war."
Our other major criticism of the report concerns its claim that none of the increased number of bombings and threats that took place in 1987 "were conclusively attributed to any institution," and that "there is no consensus on the possible identity of the persons or groups responsible." To the contrary, since
11
Critique
1983, all threats and acts of violence against the government and against human rights organizations have come from supporters of the military dictatorship. Except for very sporadic street disturbances, there is no organized violence originating in the democratic opposition or left-wing sectors. Indeed, the few arrests that have been made have all been of former members of the death squads and intelligence services, for their alleged involvement in launching attacks with ejqplosives, making threats and acquiring of arms for the purpose of destabilizing the government. Public calls against "pornographic democracy" and the "radical synagogue" (an allusion to the Jewish faith of some leaders of President Alfonsin's Radical party) have come only from supporters of the recent military dictatorship. Under these circumstances, it seems odd that the State Department not only failed to identify these enemies of democracy, but actually tried to make it appear that there is a controversy in this regard.
Two other points warrant mention. First, in discussing the freedom of the press, the report misrepresents the circumstances of an injunction issued in May 1987 by a federal judge against the publication of a paid advertisement that defended a former military junta member who had been convicted in 1985. The State Department reports that the injunction was requested by the government, when in fact the petitioners were an individual journalist and two unions representing journalists and newspaper workers. The judge who initially issued the injunction found that the ad, which was meant as a salute to General Jorge Rafael Videla, constituted an "apology of crime and of a convicted felon" in the terms of the Penal Code. Whatever the merits of the judicial decision, it is unfair to attribute any role in it to President Alfonsin's government.
Second, in the section on attitudes regarding international investigations of human rights, the State Department should have observed that Argentina recently accepted the compulsory jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, a body of the Organization of American States. The failure of the United States to take this step should not have precluded the State Department from noting this positive step when taken by others.
12
