CHILE
Last year we considered the country report on Chile to be thorough, meticulous and an improvement over pre\ious reports in most respects. This year the report shows further improvement, making it something of a model for how the State Department could be reporting on other countries. The discussions of censorship, the lack of judicial independence, and the restrictions on political and labor rights, as well as the category-by-category review of gross violations of the right to life and the right to personal security and integrity, are impressively well presented and illustrated with case examples that are relevant and representative. In addition, the report departs from earlier years in that it includes a tacitly critical treatment of the military regime's 1980 Constitution by pointing out that the armed forces retain a considerable scope of authority within the so-called "protected democracy" that is projected in the Constitution. And, as is appropriate in the period preceding a major electoral event — the Presidential plebiscite by which the regime seeks to perpetuate itself — the report offers more detailed analysis than previously of the constraints on assembly and political-party activity. Finally, we note the report's clear presentation of the persecution of the Vicariate of Solidarity, and in general its fair presentation of the work of human rights organizations.
We take exception with the report in three respects, however. First, the report fails to mention the cases addressing disappearances that are pending before Chilean courts. In this respect it follows the practice of earlier reports. We consider that these cases deserve mention in the section on disappearances because they constitute an area of ongoing investigation which should not be forgotten.
Second, the report does not mention the refusal by the Chilean government and courts to cooperate with U.S. initiatives in the case of Orlando Letelier, who was assassinated in 1976 in Washington, D.C. on orders of the Chilean security police. In February 1987 a defendant in that case defected to
17
Critique
the U.S. and, among other things, implicated Gen. Pinochet in covering up the assassination. U.S. efforts to follow up on the defector's information have met with resistance in the Chilean courts. Given the importance of the case not only for Chilean-U.S. bilateral relations but also within the human rights context of Chile, it would have been appropriate to mention those developments in one or more sections of the report.
Third, we continue to be concerned with the report's treatment of non-uniformed political violence in Chile, particularly its identification of "terrorists" of the right and left. On the one hand, this year's report, unlike last year's, does not clarify that rightist political \iolence is linked to the security forces. In the section on poHtical killing, the report mentions a few "rightwing terrorist groups" by name, but it presents no evidence of their connection to official agents, except indirectly with regard to a single case which did not involve a death but a kidnapping. Given that the structure of repression has not changed in this respect since 1986, we question the report's failure to clarify the provenance of non-uniformed political violence from the right. Such clarification is all the more necessary in that, as the report notes, repression of this sort — killings, kidnappings, physical abuse and threats — became an increasingly serious problem during 1987.
On the other hand, the report tends to adopt the government's loose characterization of "leftist terrorists." In describing victims of poUtical killings, for example, the report asserts that "[ojver half of the dead were leftist terrorists." The report then provides a partial breakdown of those cases which casts doubt on the use of the "terrorist" label. The breakdown includes the deaths of two persons who were shot from vehicles while they participated in an anti-government protest, which hardly constitutes terrorist activity. It also includes twelve deaths in five separate incidents of persons killed while purportedly "resisting arrest"; although the government called these people terrorists, they were not engaged in their own armed activity when they were killed, and at least nine appear to have possessed no firearms to justify fire by security agents. To describe such people as terrorists stretches considerably the definition of what constitutes terrorism, such that the report tends to reflect the Chilean government's broad, poUtically convenient concept of that phenomenon.
18
Chile
That is not to deny that there is armed leftist activity in Chile, and that an increasing proportion of that activity may fairly be described as terrorist in that it endangers civilian lives and unsettles the public at large. Among such incidents are certain bombings and shootings mentioned in the report. This accelerating trend of violence deserves note and condemnation, but it should also be kept in perspective. Some incidents have created suspicion of official provocation, such as the above-mentioned case of twelve leftists killed while purportedly "resisting arrest." While the report notes that human rights organizations have questioned the official explanation for these deaths, and that an official investigation into the deaths seems to have been halted when a military court assumed control of it, the report does not cite the substantial evidence which tends to show that the leftists were murdered according to a premeditated plan. Those facts should have been reported.
These criticisms aside, the report merits special commendation. Ironically, however, the very excellence of this report conforms to a pattern we have noted over the years, in which the quality of the reporting varies according to the extent to which accuracy will further the Reagan Administration's foreign policy objectives. During 1987, the Reagan Administration took several positive steps in its human rights policy toward Chile — among them, the decision to eliminate trade benefits to that nation under the Generalized System of Preferences because of the lack of respect for labor rights, and a strong statement by President Reagan and Secretary Shultz, on December 17, regarding the need to respect basic rights in the period leading up to the Presidential plebiscite expected this year. These steps are reflected in the country report's improved presentation of labor rights conditions and its improved analysis of the Constitution and the rights of political parties. We once again commend the Administration for having taken those steps, and commend the high quality of this report. We would only suggest that such quality should be achievable whatever the foreign policy concerns of the State Department in a given country in any given year.
19
Critique
