PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
The report on the People's Republic of China ("PRC") is a detailed and, in significant part, accurate account of the human rights situation in 1987. Nonetheless, it contains a number of inaccuracies and omissions, and is misleading in its discussion of Tibet. Moreover, certain sections of the report describe progress wthout discussing the ways in which China continues to fall short of internationally recognized human rights standards.
The report discusses the case of Yang Wei, a former student at the University of Arizona who was arrested during demonstrations and sentenced in December to two years in prison. It neglects to mention, however, that the major component of the case against him was his alleged connection to the Chinese Alliance for Democracy, the U.S.-based dissident group that publishes China Spring magazine. In addition to charging Yang with inciting unrest and spreading propaganda for the Alliance, officials alleged that he had attacked "the people's democratic dictatorship and socialist system" while writing under a pseudonym in the U.S. This report's omission of the information is particularly significant because Chinese actions against Mr. Yang for activities in the U.S. may implicate U.S. legislation designed to deter intimidation and harassment of foreign citizens in the U.S. The Arras Export Control Act prohibits arms exports to those countries "determined by the President to be engaged in a consistent pattern of acts of intimidation or harassment directed against individuals in the United States."
The report presents government statistics on torture cases, and notes that the authorities have taken disciplinary action against torturers: China's code of criminal procedure specifically prohibits the use of torture. However, according to official statistics, in the first 6 months of 1987,65 cases of torture ... were reported, a 23.5 percent drop compared to the same period in 1986. The Government continues to condemn and to publicize cases of [torture] and to take action against the perpetrators.
20
People's Republic of China
This section incorrectly implies that the government is taking adequate measures to eliminate torture. It should have stated that torture will continue to be a systemic problem as long as the authorities permit incommunicado, illegal, and administrative detention in China.
Although the report concedes that "a number of reliable sources reported that People's Armed Police severely beat several monks who were detained during a demonstration in Lhasa on October 6," it does not comment on the widespread use of torture in Tibet. More important, the report fails to note that the authorities' willingness to condemn and punish acts of torture does not appear to have extended to torture in political cases in Tibet.
In fact, the State Department devotes only minimal attention to any of the many human rights abuses in Tibet. This is surprising considering the extensive international attention given to Tibet last September and October when demonstrations by monks erupted into violence after police beat and fired on unarmed participants. More demonstrations and violence followed, in which at least 13 Tibetans died; police made 300-400 arrests, accompanied by beatings; and at least 19 are believed to have died in police custody. Except for the above-mentioned brief reference to the police beating monks, the report does not describe these events.
In discussing religious freedom, the report accurately acknowledges that "the authorities still react harshly to unsanctioned religious activity" 2md describes state control of religion and state-imposed obstacles faced by organized religions. In mentioning a 1983 law authorizing the death penalty for leaders of sects that spread "feudal and superstitious ideas," however, the report adopts a troublesome tone, implying that only "mainstream religious activity" deserves protection:
This provision appears to be aimed at traditional animist and cult practices or criminal activity rather than at mainstream religious activities.
Also on the topic of religious freedom, the report states: The Tibetan people's deep reverence for the Dalai Lama as a religious leader is tolerated in China, but individuals face charges... if they participate in activities deemed to be politically motivated.
21
Critique
This sentence is misleading, as it does not convey the fact that any organized expression of devotion to the Dalai Lama is considered to be politically motivated. For example, it is forbidden to offer prayers publicly for the Dalai Lama.
The report omits any discussion of population transfer to Tibet. In its reporting on minority rights, the report should have discussed the impact of this transfer on Tibetan culture, as well as the evidence of strong patterns of discrimination against the Tibetan population relating to the growth of the Chinese population. This is manifested in policies on housing, access to services, freedom of movement, education, and economic opportunities. Tibetans are increasingly being moved by design into disadvantageous economic and social positions vis-a-vis the plateau's growing Chinese population in the cities and towns. In this respect, the PRC government only a few years ago was contending that family size restrictions would not apply to Tibet, so that Tibetans could build up their population and thus develop Tibet's economy. Now, however, restrictions on family size are imposed while Chinese migration is actively encouraged.
The report's discussion of freedom of assembly and association does not mention the student demonstrations of December 1986 and January 1987 in which thousands of students protested in major cities throughout China, demanding democratic reforms and freedom of the press. Although the authorities initially tolerated the demonstrations, they later restricted them. In January 1987, the government launched a campaign against "bourgeois liberalization," dismissing academics, journalists and Party officials from their jobs or expelling them from the Chinese Communist Party. Many people were temporarily detained; some were mistreated in custody; and some were formally arrested on political or criminal charges. One journalist has been sentenced to seven years in prison for making a speech. Although the report's section on free speech mentions the campaign against bourgeois liberalization, there is no discussion of the criminal sanctions imposed on demonstrators in the sections on free speech, assembly or association. Indeed, in the section on citizens' rights to change their government, the report credits the authorities with responding to the demonstrations wth "restraint." This is an example of the tendency in the
22
People's Republic of China
report to make judgments based on comparisons with prior Chinese practice, rather than internationally recognized standards.
The report does not discuss the cases of any political prisoners. Although the State Department is accurate in asserting that "[n]o reliable figures exist for the number of political prisoners in China," information on many individuals is available and should have been described, For example, the report should have mentioned the still-confined Democracy Movement prisoners of 1979-80, who include Wei Jingsheng, Liu Qing, and Xu Wenli, among others. It also could have discussed the case of Tibetan nationalist Geshe Lobsang Wangchuk. Geshe Lobsang Wangchuk had been imprisoned for most of the past 25 years because of his pro-independence efforts. He was reported to have died last year while in custody after being tortured. The report of his death was later confirmed by Chinese authorities.
Regarding the right to counsel, the report states:
[A] defense attorney does not enter a case until after the police and procurator have finished their investigations and have decided to recommend to the court that the accused be formally charged.
In fact, defense attorneys may not see clients until just before trial, which could be months after authorities bring formal charges. In describing trials, the report concedes that "[c]ourts assume the guilt of any person brought to trial," but fails to mention the lack of procedural rights, such as incommunicado detention and denial of the right to counsel.
Finally, the report notes: There are no known organizations within China which monitor or comment on human rights conditions .... The Chinese regard their human rights record as an internal matter and generally offer no justification for foreign concern about it." The report does not state, however, that the government has suppressed efforts at domestic human rights monitoring.
23
Critique
