COLOMBIA
The report on Colombia correctly notes that there is a high level of political violence, including an increasing number of political assassinations, and that the "weak enforcement of law and order" enables "perpetrators of violence to act with impunity." Furthermore, in a marked improvement over prior years, the report directly acknowledges that those perpetrators include (but are not limited to) members of the armed forces. The report is weakened, however, by its efforts to downplay the disastrous proportions and political implications of Colombian violence and the rapid deterioration of the rule of law. The report thus fails to convey what many Colombians describe as a complex "dirty war" in their country.
For example, the report states that left-wing political activists, principally members of the Patriotic Union (UP), have been particularly "targeted for assassination," and includes the UP's claim that nearly 500 of its members have been killed since it was founded in 1985. But the report then undercuts this claim by stating that, according to unspecified "public sources," only 56 UP activists were killed in 1987. The figure of 56 is not that much higher than the toll that the report gives for assassinated members of the traditional Liberal and Conservative parties, leaving the reader with the false impression that UP activists have not suffered a disproportionate share of the attacks. Moreover, by implying that, of the reported 500 killings since 1985, only 56 occurred in the past year, the report suggests that a substantial reduction in the rate of killings has occurred. In fact, human rights groups and the UP report between 110 and 150 UP activists killed in the past year, including 24 officials or candidates for public office.
Similarly, in citing the murder of 30 to 40 banana workers in the region of Uraba in August, the report erroneously su^ests that the violence ended with the settlement of the labor dispute. In fact, the murder of union members in Uraba continued throughout 1987 and into 1988. The report also fails to con-
24
Colombia
vey the campaign to decapitate the progressive labor movement nationwide. According to an admittedly incomplete list issued by the Unitary Workers Central, Colombia's largest and most militant labor confederation, 22 union presidents or members of union directorates were assassinated in 1987.
The report also mutes its discussion of the beUef of most analysts and Colombian government officials that the level of political violence is rapidly accelerating, with a corresponding deterioration in the rule of law. While the report correctly notes that statistics on killings and disappearances are unreliable, it fails to mention the general agreement that the available figures greatly understate the actual violence.
The report claims that the Permanent Committee for the Defense of Human Rights, the principal nongovernmental human rights organization in Colombia, has reported 410 political killings in 1987. This figure presumably reflects the number of cases cited in the Committee's periodic bulletin, which reflects press reports, personal testimony and complaints filed by relatives. But the country report fails to indicate that the Committee lacks the capacity to monitor all human rights violations nationwide, and does not pretend to list them all in its bulletin. Official sources cited in the press indicate that upwards of 1200 non-combatants were assassinated for poUtical or labor reasons during 1987. Indeed, the Permanent Committee itself has released statistics on human rights violations for 1987 listing 1,651 assassinations.
The report's treatment of disappearances also minimizes the seriousness of the phenomenon. The report does not cite figures released by the Attorney General's office in late 1987 which indicate that a total of 603 persons have disappeared in Colombia (of a total of 893 cases of reported disappearances, QQl persons have been found alive, 89 dead). Between May 1986 and May 1987, 158 cases of disappearances were reported to the Assistant Attorney General for the Armed Forces for investigation.
Inexplicably, the report also omits one of the more ominous developments in Colombia during 1987: the circulation of hit lists and the proliferation of written and telephone death threats. These threats have created a climate of terror which has led dozens of prominent Colombians to flee the country or to send their families abroad. The report also neglects to note that, unlike in
25
Critique
previous years, those threatened and killed are not limited to left-wing political or social activists, or to persons with alleged guerrilla connections. During 1987, victims included, among others, journalists, academics, and independent human rights activists. Consistent with these omissions, the report also fails to comment on the continuing growth and role of death squads, believed by the Minister of Government now to number approximately 140.
Apart from these factual inadequacies, the report meikes no effort to explain the political motives behind the growing violence. The report's comment that partisan political violence in Colombia is "not new" perpetuates the prevalent pseudo-explanation that Colombians are violent and fails to account for the increase in bloodshed. Moreover, the comment is inaccurate, since the advent of hundreds of assassinations by hired guns and death squads is new to Colombia, as is the apparent effort to liquidate a political party, the UP. The report should at least have noted some of the factors cited by Colombians to explain the violence: a fiercely intolerant right wing — including civilians and members of the military — that is unwilling to accept the UP's existence; the ambiguous relationship between the UP and the guerrilla organization FARC (the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia), which has permitted anti-guerrilla hostilities to be turned on the UP; the interest of extremists on both ends of the political spectrum in definitively ending the peace process and provoking military solutions to poUtical differences; and the interest of certain sectors in derailing the first mayoral elections in Colombia's history, held in March 1988, which threatened party bosses in many areas and offered the unrealized possibility of several dozen local UP victories.
To its credit, the report for the first time forthrightly includes individual members of the military, along with drug traffickers, guerrillas, hired killers and death squads, as sources of violence. But after that commendable beginning, the report fails to present m its own voice an analysis of the threat to the rule of law posed by numerous human rights abuses committed by or wth the acquiescence of the military. Rather, the report merely refers to "accusations of military or paramilitary involvement" made by the UP, Americas Watch and Amnesty International. Similarly, the report misrepresents the public controversy over the discovery of armed peasant "self-defense" groups — portraying the
26
Colombia
controversy as disquiet over the inability of the armed forces to prevent defensive operations from becoming offensive — while failing to state that many Colombians, including government officials, are concerned that such groups are in fact paramilitary or "private justice" death squads armed and trained by the military for offensive actions.
With unfounded optimism, the report notes the "positive steps" taken by the Colombian government to reduce political violence and strengthen the administration of justice. A more candid assessment would have to be that such steps have been too little, perhaps too late. The Colombian government to date has been notoriously ineffective at curtailing violence or punishing human rights abuses. As the report cautiously remarks, "many" perpetrators of violence act with impunity. In fact, all but a handful have escaped punishment. To date, no one has been conNicted for any of the UP murders, and few of the thousands of political crimes in the past several years have been solved.
In particular, the critical issue of military impunity for human rights abuses should have been handled in a more straightforward manner. Rather than asserting its own analysis, the report relies on a quote by Amnesty International to explain that, with military courts exercising criminal jurisdiction over such cases, few military members are prosecuted for human rights abuses. The Assistant Attorney General for the Armed Forces, Omar Henry Velasco, has attempted to reverse this trend by commencing genuine investigations into the military's role in attacks against the UP. The report unfortunately mischarac-terizes his interim results. In September, Mr. Velasco (who has been appointed on a permanent basis to the post, despite the report's indication to the contrary) reported on the status of 14 of 26 (not 14) ongoing investigations; in 6 (not 4) of those cases the evidence warranted initiating formal disciplinary procedures against 11 (not 8) officers. We cite the correct results not to quibble, but because these investigations are an unprecedented assault on military impunity. We believe the report not only should have accurately reported the full scope of his effort but also should have directly applauded this endeavor to secure administrative prosecution for military abuses.
27
Critique
