CUBA
Despite certain positive developments in the past year - the Cuban government has released a number of political prisoners, and for the first time has permitted two imofficial himian rights groups to operate - Cuba remains a closed, highly structured society in which peaceful political opposition to the government can result in loss of job, denial of educational opportunities, and imprisonment. Criminal defendants must depend on government-employed lawyers whose loyalty to their employers seems to take precedence over the defense of their clients; trials are conducted before judges who are not independent; convicted defendants face excessively long prison sentences with infrequent family visits and correspondence; and prisoners who resist "reeducation" are harshly treated, including inhuman and lengthy confinement m dark and cramped punishment cells. The country report on Cuba does a thorough and largely accurate job of describing these abuses.
Unfortunately, the State Department not only catalogues these actual abuses, but goes on to make allegations of additional serious abuses for which there is no support. The report thus makes charges of "secret executions," "systematic torture" and "disappearances." While the Castro government in the past has been responsible for secretly executing thousands of "counterrevolutionaries," and severely mistreating countless others, there is no evidence that the secret executions, systematic torture and disappearances described in the report continue today.
The apparent imp>etus for including these unproven allegations is that Cuba has been a principal focus of a human rights campaign by the Reagan Administration for the past two years. In both 1987 and 1988, the overriding concern of the U.S. delegation to the U.N. Commission on Human Rights in Geneva was to draw attention to persistent human rights violations in Cuba. The country report on Cuba, issued just days before the opening of the 1988 session of the U.N. Commission, served as, a briefing book for the U.S. effort. However, by placing unsupportable allegations at the forefront of its human rights campa^, the State Department hinders efforts to improve the human rights situation in
28
Cuba
Cuba. Exaggeration gives the Cuban government an easy set of charges to rebut, permitting it to appear to address international human rights concerns while leaving untouched the ongoing and serious human rights violations in Cuba which the U.S. should have highlighted but did not.
The report on Cuba relies extensively on a single source, the Cuban Committee for Human Rights (CCPDH), led by Ricardo BofiU Pages. Bofill and his compatriots resumed aggressive human rights monitoring only months after several of them left prison for the same activity. Much of their information is accurate and valuable, and the group clearly has established the trust of important sources of information in the prisons and elsewhere. Yet, because CCPDH is not able to operate freely enough to verify all the information it receives, the State Department should not rely uncritically on the information CCPDH publishes. However, instead of recognizing that CCPDH operates in adverse circumstances, and proceeding with appropriate caution, the State Department apparently preferred to report information that was disparaging of the Cuban government, sometimes at the expense of accuracy. The report thus uncritically parrots the most serious CCPDH allegations, occasionally embellishing them in the process.
An example is the report's discussion of disappearances. In its 1986 report, the State Department conceded that "there are no substantiated reports of disappearances in Cuba." This year, however, the State Department sought to fill the "disappearance" category even though Cuban practices had not changed.
Thus, citing CCPDH, the State Department asserts that disappearance victims include "all those executed for political crimes... since the trials in which they are condemned to death are completely secret; no one has any word of them subsequent to their arrest; and afterwards, the families of the victims never receive information regarding the remains of their loved ones." The report gives as an example of this phenomenon the case of three brothers, Ventura, Ciprian and Eugenio Garcia Marin. An investigation of this case does not bear out the State Department's conclusion.
To begin with, the State Department already noted in its 1985 report that the Garcia Marin brothers "reportedly were executed," not that they had
29
Critique
disappeared. Moreover, with the assistance of BofiU and CCPDH, we have interviewed the mother of the Garcia Marin brothers. As she explained, the Cuban government has not withheld from her the fact that her sons had been arrested, that they had been convicted in connection with an attempt to seek asylum in the Papal nunciature, during which hostages were taken and one nunciature employee died, and that they had been executed in January 1981. Indeed, the Cuban government has told her where her sons are buried, and she makes periodic maintenance payments. The sole sense in which her sons could be said to have disappeared is that the Cuban authorities, unjustiHably, have refused both to release the remains to her for reburial elsewhere and to tell her precisely where in the cemeiery her are buried. The State Department might rightfullv have chosen to deplore these executions of the past, but they are not disappearances, if for no other reason than that they never gave rise to the lingering uncertainty as to the fate of one's loved ones as occurs in the classic disappearance case.
Indeed, CCPDH makes clear that these are not classic cases of disappearances by stating that they are "virtually considered" disappearances. In the country report, however, the State Department chooses to drop the qualification.
The State Department goes on to state that CCPDH "names 14 others who have similarly disappeared in 1987." In fact, although the CCPDH report specifies 1987 whenever reported events occurred in that year, it provides no date in describing these 14 cases. The statement that these occurred in 1987 is at best speculation on the part of the State Department, evidently resorted to out of a desire to enhance the relevance of the CCPDH charges.
The State Department's other example of purported disappearances is no less fanciful. The report asserts that one category of disappearance victims in Cuba are "persons [who] have disappeared while attempting the perilous crossing to Florida in small boats or on homemade rafts and are presumed dead." Referring to those lost at sea as victims of disappearances is absurd. Recognizing a plausibility problem, the State Department adds that "[wjhile most of these deaths are likely due to the inherent dangers of the crossing, there have been unconfirmed charges that the Cuban Coast Guard and Air Force fire
30
Cuba
on boats and rafts trying to escape." Even with this caveat, the allegation has nothing to do "mth the phenomenon of disappearances that has plagued many countries of Latin America. Indeed, CCPDH mentions those lost at sea not as disappearance victims but, more appropriately, as victims of the Cuban government's restriction on freedom of movement.
The other most serious charges in the country report display a similar preference for sensationalism over accuracy. The report speaks of 17 political executions at Combinado Del Este prison between July 1986 and June 1987. We have conducted extensive conversations with prisoners in Combinado del Este, including prisoners who monitor human rights practices there, as well as prisoners chosen at random. We interviewed these prisoners in private settings, away from guards and government officials, so as to permit them to be as forthcoming as possible. But we have been unable to find anyone who could confirm even a single political execution during the period cited by the State Department. Indeed, the State Department casts doubt over its own allegation by giving as its sole example the case of Dr. Aramis Taboada, a lawyer who defended political cases and who died in prison (reportedly of natural causes, perhaps exacerbated by his treatment in prison) not in 1987 but two years earlier, in 1985.
The State Department's discussion of torture is similar. Once more citing only CCPDH, it reports "numerous incidents of torture by the Government, both as punishment and as a means of extracting 'confessions' from prisoners.... Methods include placing prisoners in 'drawers' in freezing cells and simulating executions." Once more, our extensive conversations with Cuban prisoners in prisons across the country failed to produce anyone to suppKjrt these abuses as having occurred in 1987. That is not to say that these abuses have not occurred in the past, nor that Cuba's prisons today are devoid of abuses. There are occasional beatings, and, as noted, those who resist "reeducation" or defy prison guards are kept in punishment cells under grossly inhuman conditions. But the State Department's allegations of torture cannot be sustained as a description of current practices.
In short, the most newsworthy charges of the State Department's report appear unverified. Indeed, the timing of the CCPDH report almost
31
Critique
precluded verification in time for this year's report. According to the State Department's description of its procedures contained in Appendix A to the Country Reports, U.S. diplomatic missions are required to submit draft reports to the State Department by October or November. This timetable would have applied to the U.S. Interests Section in Havana, which is responsible for on-site investigation in Cuba. The CCPDH report, however, which was released in two stages, did not become available until December 1987 and January 1988. Accordingly, wth the aim of influencing the Geneva effort, State Department officials in Washington appear to have inserted the most explosive charges made by CCPDH as the country report was heading to press, apparently without determining whether those charges could be sustained.
As noted, this trumpeting of unsupported charges has its cost in that it provides the Cubans a ready excuse to avoid addressing the serious himian rights violations that persist in Cuba. Regrettably, much of the international human rights community quickly loses sight of the lack of due process or freedom of expression when it is engaged in a debate over political executions, disappearances and torture. And by demonstrating that political executions, disappearances and torture do not now take place in Cuba, the Cuban government will have deflected much of the pressure to alleviate the human rights abuses that in fact prevail.
There is an additional and particularly troubling dimension to the State Department's conduct here. By making the CCPDH allegations the centerpiece of the country report, and, as a result, the focus of the emotionally charged Geneva effort, the State Department places CCPDH in an extremely vulnerable position inside Cuba. Indeed, the week after the Geneva session, the Cuban press repeatedly vilified Boflll, and unidentified individuals harassed him. The State Department exacerbated existing tensions by exa^erating CCPDH's allegations and widely circulating its own interpretation of CCPDH findings.
Cuban human rights practices require international attention. To encourage a sober and meaningful examination of them, the State Department would do well to substitute accuracy for ideology as the guiding principle of its human rights reporting.
32
