CZECHOSLOVAKIA
The report on Czechoslovakia provides a balanced and accurate portrayal of human rights conditions in the past year. It notes that "[t]he basic human rights situation in Czechoslovakia showed a slight improvement in 198T — that is, "fewer arrests, fewer trials resulting in prison sentences, and some signs of greater official toleration for independently organized activities" — but it tempers these positive assessments by observing that "[hjarsh repression continues to be directed at religious activists and at those persons and groups, such as signatories of Charter 77 and members of the Committee for the Defense of the Unjustly Persecuted (VONS), who monitor human rights abuses in Czechoslovakia." A few points warrant further discussion.
In addressing torture and inhuman punishment, the report displays appropriate balance. It states that "[t]he Government does not appear to practice a systematic program of torture," but then describes the "cruel and degrading treatment" accorded current and former prisoners. Further elaboration would have been in order, for example, in the case of Jiri and Pavel Wonka. It should have been noted that Pavel Wonka — who has since died in prison — was reported to be in very poor physical and psychological condition as a result of his incarceration. After his arrest in May 1986, he was reportedly kept naked in a cell for three days without a bed; when he complained about the cold, he was put in an even colder cell. At his court hearmg on October 3, 1987, he was reported to have been trembling uncontrollably.
The State Department should be commended for once again discussing the hazardous conditions under which prisoners are forced to work. It states:
Informed sources report that prisoners are assigned unpleasant and hazardous work which normal workers refuse to perform. Inmates are occasionally given such health-threatening assignments as polishing crystal and costume
33
Critique
jewelry in environments lacking sufficient ventilation to
prevent glass fragments and chemicals from being inhaled.
In addition, while the report observes that medical facilities are reliably reported to be "deficient," it might have gone further by noting that the medical services offered in such stricter-regime facilities as Valdice are wholly inadequate.
In discussing the number of political prisoners, the report once again eschews polemics and cites the conservative figure of 15 given by VONS, as well as other estimates of 200 to 800 if cases of illegal attempts to leave the country are included. If anything, the report should be faulted for giving an unjustifiably low impression of the number of political prisoners, insofar as the report neglects to mention that VONS qualifies its figures by noting that it is able to report only the limited number of cases that come to its attention and thus does not purport to pro\ide a comprehensive estimate of the number of political prisoners in the country.
When discussing arbitrary arrests and detentions, the report correctly notes the frequency with which Czechoslovak citizens are "arrested, detained or subjected to searches and interrogations for the expression of personal views contrary to those of the regime." However, the report might have described some of the constant harassment that has been directed at Charter 77 signatories. During the course of 1987, dozens of Chartists were subjected to detentions, searches and interrogations on the basis of their human rights monitoring activities — some more than once.
With regard to freedom of movement, the report correctly notes that "citizens deemed politically unreliable may be denied permission to travel to either Eastern or Western Europe." Again, this could have been expanded. Czechoslovak authorities have exhibited a profound fear of having their citizens -especially opposition activists — travel to other East European countries. The government's fear of the "Polish virus," i.e., SoUdarity, has made it extremely difficult for Czechoslovaks to visit neighboring Poland. Similarly, Czechoslovaks wishing to visit Moscow must overcome significant hurdles. In December 1987, when two Chartists — Jan Urban and Prof. Venek Silhan — were en route to an unofficial seminar in Moscow, only Urban was permitted to board the plane.
34
Czechoslovakia
On his return, Urban was searched by Czechoslovak authorities and many of the materials he was carrying were confiscated.
Finally, the report disappoints by not addressing the growing police repression of unofficial rock and punk groups. While such groups are not the first to come to mind when contemplating likely human rights victims, they and other unofficial groups represent an important attempt to expand the scope of individual autonomy and civil society outside the control of the state. As such, they deserve attention and protection.
For example, in addition to the case of the Jazz Section, which received considerable international attention and is well covered in the report, the Czechoslovak authorities have engaged in a series of crackdowns against unofficial concerts. On July 25, a concert that was to take place in Western Bohemia was banned two days before the opening. The police surrounded the concert site and turned away all those arriving by car and train. One of the organizers, Daniel Mraz, was harassed and his house was searched. From September 4 to 6 in Volanov, six rock and punk groups were supposed to hold a concert, but the police occupied the road and stopped those en route to the concert grounds. Two of the organizers were arrested for 24 hours and the police continued to harass the audience throughout the weekend. There were reports of sporadic violence.
Correction: In our report. The Reagan Administration's Record on Human Rights in 1987, published in December 1987, we said that the U.S. Embassy should have made more of an effort to observe trials throughout the country, not only in Prague. This comment was based on inadequate information. In fact, the Embassy did go to considerable lengths to observe such trials. We regret the error.
35
Critique
