ECUADOR
Reading the report on Ecuador, one gains no sense that Ecuador has just weathered a near constitutional crisis stemming in large part from the human rights practices of its police. Buried eight pages into the nine-page report, the State Department notes, without any explanation or commentary, that on September 28, 1987 Minister of Government Luis Robles Plaza was called before Congress to answer six formal queries, that he refused to answer the queries, that Congress then voted to censure him and remove him from office, and that President Leon Febres Cordero refused on procedural grounds to recognize the censure and thus kept Robles in office. This bland account conveniently omits that the principal motivation for the censure vote was congressional discontent over the human rights abuses of the police under Minister Robles, and that President Febres's refusal to abide by the censure vote was patently unlawful.
President Febres's response to the censure vote was consistent with the disdain that he repeatedly has shown toward democratic institutions and the rule of law during his first three years in ofiice. To cite a few examples:
•	When early in his administration he was confronted with congres-sionally selected Supreme Court judges who were not to his liking, he ordered the army to surroimd the Supreme Court with tanks to prevent the newly appointed judges from assuming their posts.
•	When Congress, m September 1986, voted an amnesty for two public officials. President Febres refused on purported constitutional grounds to publish the law in the official register, thereby depriving the amnesty of legal effect; the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees, an autonomous body authorized by the Ecuadorean Constitution to adjudicate the constitutionality of the government's laws and conduct, excoriated the President's position, accusing him of "promoting disregard for the state's judicial order."
•	In September 1987, when the Supreme Court issued an arrest warrant for a former high official of the Febres administration on grounds of graft, the police, under the control of the Minister of Government,
38
Ecuador
refused to execute the warrant, once more on spurious legal grounds,
allowing the official to take flight and hide.
Such persistent flouting of the rule of law by the executive branch has put serious strains on a system which emerged from military rule only in 1979. Nevertheless, the State Department paints a rosy picture of a freely functioning democracy, thereby distorting the political context of the worsening human rights practices imder the Febres Administration. To its credit, the report is not a whitewash. But it tends to pussyfoot about in its coverage of violations of fundamental civil and political rights, minimizing the government's conduct while avoiding forthright statements in its own voice.
In its treatment of torture, for example, the report notes that "[pjolice reportedty beat suspects or treat them harshly" (emphasis added). The report also comments in a characteristic understatement that the laws regarding the length of incommunicado detention and detention without charge are "not always respected in practice." In fact, these laws are routinely violated, particularly in political cases, which, for the most part, involve suspected members of Ecuador's relatively ineffectual guerrilla organization. Similarly, the report notes that "at times the police have been involved in illegal surreptitious entries," again understating the problem and failing to report the fact that warrantless entries are routine in political cases.
The report affirms unequivocally that "[t]here were no substantiated charges of politically motivated killings by government forces during the year," a statement that has been included in State Department reports on Ecuador for the past three years. What is required for a "substantiated" charge, and who is to determine when such criteria are met, is left unclear. Certainly there have been serious charges of politically motivated police killings throughout the Febres Administration. In 1986, for example, family members and human rights organizations accused the police of extrajudicially executing nearly a dozen guerrilla leaders. There were fewer such charges in 1987, reflecting a decrease in the reported number of police homicides of civilians: 34 for 1987, contrasted vâth 40 in 1986, according to the Ecumenical Commission for Human Rights. The decrease also undoubtedly reflects the apparent decimation of the guerrilla groups as the result of police actions in prior years. Nevertheless, some of the
39
Critique
police killings that did occur in 1987 suggest a political motive. For example, one of the killings cited in the report — that of a young student leader and com-mimity actimt by off-duty army personnel — has been decried in Ecuador as a political murder.
There were no reported cases of forced disappearances in 1987, as the report correctly notes. Referrii^ to five reported cases from 1985 and 1986, however, it cites the government's disavowal of responsibility. Yet in one case, that of Manuel Bolanos Quinones, who was detained by the Navy in 1985 and later disappeared, the government has informed the United Nations that Bolanos died in detention and that criminal proceedings had been initiated in the appropriate military courts against those responsible.
The report fails to address directly the impunity with which the police and military commit crimes gainst ci\ilians. Such crimes fall under the jurisdiction of special police and military courts, which are presided over by active or retired officers. Not surprisingly, there are few convictions. The report does not mention the police coiu"ts at all. With regard to military courts, the report presents a distorted picture when it states that these courts "may try only those cases involving infi-actions of military regulations or acts against military installations." In practice, the military (and police) courts exercise exclusive jurisdiction over all cases in which members of the security forces are accused of crimes while on active duty, including cases of torture, rape and homicide. For example, a military court had jurbdiction in the above-mentioned case of Manuel Bolanos.
The report acknowledges violence against prisoners by prison guards and notes reports of prisoners having been killed "while trying to escape." No reference is made to general prison conditions, however, which are antiquated, squalid and brutal. Surprisingly, one of the positive human rights developments in Ecuador is ignored. In 1985 and 1986, detainees accused or convicted of guerrilla activities were notoriously and discriminatorily abused in the Guayaquil prison. In 1987, however, such discrimination ceased.
The section on freedom of the press is factually sound as far as it goes, but blunts the reporting of violations by omitting most evaluation or commentary. For example, the report notes that the Inter-American Press As-
40
Ecuador
sociatioQ (lAPA) at its November meeting adopted a report by the publishers of Quito's major newspapers which criticized government limitations on press freedoms. It then remarks that "(tjhe President of Ecuador and the government press service rejected the report's contentions," without indicating which position the State Department endorses.
In the section on the denial of fair trials, the report announces unequivocally that "[t]here were no Ecuadorean political prisoners in 1987." The State Department ignores the case of eight alleged members of the guerrilla group Alfaro Vive Carajo who remain imprisoned because of their alleged political affiliation and in clear violation of the guarantees in domestic and international law against double jeopardy. The eight initially were charged, and seven were convicted, of armed robbery. After several of them had completed their sentences on March 7,1987, the police kept them in prison by initiating new charges of weapons possession based on the same facts that had led to the original armed robbery conviction. On July 28,1987, the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees emphatically denounced the new charges and the continuing incarceration as clear violations of the double jeopardy guarantee. The Government, however, has refused to drop the charges.
The report notes that violence occurs in the context of many urban and rural land disputes. As the examples cited by the State Department suggest, the police are frequently involved in violent — and illegal — eviction attempts in which lives are lost; they also fail to arrest the armed civilians who attack residents, houses and crops in contested areas. The impunity with which these attacks are carried out has led to serious accusations of government complicity, not simply to the charges of governmental "indifference" that the report cites. The report also neglects to mention the important social and economic context of land disputes in the Amazon. The State Department notes that human rights organizations have "reported that community leader Jose Sharupi was killed by a policeman ... during a land dispute," but the report does not mention that Sharupi was an Indian leader and that Indians have been the victims of considerable violence when they seek to defend their land against petroleum and palm-oil enterprises and non-Indian settlers. The authorities have made no
41
Critique
discernible effort to stop this violence, to protect the Indians, or to prosecute those responsible.
Finally, the report omits important information in its discussion of the government's treatment of human rights monitors. The report mentions "occasional accusations of official harassment of... human rights activists in 1987," but it fails to convey the level of hostility displayed by the government toward these activists. Thus, the report makes no mention of the various attempts by the government to link human rights monitors to guerrilla groups, or of a governmental announcement on television asserting that those who purport to defend human rights are simply defending terrorists and drug traffickers and do not care about the rights of victims.
The excessively limited portrayal of human rights in Ecuador is particularly unfortunate in that it comes at a time when U.S. efforts to promote human rights might well have been influential. A successor to President Febres, Rodr^o Borja Cevallos, was elected in May 1988. The issuance of the country report was thus an opportune time to provide the incoming president with a forthright assessment of the human rights problems in need of correction. The State Department's superficial treatment of Ecuador's persistent human rights difficulties betrays a greater concern with placating President Febres — who has been a loyal Reagan Administration ally in his economic policies, his attitude toward Nicaragua, and his tough anti-drug and anti-terrorism stance — than with working to promote respect for human rights in Ecuador.
42
