GUATEMALA
We, unfortunately, cannot share the optimism expressed in the report on Guatemala. We part company with the State Department's analysis of the situation as early as the first two sentences of its report, which state in part: Guatemalan democracy continued to take root in 1987. Fewer human rights violations were reported, and the Government improved its capacity to investigate allegations of abuses.
Although a civilian government was freely elected in 1985, the military has not retreated from its domination of all aspects of rural life, nor has it ended its practice of murdering or "disappearing" perceived opponents, and it has certainly not allowed itself to be subject to the rule of law.
A good share of the State Department's unfounded optimism can be attributed to its decision to all but ignore the continuing militarization of life in Guatemala. For example, the report states that "[t]here are no legal restrictions on freedom of movement within the country." That statement is belied by the system of "model villages," in which the military has resettled some 60-70,000 Guatemalans, mostly highland Indians who fled to the mountains after the military destroyed their villages in the early 1980's in the course of its counterin-surgency campaign. Since then, the military periodically has conducted sweeps through the highlands to round up these Indians and force them to resettle in the model villages, where they are subjected to constant military surveillance and from which they can leave only with army permission. The most recent such sweep was the "Year-End Offensive" announced in September 1987, which resulted in the rounding up of some 2,000 Indians through December 1987. As the campaign continued into 1988, Defense Minister Héctor Alejandro Gramajo Morales announced the targeting of some 4,000 to 6,000 Indians who he said remained in the mountains. Before being assigned to a model village, those rounded up are held in containment areas near local army garrisons, where they are interrogated and indoctrinated under squalid conditions, sometimes for weeks at a time.
51
Critique
The report also effectively ignores the coercive methods used to enlist able-bodied men into civil patrols (PAC), which the report erroneously labels "volunteer." In fact, some 600,000 men are forced to participate in these patrols, and, in some places, civil patrols that were disbanded when President Vinicio Cerezo was inaugurated are being reinstated. A refusal to patrol can be met by detention in an army garrison, torture, and even death. Although nominally designed to assist the army in its counterinsurgency effort, the civil patrols function principally as a means for the army to maintain close surveillance of %ht-ing-age men who might otherwise provide assistance to the guerrillas. Many of the patrols are minimally armed, while guns and even bullets must be strictly accounted for. In a recent interview with us. Supreme Court President Edmun-do V^squez described the civil patrols as "unconstitutional, illegal and despicable."
Beyond these serious omissions, the State Department paints an imdu-ly rosy picture of the Guatemalan human rights landscape, even in the areas where it chooses to report. Docimienting human rights abuses in Guatemala continues to be e^rtremely difficult, given the inability of any local monitoring group to function under the ever-present threat of military reprisal. Nonetheless, there are indications that human rights abuses actually increased in the past year. To support its optimistic assessment to the contrary, the State Department notes that the United Nations Human Rights Commission adopted a resolution in March 1987 recognizing efforts by the government of President Cerezo to protect human rights. But the report fails to mention that the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, an arm of the Organization of American States, found in its September 1987 report that, "despite all of President Vinicio Cerezo's declared good intentions to maintain control of the human rights situation, a perceptible decline in the observance of human rights occurred immediately after the first months of his government."
The report also cites a purported decrease in political killings from 1986 to 1987, giving the figure of 83 for the period January to November 1987 as compared to 126 for the same period in the previous year. Although the report does not disclose this, the Embassy derives these figures not through independent investigation but by counting deaths reported in the press. Even this
52
Guatemala
counting does not appear to have been done thoroughly, however, since our own counting of press reports revealed hundreds of apparently political killings between January and November 1987. For example, according to Central American Report, a responsible and widely read English-language weekly published in Guatemala City, there were over 300 political killings and disappearances between February and April 1987 alone.
Progress on investigating human rights abuses, both past and present, has been minimal, contrary to the report's optimistic portrayal. Although President Cerezo's Christian Democratic administration has finally established long-promised governmental bodies intended to protect human rights, these bodies have so far failed to live up to their mandate. A human rights ombudsman supposedly chosen to investigate and seek recourse for human rights violations has made clear that he will not challenge the military, even though he conceded to us that he believed secxu^ity forces were to blame for a rash of disappearances in the last months of 1987 and early 1988. The Congressional Human Rights Commission barely manages to survive on a shoestring budget and acknowledges to foreigners that it does not have the governmental support that it needs to carry out more than perfunctory investigations of alleged human rights violations. A commission proposed by President Cerezo in April 1987 to investigate thousands of disappearances under previous military regimes only began to function in early 1988, five months after it was supposed to turn in its results. Moreover, as the State Department's report acknowledges, the commission has yet to produce a report "or publicly defin[e] its role." Indeed, it would have been fairer to note that, despite a charge that it present its findings by August 1987, the Commission has not yet begun to function. Finally, it does not appear that the ongoing investigation by Judge Olegario Labbe into more than 1,300habeas corpus writs for the disappeared has been conducted in a serious fashion. Since Judge Labb6 resumed his ordinary judicial duties in June 1987, he has devoted only about 15% of his time to investigating the habeas corpus cases.
As the report correctly observes, the government has the "capacity to investigate allegations of abuses." The report does not note, however, that what has been lacking, and appears still to be lacking, is the governmental will to proceed wth these investigations. None of the new mechanisms added by the
53
Critique
Christian Democratic government has challenged the military regarding past or current abuses. To date, no member of the military or police has been convicted for a human rights abuse committed in this decade, although tens of thousands of murders have been attributed to those institutions. Even active investigations of these abuses are a rarity. We have been shown a list of scores of officers reix)r-tedly arrested for a variety of offenses, but very few appeared to have been held for human rights abuses, and, again, none has been convicted. The sole significant exception is the well publicized case in which members of the National Police in Quetzaltenango, including the departmental chief, have been detained on charges of murdering two university students, but even that case has not come to trial. The report virtually ignores this effective immunity for ongoing abuses, and the corresponding broad gap in the rule of law.
The report makes much of the transfer of the National Police to the Interior Ministry, supposedly under civilian control. But we have been told by a high-ranking government official with access to the pertinent information that the National Police nonetheless continues to answer to the G-2, army intelligence. In 1986 and 1987, the National Police was headed by Colonel Julio Caballeros Seignd, whom U.S. government sources have described to us as a member of the G-2. The report further states that "[i]nstances of torture attributable to the military or police forces are infrequent." Nonetheless, many of the corpses found throughout the country bear signs of torture. Based on cartridges found near the bodies and the types of torture involved, government officials, political leaders and others have told us that dozens of these cases reflect military involvement.
Several cases of killings and disappearances described in the report are outlined in a misleading way, or in a way intended to downplay the likelihood of military involvement. For example:
• In the case of Edgar Arana Castillo — who having fled Guatemala in 1982in the face of death threats, was abducted after his return in March 1987 and his body left near a river — the report states as fact the un-proven charge that Arana was "formerly active with subversive organizations," thereby underwriting the military's claim that Arana was killed by the guerrillas.
54
Guatemala
•	In describing the case of Marta Odilia Ra^al-Sisimit and her mother Maria Esteban Sisimit, the report refers to it in gentle terms as an "unsolved" kidnapping and murder "in which a political motive was suspected." But the report fails to mention circumstantial evidence in the case implicating the National Police: in January 1987, Maria Odilia Ra^gal-Sisimit denounced the kidnapping of her husband to the Special Operations Brigade (BROE) of the National Police. On January 27, she received a telegram from the BROE ordering her to come to the station. She then disappeared. That same day her mother, Maria Esteban Sisimit, was kidnapped from her home. Both women's bodies were found January 30.
•	In describing the situation in Santiago Atitlán, the report mentions one murder by the guerrillas but neglects to mention recent killings and disappearances for which the military and security forces are believed responsible. It then attributes to the guerrillas a list of hundreds of assassination targets which the military purportedly foimd, without mentioning that local villagers, including the mayor, accuse the army of creating the list to coerce the male population into reestablishing the civil patrols that were disbanded when President Cerezo took office.
•	A similar lack of objectivity pervades the description of the case of the temporary disappearance of Débora Carolina Vásquez Velásquez, a 27-year-old student who returned to Guatemala in April 1987 for the first time in seven years and was seized by a group of men armed with machine guns on April 15. Some 50 people witnessed the mid-day kidnapping, as well as the beating of her father, who was left semi-con-scious at the Guatemala City gas station where the kidnapping occurred. Purporting not to take sides, the State Department reports that "the family claimed that the military was responsible for the abduction" but that the military "categorically denied involvement." But the State Department elects to omit key facts that belie the military's denial, namely that two uniformed policemen chased the vehicle in which Vásquez was captured, but stopped when they saw it enter the military headquarters. Nor does the report mention that on April 21, Vásquez's father met with President Cerezo, who told him that the military had seized his daughter and would release her if he promised not to talk to the press.
In other areas, the section on labor unions emphasizes the new freedom to organize, bargain and strike that the Cerezo government has recognized. But the report fails to mention that 13 trade unionists have been kidnapped or killed (and only six released) since President Cerezo took office in January 1986.
55
Critique
In contrast to the bulk of the report, the section on freedom of speech and press is relatively accurate. It notes that despite the absence of formal press censorship, "self-censorship" accounts for "the lack of aggressive investigative reporting dealing with the military and human rights violations...." Typically, however, the report never explains that the self-censorship is due to a well founded fear of military retaliation against those who discuss its misdeeds too frankly.
56
