HONDURAS
While ignoring several of the most significant human rights developments of the year, the State Department finds room in its evaluation of the 1987 human rights situation in Honduras to launch vituperative attacks against the major human rights organization in the country and its president, Dr. Ramón Custodio. Attacks on the credibility of the Committee for the Defense of Human Rights in Honduras (CODEH) have become a standard feature of the Reagan administration's human rights reports, yet this year's chapter is more hostile and, for the first time, attacks Dr. Custodio personally. Such attacks have never been an appropriate part of what purports to be a report on human rights conditions. Coming at a time when a prominent official of CODEH has recently been murdered, the verbal attacks are all the more inappropriate because they place CODEH members at greater risk, thereby jeopardizing the lives of human rights monitors and undermining the respect for human rights that the State Department should be aiming to promote.
Apart from the attacks on CODEH, the report is noteworthy for its failure to mention several key human rights developments. For example, in the discussion of killings by FUSEP (the Honduran police), the report mentions several killings of suspected guerrillas, but fails to mention that the police shot dead Supreme Court Justice Mario Reyes Sarmiento in his car early on the morning of July 4,1987 during an anti-crime sweep. The Human Rights Commission of the Honduran Bar Association described the incident as typical of FUSEP's "abuses against the citizenry," which, "aside from being intolerable, cast shame on the entire military establishment." The incident also illustrated the failures of the judicial system: military courts claimed jurisdiction over the case, in which a FUSEP agent had been detained, only to allow the army to remove the suspect from the Central Penitentiary in Tegucigalpa and transfer him to an unknown military barracks after one day's detention. The suspect has never been tried.
63
Critique
Nowhere does the report mention the important new testimony that has been provided by Florencio Caballero, a defector from the army who had served in a clandestine official death squad that had been trained by the Central Intelligence y^ency. Caballero went public with his story last year, and the major media gave prominent coverage to his testimony. In October 1987, Caballero testified about the death squads before the Inter-American Court of Human Rights in San José, Costa Rica, where representatives of the Honduran government had the chance to cross-examine him. His information, which conforms with details provided by other defectors, human rights activists and victims who survived the death squads, indicates that the Hondiu-an armed forces' death squads systematically picked up, tortured and killed suspected leftists between 1981 and 1984, and that the CIA funded the unit, trained its officers and, in some cases, interrogated prisoners. The imit, which operated under different names, but has generally come to be known as Battalion 316, still functions (albeit under yet another name) and has been implicated in a number of \iolent incidents and killings in recent years. In describing the murders. Caballero and others have implicated officers who are still on active duty in Honduras, including Lieutenant Colonel Alexander Hernández, a graduate of U.S. police training at the now-defunct International Police Academy. Hernández currently heads the police officer training school, which has been a beneficiary of recent U.S. police aid. Given Washington's key role in the activities described by Caballero, the omission of any reference to his testimony and other evidence brought out in the Inter-American Court trial raises serious questions about the objectivity of the State Department's account.
Remarkably, in a report that is capable of such comprehensive statements as that "[t]here were no substantiated charges of politically motivated killings by security forces in 1987," the State Department chooses to omit any reference to the campaign of violence and intimidation that has been launched against witnesses before the Inter-American Court case, in which the government of Honduras is being tried for the 1981-82 disappearance of four persons believed killed by Battalion 316. This campaign included threats against Ramón Custodio of CODEH and Milton Jiménez, an attorney with the Honduran Bar Association's Human Rights Commission, as well as the January 5, 1988
64
Honduras
assassination of José Isaías Vilorio, a member of the military who had been subpoenaed by the court, and the January 14,1988 murder of Miguel Angel Pavón, a CODEH official who testified in the fall. Both the Inter-American Commission for Human Rights and the Inter-American Court have found these threats and murders troubling enough to call on the Honduran government to guarantee the safety of witnesses before the Court and to acknowledge publicly that the right to testify before the Court is guaranteed by the American Convention on Human Rights. But these same events have not moved the State Department to include even a mention in its human rights report.
Indeed, in its limited discussion of the court case, the report not only omits reference to the related threats and murders but also seeks to discredit the trial by stating that the "complaints were brought before the court by CODEH" — which the re|X)rt has already attempted at length to tarnish — and by claiming that CODEH "took a leading role in the prosecution." In fact, the case is being prosecuted by the Inter-American Commission for Human Rights of the Organization of American States, a respected body the credibility of which the Administration has not challenged.
The report also erroneously praises Honduras as the only Latin American coimtry other than Costa Rica to have accepted the unrestricted jurisdiction of the Court. In fact, Colombia, Peru, Venezuela and, most recently, Suriname have accepted the Court's compulsory jurisdiction. Argentina, Ecuador, Guatemala and Uruguay have accepted the Court's jurisdiction with specific reservations.
Compared wth previous years, the report does include considerable information about extremely serious human rights violations attributed to government forces. Nonetheless, the allegations are presented in a way intended
Although the report ostensibly covers only 1987, it was not submitted to Congress until Januaiy29,1988, and the Honduran chapter contains a reference to an event which occurred in Januaiy 1988, indicating that it was not too late to include these latest and highly significant killings. Indeed, in Appendix A to the Countiy Reports, the reference to major events or significant changes in trends" that occur at the end of the reporting iperiod, and certain countiy rts, such as the ones on Cuba and ^ Salvador, cleaerly include si^iflcant material made available for the first time in Januaiy 1988.
65
Critique
to dismiss, excuse or minimize them. The report generally describes allegations of political killings and disappearances as unsubstantiated, while at the same time providing information which under any objective assessment would give considerable grounds for suspicion that such crimes are in fact taking place. For example, in a paragraph discussing purportedly unsubstantiated allegations of politically motivated killings, the report addresses the case of Trinidad Maria Pacheca, a peasant activist who died in police custody. While noting that a medical examination determined that Pacheca had died as a result of "blows to the body," the State Department dismisses the case because a military judge found "insufficient esidence" to warrant further investigation. As the report should have remarked instead, military judges in Honduras have been far less than energetic in pursuing justice for victims of abuses committed by members of the armed forces. The information presented on the Pacheca case suggests that Pacheca was beaten to death by the police and certainly should have merited further investigation.
The section on torture is fairly strong, noting that "abuse of prisoners is not uncommon," and including allegations of beatings and the use of electric shocks. Yet, the impact of these statements is watered down by a succeeding paragraph which repeats a complaint by the police that many who are charged with criminal activity claim to have been tortured because they know that confessions ^ven under torture are not valid under Honduran law. Republishing this allegation appears to serve little purpose other than attempting to discredit the repeated claims of torture. But since, as the report also notes, confessions under Honduran law are not valid unless they are repeated before a judge, an accused can avoid incrimination from an extrajudicial confession by simply not repeating it in court, without the need to allege torture. Accordingly, despite the State Department's efforts to Nindicate the police, there remains the strong implication that the allegations of torture reflect actual practice.
The report also quotes the police as sajing that the "increasingly frequent use of such charges [of torture] complicates prosecution of credible cases." Although the precise intent of this statement is imclear, it appears to be a disingenuous effort to excuse the lack of prosecutorial investigation into the repeated claims of torture. In fact, to the best of our knowledge, no Honduran
66
Honduras
police or military officer has ever been prosecuted for torturing a prisoner since the advent of ci\ilian government in 1982, and the reason is not because the police are confused by so many purportedly false claims of torture. The Hon-duran military establishment is unwilling to allow any such prosecution, and so liot a single one has been carried out.
The report's detailed attacks on Ramón Custodio and CODEH are, as noted, the most objectionable aspect of the State Department report on Honduras. The attack appears calculated to discredit CODEH because of the bad press it has given the Honduran government. While we do not necessarily expect the State Department to share Dr. Custodio's analysis of the human rights situation in Honduras, we are appalled that the administration would use a human rights report to vilify a human rights monitor at a time when he has received numerous death threats and his Vice President, Miguel Angel Pavón, has recently been murdered after similar threats.
Setting aside the propriety of such an attack, it is also based on several inaccurate charges. For example, apparently repeating a report in the Honduran daily Tiempo, the State Department quotes Dr. Custodio as having claimed that Doris Rosibel Benavidez, a suspected subversive, had "disappeared" and been murdered by security forces after he failed to find her in an inspection of the facilities of the DNI, the intelligence branch of the police force. In fact, as Dr. Custodio explained in a letter published in Tiempo and in a letter to the chief of the DNI, the original article had misquoted him in that he had accused the police only of an illegal detention because the DNI had seized Beravidezbut had denied doing so. After being dropped off at the Mexican Embassy where she sought asyliun, Benavidez confirmed that she had been held by the DNI.
Later, the report charges that CODEH fails to defend victims of the armed left as well as the right:
[MJost Hondiu"ans consider it [CODEH] to be a partisan organization. CODEH is publicly identified with the support and defense of leftist or radical causes.... CODEH's politiciza-tion and reluctance to speak in defense of victims of the violent left led to public demonstrations against it in May 1987....
67
Critique
To begin with, this charge isn't true: CODEH's most recent report includes the case of a military man killed by the left. Moreover, while we prefer an evenhanded approach and strive for it in our own work, many human rights organizations, including some which receive strong backing from the United States government, limit themselves to monitoring rights abuses by government forces or groups allied with them. Finally, it is worth noting that Dr. Custodio has presented evidence to a criminal coxu't in Tegucigalpa to show that the "public demonstrations" against him described in the report in fact were organized by the military.
The administration's attacks against CODEH, like campaigns it has leveled in the past against Tutela Legal in El Salvador and Task Force Detainees in the Philippines, do a disservice to the cause of human rights in those countries. If the administration is concerned with the furtherance of human rights, it ought to defend threatened rights monitors around the world, regardless of whether it finds their political views to mirror those of the U.S. government.
68
