HAITI
The country report on Haiti reflects a systematic effort to downplay the role of the military m the electoral violence of 1987. In doing so, the report minimizes the degree to which the Reagan Administration's support for the military contributed to the electoral disaster in November.
After thirty years of dictatorship, the Haitian people had hoped to hold their first national elections on November 29,1987, in accordance with a new Constitution that had been approved overwhelmingly in March. The Constitution contained several key provisions designed to avoid military control of the electoral process and to achieve a break with the Duvalier dictatorship: it established a civilian-controlled Provisional Electoral Council (CEP), "charged with drawing up and enforcing the Electoral Law to govern the next elections," and entrusted the CEP with enforcing a constitutional provision that barred from public office for ten years anyone who had been an "architect" of the dictatorship or had been involved in the torture of political prisoners or the embezzlement of public funds.
Despite these provisions, on June 22,1987, the military-dominated National Governing Council (CNG) decreed that responsibility for managing the electoral process would be shifted from the CEP to the Minister of the Interior, and that candidates rejected by the CEP under the ten-year bar would be permitted to appeal that decision to the Supreme Court, the president of which was the civilian member of the CNG. The attempted electoral coup sparked street demonstrations and a general strike which ultimately forced the CNG to rescind its decree, but not until the army had killed 22 and wounded 135.
The country report's account of these events, and the resulting unrest throughout the summer, is a study in obfuscation. It notes that "many Haitians perceived" the CNG's decree to be unconstitutional, without stating in its own voice that the decree indeed was unconstitutional, under a plain reading of the Constitution. It refers to the protests as "violent antigovernment street
57
Critique
demonstrations," su^esting that the violence came from the protestors when in fact army guns were responsible. It adopts the passive voice to assert that the demonstrations "resulted in numerous deaths and injuries," as if the demonstrators, not the army's bullets, were the cause of the casualties. And it asserts that the army "threatened" foreign and Haitian journalists, when in fact the army shot at the journalists, and wounded several.
At one point, the report concedes that "some" of these killings and injuries were the result of "inappropriate crowd control actions by Haitian security forces," a somewhat euphemistic way of describing the act of shooting at peaceful demonstrators. To its credit, though, the State Department does specify a number of instances in which the army killed demonstrators by shooting indiscriminately into their ranks, and it notes that "[t]here has been no government or independent investigation into any of these deaths and no reliable number or list of names of those killed has been published." But the State Department's effort to attribute violence to both the protestors and the army obscures the army's unique responsibility for the killings.
Indeed, the report presents deceptively the one instance of demonstrator violence that it specifies. The report notes that "[o]n August 1 police shot and killed 3 people in a crowd which had earlier attacked the driver of a truck carrying corpses from the Central Hospital to a burial ground." Reading this account one is left with the sense that the demonstrators had some perverse desire to desecrate the dead. To be fair, the State Department should have noted that the truck contained the bodies of earlier victims of army killings, and that the crowd was attempting to prevent the army from disposing of these bodies before an accounting of the victims could be made.
The report's accoimt is no fairer in describing the CNG's parallel effort to dissolve the opposition trade union CATH, the Autonomous Central of Haitian Workers. In response to a called general strike, the CNG ordered the closing of CATH on June 22, the same day as its attempt to take control of the electoral process. By July the CNG rescinded this order in the face of widespread protest. Straining to justify this closing, the report notes that CATH's call for a general strike had produced widespread "rumors of violence." That there in fact was no violence behind these "rumors" does not warrant
58
Haiti
mention by the State Department. Nor does the State Department note that the feared violence behind the rumors was violence by the security forces. Moreover, undoubtedly cognizant of the fact that governmental interference with legitimate trade union activities can lead to the discontinuance of U.S. trade benefits under U.S. law, the State Department obligingly reports that "[t]he Government stressed that the order closing CATH was issued not because of CATH's labor activities, but because of alleged unconstitutional, poHti-cal actions." The report makes no effort to specify what these purported unconstitutional activities were, let alone to provide CATH's account of the closing.
The report is inconsistent in its description of the murder of two presidential candidates, Yves Volel and Louis Eugene Athis. In the case of Volel, who was murdered on October 13,1987, the report is quite fair. It notes that "[e]yewtness accounts contradicted the official police version of the killing and indicated that Volel's attackers emerged from police headquarters." It also observes that "[ajlthough the police publicly stated they were pursuing an investigation, no results were ever released." (Unfortunately, a line of text appears to have been inadvertently dropped from the paragraph on the Volel murder, lea\ing the description of the murder somewhat garbled.) The description of the murder of Athis, along with two of his aides, on August 2, 1987, is less forthcoming. It notes that Athis and his companions were "killed by local peasants who accused them of being Communists." While that is correct as far as it goes, the report should have noted that the three men were stoned and hacked to death by a mob led by the local section chief, David Philogene, who himself raised the Communist allegations. The report correctly notes, however, that "[a]lthough the Information Ministry stated that four locals had been arrested in the case and that an investigation was being prepared, the status of the four detainees is unknown, and no report was ever released."
The report also goes out of its way to absolve the military for the plague of violence that terrorized Haitians throughout most of 1987. While noting that the innumerable killings have been attributed "to hit squads or to men in green uniforms," the report claims that the arrest of two gangs in February and September "revealed that, although gang members wore uniforms, none were
59
Critique
members of the military." Rather, according to the report, the perpetrators were "common criminals, ex-Tonton Macoutes... and military personnel acting independently to take advantage of the chaotic situation." But that account is deceptively incomplete in describing the gang stopped in September, presumably a reference to a gang stopped by a neighborhood self-defense committee in Tabarre after the gang had plagued Tabarre, Bois Blanc, Carrefour Clercine and surrounding areas with two weeks of death-squad style attacks. That gang was foimd to include Leon Gedeon, the personal driver of Lieutenant General Henri Namphy, then the head of the CNG, and to be in possession of cards and telephone numbers for the Casernes Dessalines, the barracks of an elite army battalion that has been responsible for much of the violence in Haiti over the past two years.
This selective account continues in the State Department's description of the November 1987 \iolence. Throughout the month of November, gangs of roving thugs machine-gunned and fire-bombed the homes and offices of presidential candidates and CEP members, culminating in the murder of 34 voters and election workers on election day. Despite desperate pleas for protection, the army barely lifted a finger to prevent the violence, thus effectively sanctioning it. The State Department's description of this violence once more reverts to the passive voice, observing that "[v]iolence £^ain rose steadily several weeks prior to the November elections." Although the report correctly notes that army personnel were involved in the election day murders and that "the CNG failed to stop the violence or to provide the necessary security for a fair and orderly election," it maintains that only "elements of the Haitian military" and "some Haitian military personnel" were implicated. The implicit effort to assign responsibility for the election day butchery to only a portion of the military would have been fairer if at the same time it had noted that no element of the military was observed to have lifted a finger to stop the election day carnage. If there is a respectable segment of the Haitian military, devoted to establishing democracy and protecting human rights, it was not to be seen in Port-au-Prince on election day.
The report pursues the same theme when it attributes the violence to "followers of the Duvaliers who hoped to regain control of the country," an
60
Haiti
analytically convenient but deceptive category, since it obscures the violent role of the army and its allies, who had no need to "regain" control of the country since, with U.S. backing, they were already in power and hoped to stay there. Similarly, the section on freedom of travel should have noted that in the days preceding the November elections the army did nothing to stop armed men at checkpoints along strategic highways from preventing CEP trucks from delivering ballots. In addition, the military refused to issue flight clearances to helicopters that the CEP had rented to help distribute ballots. This coordinated effort to block the distribution of ballots forced the CEP to postpone the elections in several parts of the country even before the extreme violence of election day.
The report is also incomplete when it turns to the military's efforts following the collapsed November elections to produce an electoral event under its control. The report notes correctly that, "{ijn violation of the Constitution the CNG subsequently dissolved the CEP, repealed the electoral law, and appointed another electoral council of its own choosing," with new elections scheduled for January 17,1988 and the installation of a new president scheduled for February 7,1988. The report also correctly adds that "many of the social and political parties, including those of the four major presidential candidates, urged a boycott of the government-sponsored elections."
But the report never describes the new, military-imposed electoral law, and thus fails to e}q)lain how the law ensured that the January 17 elections would be a sham. Missing from the report is any hint, for example, that the new electoral law allowed soldiers to inspect voter choices before ballots were cast, that it provided no guarantee for independent observers at such crucial stages as the vote counting, and that it placed much of the burden for distributing ballots on the candidates themselves (imder the system used, voters present a ballot con-tiiining the name and picture of their chosen candidate), and thus implicitly favored the candidate closest to the institution with the best distribution system in Haiti, the army. Accordingly, the reader is left with no sense of why the four leading presidential candidates of the November 29 elections urged a boycott of the substitute elections on January 17.
Moreover, the report fails even to condemn the substitute electoral procedure in its own voice. It states that "[i]n the opinion of many Haitians the
61
Critique
criteria necessary to make these elections credible have not been fulfilled," without ever stating that the State Department agrees with those Haitians. The omission is unejqjected because the State Department did condemn the elections as "flawed" on January 14,1988, over two weeks before the country reports were delivered to Congress. The report on Haiti should have reflected this Niew.
Finally, the State Department continues to obscure the lack of substantial efforts to prosecute those responsible for the gross human rights abuses under the Duvalier dictatorship. The State Department reports that public trials of several Duvalier-era officials were held "[djuring the 1986-87 judicial session," shrouding the fact that there were no such efforts in 1987. Moreover, the only defect in the judicial system that the report notes is the difficulty in attracting jurors. The report should have observed that the few prosecutions of Duvalier-era officials conducted in 1986 were conducted as show trials, wth little regard for due process, and with the apparent goal of avoiding implicating anyone who continued to hold a high position in the military. Similarly, the State Department persists in supporting the myth that prosecutions are still pending into the killing by army soldiers of three schoolchildren in Gonaives in November 1985. In response to a Congressional requirement that this and several similar cases be investigated and prosecuted as a condition for military aid, the State Department asserted on August 26,1987 that "[t]he Government of Haiti has assured our Embassy that legal proceedings against an Army officer and two former militia members accused of the November 1985 killings in Gonaives are proceeding through the evidence gathering stage, albeit slowly." The country report now states that "[o]ther cases involving human rights abuses, notably the deaths of students in Gonaives prior to the fall of Duvalier, were still pending at year's end." A fairer account would have noted that there has been no progress whatsoever on these cases, and that by all appearances they are moribund.
62
