ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
The report on Israel and the occupied territories is for the most part balanced and accurate, and in some respect this year's report is an improvement over previous years. There are, however, problems of language and tone that understate the seriousness of the situation in the territories. There is also at least one serious oversight that distorts the report's account of an important issue. Because our expertise pertains to the occupied territories, this critique focuses on the State Department's account of human rights conditions there.
As was the case last year, the discussion of torture and other forms of mistreatment of detainees is the weakest section of the report. The 1986 report acknowledged that Palestinians "complain" and "assert" that mistreatment of detainees is "widespread and systematic," but it made no attempt to assess the credibility of these complaints. Nor did it specify what kinds of abuses are commonly alleged. The 1987 report is a considerable improvement in this respect. It specifies the kinds of abuses commonly alleged: beatings, extended solitary confinement, sleep deprivation, hooding and cold showers, among others. It also adds weight to the complaints of Palestinians by noting that international human rights organizations, including Amnesty International, have made similar complaints. The 1987 report also notes some of the legal provisions that tend to invite abuse of detainees, including the heavy reliance of the military courts on confessions, and the routine denial of access to counsel, family members, and representatives of the International Committee of the Red Cross until after confessions have been obtained. The report also notes, as it failed to do last year, that most interrogations are carried out by the Shin Bet, Israel's domestic intelligence agency. But here is where the 1987 report stumbles badly.
The Shin Bet was the subject of a special judicial commission of inquiry in 1987. The commission, headed by retired Supreme Court President Moshe Landau, confirmed that Shin Bet interrogators had for many years used both ph^ical and psycholc^ical coercion to obtain confessions from security
81
Critique
suspects. The commission also found that since 1971 Shin Bet agents had systematically perjured themselves in the military courts as a matter of policy, denying that such methods were used. All of this is duly noted in the country report.
Incredibly, however, the State Department fails to note perhaps the most explosive result of the Landau inquiry: its conclusion that the Shin Bet's coercive interrogation methods were, for the most part, justified. The commission concluded: "We are not indicting the methods of interrogation used, which must in large part be placed on the credit side, in both the moral and the legal sense." The commission condemned some of the worst abuses and the perjured testimony, but it recommended that no agents be prosecuted or otherwise held accountable. Most important, it explicitly endorsed what is called "non-violent psychological pressure" against security suspects and added that, when this failed, a "moderate measure of physical pressure is not to be avoided." Details of the permissible "pressures" were spelled out in a secret addendum to the commission's report submitted to the Prime Minister. The Israeli Cabinet adopted the report's conclusions and recommendations in the first week of November.
In light of this extraordinary development, it is inexcusable for the State Department to begin its discussion of "torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment" with the flat assertion that "[t]orture is forbidden by Israeli law, and Israeli authorities state that they do not condone torture." The significance of the Landau report is precisely that the Israeli Cabinet, in adopting the report in its entirety, has for the first time officially condoned the use of physical and psychological coercion as a means of interrogating security suspects. One can quarrel about the legal definition of the terms "torture" and "cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment," but the State Department skirts the issue altogether by failing even to mention the Israeli government's explicit endorsement of a "moderate measure of physical pressure" against security suspects. The approach is particularly inappropriate in light of the State Department's vow in Appendix A of the Country Reports that the discussion would "concentrate[] on actual practices, not on whether they fit any precise definition."
82
Israel and the Occupied Territories
The report's failure in this regard is especially regrettable because neither the Reagan Administration nor the State Department has publicly commented on the Landau Commission's conclusions on this issue. Although the U.S. government has been consistently critical of Israel's use of administrative sanctions in the occupied territories — and the report is generally accurate in its discussion of these issues — the Reagan Administration has never taken Israel to task for its official endorsement of coercive interrogation.
Beyond this major oversight in its discussion of torture, there are a number of instances in which the report is imprecise and sometimes even misleading in its choice of words, so as to downplay the seriousness of the political conflict in the territories. Words like "friction," "discontent" and "tensions," on the first page of the chapter on the territories, leave an uninformed reader with little sense of the profound hostility and accumulated grievances that have built up over 20 years between the occupation authorities and the occupied population.
The report is particularly inadequate in its discussion of Jewish settlers in the territories. In explaining the "discontent" caused by settlers who have "taken up residence in the West Bank and Gaza," the report highlights the resulting dual systems of justice and instances of settler violence against Palestinians. But it fails to mention the critical role some of the more militant settlers play as "claim-markers" in an ongoing struggle to secure permanent control of the territories. By some accounts Israel has appropriated, by a variety of means, more than half the land on the West Bank, and much of it has been made available to the settlers. Many of Israel's security practices in the territories have been aimed at facilitating settlement and protecting the settlers. The report is correct in noting "the advocacy by some Israeli political figures of annexation or permanent control of the territories," but an uninformed reader could only guess that those figures include the Prime Minister, Yitzhak Shamir, and members of his right-wing Likud bloc, for whom the dream of a united "Eretz Israel" is the bedrock of political ideology. The Israeli government's active support for the settlement movement, under both Likud and Labor governments and under the present coalition government, has undermined Israel's claim to be acting purely in self-defense in the occupied territories. But the report makes no mention
83
Critique
of the controversy concerning the legality of civilian settlements in occupied territory.
The report is also imprecise in its use of the term "security," too often acceptii^ uncritically Israel's broad definition of the term. Israel does, of course, confront serious threats to its national security, yet it tends to define its security interests in ways that cannot be squared with the competing nationalist interests of the Palestinians, in effect defining any form of national political activity as a threat to Israel's security. There are reasons for this, and some of them are valid ones when viewed exclusively from Israel's perspective. But the State Department's report, which repeatedly refers to Israeli measures based on "security grounds," should at least make clear that, as a practical matter, Israel reserves the right not to distinguish between non-violent forms of nationalist political activity, such as publishing a newspaper that advocates an independent state for the Palestinians, and violent forms of political activity, such as terrorism. From Israel's perspective, both can be legitimately suppressed on "security grounds." From a human rights perspective, it must at least be made clear that "security" measures — arrest and detention practices, interrogation methods, trial procedures, intel%ence-gathering techniques — designed to combat the extreme threat of terrorism also are regularly used to combat such non-\iolent forms of nationalist activity as journalism, student politics, trade-union organizing, and even child-care prc^ams.
In its discussion of freedom of speech and press, for example, the report begins by asserting that "[f]freedom of expression is generally allowed, subject to restrictions imposed by the authorities on security grounds." This would seem to be a case of the exception being larger than the rule. Virtually all forms of nationalist political expression are potentially illegal, and nationalist politics is the primary political issue for most Palestinians. The ban on public expression of support for the PLO is tantamount to a ban on any expression of support for Palestinian nationalism, since the PLO is viewed by most Palestinians as the embodiment of their nationalist aspirations. There were some extreme examples in 1987, including the prosecution of Saeb Erakat, a relatively moderate Palestinian professor at Al-Najah University, who was convicted in April of "incitement" for writing three words — "reject, endure, resist" — in an
84
Israel and the Occupied Territories
English-language newsletter distributed abroad. The State Department is correct to observe that a good deal of political expression does in fact go im-punished in the territories. But the key point to be made is that in the context of such a prolonged occupation, any provision for exceptions based on "security grounds" grants the authorities virtually unlimited discretion to suppress political expression.
The report is correct in noting that Israel has sought to manipulate local politics in the territories, in part by trying, as the report says, "to reduce the influence of the PLO." But again, the reader is left to his own devices to ascertain how precisely Israel has done this. When the report observes that Israel has "discouraged" political organizations above the municipal level, the uninformed reader is ^ven no hint that Israel has done so by means of incommunicado detention, six-month administrative detention orders, deportation of suspected nationalist activists and leaders, and recruitment of informers by means of blackmail and coercive interrogations. All these practices are justified "on security grounds." The report is correct in noting that threats by Palestinian extremists also have inhibited the emergence of Palestinian moderates.
The report's discussion of "arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home or correspondence" is unaccountably thin. It notes the broad legal provisions for warrantless searches of homes — again, the exception allowed for pursuit of security objectives" in effect grants unlimited discretion to soldiers entering homes — but gives no indication of how commonplace these searches are. In fact, widespread, sometimes indiscriminate searches of homes, particularly in refugee districts under curfew, have been a long-standing grievance of Palestinians in the territories.
The discussion of demolitions and sealings fails to note what is perhaps the most disturbing as]>ect of this severe extra-legal sanction: collective punishment. Missing from an otherwise accurate account of the sanction is any indication of the numbers of people affected in addition to the suspected terrorist. Extended families of as many as a dozen or more people are sometimes rendered homeless by this sanction. Collective punishment is prohibited by the Fourth Geneva Convention.
85
Critique
