KENYA
The report on Kenya is a mixture of accurate and misleading presentations. Although it describes some developments in detail, it seriously underestimates certain important abuses and omits several significant developments, thereby undermining the report's usefulness.
The most serious failure is the report's treatment of MwaKenya, a clandestine organization that seeks the overthrow of the government. The report does not point out, as it should, that the government's emphasis on MwaKenya, which does not pose a serious internal threat, has been used to justify a widespread crackdown on peaceful dissent. In accepting implicitly the government's description of MwaKenya as a threat to stability, the report misrepresents the nature and source of political unrest in Kenya in 1987, which was the government's determination to crush dissent and to undermine the independence of institutions such as Parliament, the courts and the church. The report does not indicate, as it should, that throughout 1987 the policies of the government were dictated by the desire to root out dissent and that no distinction was drawn between criticism and violence. Nor does the report mention the extent to which the government's increasing unwillingness to tolerate opposition has alienated many influential leaders, who have condemned the insecurity and suspicion created by the government's policies and pronouncements.
In discussing government attacks on Amnesty International, the report does not mention that on December 12,1987 President Moi publicly threatened to arrest personally any representative of Amnesty International who visited Kenya. The report should have noted that, in November 1987, Amnesty International had sent an observer to attend an inquest into the death of Peter Karanja, a businessman who died in police custody. He was informed by the Attorney General that he was not allowed to represent Amnesty International.
Kenya
In the section on the denial of a fair public trial, the report states that:
The Mwakenya trials are... open to the public, but usually held late in the afternoon without prior announcement, so that the defendant's family and the press were often unaware of the time of the trial.
The report should also point out that it has been difficult for many lawyers to know where their clients were being held, to have access to them, to know when they are due to appear in court, or to learn that they have appeared in court. Some lawyers have had to waste time waiting in court because of rumors that their client would appear. On occasion, lawyers have been deliberately misled. The report should have noted other developments that severely curtail the right to a fair public trial: 1) in general, the police empty the courts before MwaKenya suspects are brought in; 2) most of these trials have taken less than 30 minutes to prosecute and convict the suspect; and 3) it is often difficult for lawyers to represent clients charged with MwaKenyarelated offenses because the families of the suspects are afraid of the consequences if they seek legal assistance. Cases have been reported in which the relatives of those being held in custody on MwaKenya charges have requested lawyers to drop habeas corpus applications after police intimidation. In addition, the report should have mentioned that, among those arrested, detained and convicted on political charges, some were detained and sentenced simply because of their relationship or association with others charged with MwaKenya-related offenses.
In the section on disappearances, the report correctly notes the numerous occasions in which authorities have detained people and failed to acknowledge this when inquiries were made. It does not point out, as it should, that there have been cases in which the Police Commissioner himself publicly stated that he knew nothing of these arrests, which were carried out by Special Branch, Kenya's security forces. The report should also add that it is during these periods of "disappearance" and secret detention that there have been credible and persistent reports of torture of those arrested on political grounds, either by the Special Branch or the Police Criminal Investigation Department (C.I.D.).
Despite compelling evidence that torture was a serious issue in Kenya throughout 1987, the State Department's failure to endorse these reports and
89
Critique
its obvious desire to distance itself from the issue is disappointing. The report states that "{t]orture has been cited in the Kenyan press and has been noted by human rights organizations and in the international media." Such language, and the superficial treatment of this question, reflects the State Department's reluctance to engage in public criticism of the Kenyan government. Moreover, in the discussion of deaths in custody, the report should have noted that the police in Kenya have been accused of releasing prisoners after torture so as to avoid their death while in detention. In response to widespread criticism of its use of torture, the government has repeated the defense that a few undisciplined policemen have been responsible for isolated incidents. To date, however, there have been no investigations, disciplinary measures against, or prosecution of those responsible for torture.
The discussion of the judiciary seriously understates its lack of independence in politically sensitive cases. The report asserts that "the Kenyan judiciary usually exhibits considerable independence, although the Government has reportedly put pressure on judges in sensitive cases." It adds that "[i]n cases of detention under the Preservation and Public Security Act, judicial authority is limited to ensuring compliance with procedural provisions." It should state categorically, instead of merely hinting, that the judiciary exhibited no independence whatsoever with regard to the MwaKenya trials. It would have been appropriate to point out that during the MwaKenya trials, no judge: 1) challenged the fact that the defendants had all been detained far longer than provided by law, 2) questioned the consistent pattern of guilty pleas; 3) requested an inquiry into the widespread allegations of torture; or 4) probed the absence of evidence other than confessions. The MwaKenya trials highlighted the extent to which the independence of the judiciary has been undermined, a development which the report simply ignores.
In its œmments on the release of human rights lawyer Gibson Kamau Kuria, the report might have noted that Kuria has directly attributed his release to pressure by human rights organizations and to foreign coverage of his detention. The report should also have noted that durii^ his nine-month detention, Kuria was kept in solitary confinement, threatened with the destruction of his
90
Kenya
career, and advised to stop representing "unpopular clients," according to a statement he gave to the press upon his release.
In the section on prisons, the report should have noted that there have been frequent and serious allegations of the denial of medical treatment to those held on [}olitical grounds. In April 1987, the wife of Raila Odinga, detained without trial since 1982 and released on February 5, 1988, asked the prison authorities why they had failed to respond to a recent serious deterioration in her husband's health. She herself was later arrested and threatened with Mwa-Kenya charges. In general« there should have been more emphasis on the extent to which prisoners and detainees are kept in solitary confinement. The report should have pointed out that in July 1987, Maina wa Kinyatti, a historian and university lecturer convicted of possessing a seditious dociunent and sentenced to six years' imprisonment in 1982, was moved to a cell in a block reserved for insane inmates, where he was held in solitary confinement. He has since been moved to Naivasha prison, where he is held, again, in solitary confinement and not permitted adequate medical treatment.
The report describes as "controversial" the constitutional amendment adopted in December 1986 which stripped the powerful posts of Attorney General and Auditor General of tenure and granted the president increased powers over these two posts. The report does not explain the seriousness of this measure, which has far-reaching implications. Until then, the Attorney General and the Auditor General had been protected from political pressure by temu"e. For the first time, the President has the legal power to dismiss them without having to seek parliamentary approval.
The report understates the extent to which the power of the president and his party, the Kenyan African National Union (KANU), have imdermined the power of Parliament, despite paying lipservice to the notion of parliamentary suprema<^. President Moi and other senior government leaders have publicly declared the supremacy of KANU over Parliament.
The report completely fails to mention the extent to which a KANU Disciplinary Committee created in July 1985 has seriously undermined freedom of e}q)ression in Parliament. In the coxu-se of 1986-87, the Committee became notorious for intimidating Members of Parliament who were critical of
91
Critique
government policies. MPs were called to task for questioning Party policies and leadership in Parliament, a serious breach of the freedom of expression which MPs enjoy under the Parliamentary Powers and Privileges Act. The report should have cited Charles Rubia by name as the MP who was taken to task for speaking out against "queuing," the requirement that on election day, in the preliminary elections, voters physically line up for the candidate of their choice, thereby eliminatii^ the secret ballot. The report should also have mentioned that another MP, Masinde Muliro, was also condemned for speaking out in Parliament against "queuing." After criticizing it for becoming too powerful. President Moi announced the dissolution of the Committee in September 1987, primarily because its power posed a threat to his own authority.
The discussion of freedom of religion contains some misleading comments and omissions. It states that "clergymen in Kenya have spoken out on political as well as religious issues from their pulpits," creating the false impression that such criticism was voiced with little fear of retaliation. In noting that "[ojne prominent clergyman was transferred by his church from Nairobi to a rural area in a controversy over political sermons," the report should have referred to Reverend Dr. Timothy Njoya by name. It should also have mentioned that security officers broke up a meeting between Dr. Njoya and U.S. Congressman Howard Wölpe in January 1987. In an effort designed to limit his influence, the government-owned Voice of Kenya radio stopped live broadcasts of his sermons. Moreover, Dr. Njoya was not the only church critic to face government reprisal. In April 1987, Bishop Alexander Muge of Eldoret, an outspoken critic of the government's clampdown on dissent, spoke of police harassment. He said that some of his close associates had recently been picked up by the police for questioning.
In referring to the violent clashes between students at the University of Nairobi and heavily armed riot police in mid-November 1987, the report fails to mention that the riots, which also involved the paramiiitary General Service Unit, left several people injured. The report also omits several relevant facts. The riots were sparked by the arrest at gunpoint of seven student leaders, who were dragged from their beds after the police raided their student residence in the early hours of November 15. The student leaders had addressed a student
92
Kenya
rally the previous day and expressed opinions critical of the government and of President Moi. The seven leaders and forty others were detained. A few days later all were released except the chairman of the student body, who has been sentenced to a five-year prison term, accused of passing information to the Libyan government about student activities, which was considered prejudicial to the interests of Kenya. The report should also have noted that the student union remains banned and that many of the students fled to Tanzania, and feared returning despite assurances by President Moi.
Although the report notes the government's sensitivity to coverage of human rights issues by the large foreign press corps in Nairobi, it does not refer to measures that are intended to intimidate critical foreign reporters or to the government's threat to reduce drastically the number of foreign correspondents. The government has made it more difficult for foreign journalists to renew their work permits. All correspondents have to reapply for accreditation under new, stricter criteria, including by submitting letters from their news organizations' headquarters, embassies and a national association, as distinct from an association of journalists. Work permits were made much more expensive at the end of 1987 and the duration of their validity was reduced. The report does not mention that as a response to extensive coverage by Norwegian and Swedish media of the report issued by Amnesty International in July 1987, the government refused permission for a group of Norwegian and Swedish journalists to visit Kenya in September 1987.
In the section on restrictions on travel, the report fails to mention that it is still difficult to travel to the northeastern parts of the country, where emergency regulations are in effect. In the section on the right to legal defense, the report should have pointed out that there is no right to a state-appointed lawyer in cases of armed robbery, only murder. Most of the pending death penalty cases relate to armed robbery.
93
Critique
