LIBERIA
Notwithstanding some familiar problems, the report on Liberia represents a considerable improvement over last year's report, which was misleading to the point of being disii^enuous. Gone are the spurious references to signs of "progress," to the "transition from military to civilian rule," and to "efforts at national reconciliation" between President Samuel Doe and his adversaries. To its credit, this year's report draws much clearer distinctions between appearance and reality.
The report observes in its opening paragraph that while the 1986 Liberian Constitution provides for a democratic government and guaranteed rights and freedoms for the individual, in practice recent military rule and a strong executive authority "continue to prevent fulfillment of that ideal." In acknowledging these factors, the report sets a tone markedly different from last year's overly optimistic portrayal of the transition to constitutional government. This year's opening paragraph also highlights the critical importance of the 1985 presidential election, in which, the report observes vsith commendable candor, "Doe's claim of a narrow victory was widely believed to have been fabricated." Readers are thus given a fair assessment of the basis for President Doe's continuance in power. "While Liberia is now ruled by a civilian government," the report concludes, "the army continues to be a bulwark of the current administration."
The report is thorough and, to our knowledge, largely accurate in discussing what it calls "serious problems" in the current human rights situation. It notes the "general weakness of the administration of justice," the frequent reports of "arbitrary arrests," "general harassment by military personnel," and "prolonged detention pending trial, or even without charge." It highlights the deplorable conditions in Liberia's prisons, including persistent reports of brutality by police and soldiers during arrest and interrogation proceedings, and
98
Liberia
it notes accurately that "there have been no evident government efforts to halt it."
The most serious deficiency in the report is its lack of historical context, which leaves the reader with little understanding of the larger pattern of human rights violations in Liberia since Doe and his fellow enlisted men seized power in a bloody military coup in 1980. It has been a pattern of periodic violent storms rather than systematic repression. Explosions of extreme brutality, including large numbers of summary killings and widespread detentions without charge, have been followed by lulls, during which there has been relatively little political violence and few political detentions — and little active political dissent. The last half of 1986 and most of 1987 were characterized by such a lull. The State Department interprets this relative calm as a sign of "improvement" in human rights conditions. Our own view is that the present lull is consistent with the existing pattern, and reflects the development of a more submissive population, not a more benevolent government.
The report notes accurately that "there were no reports of political killings" in 1987. It fails to note, however, that political killings have been a recurring feature of Liberian life from the moment then-Master Sergeant Doe and his compatriots seized power in 1980. Since then, several hundred soldiers and civilians have been simmiarily executed, including an undetermined number who were shot to death, castrated and dismembered on the Executive Mansion grounds in the aftermath of an attempted coup in November 1985. President Doe's government has never acknowledged responsibility for those deaths, nor has it even invest^ated them. The State Department should have noted these points.
Likewise, the report says simply that "there were no reports of politically motivated disappearances" in 1987, obscuring the fact that there have been disappearances in the past that have yet to be accounted for. The same problem arises with the report's assertion that "there were no known political prisoners held in Liberian prisons in 1987." There have, in fact, been numerous political prisoners in previous years, and a number of Liberia's most prominent opposition political figures are now Uving in exile after serving long terms in prison without trial. In its discussion of the press, the report fails to note that a number
99
Critique
of prominent editors and reporters have been jailed and brutally flogged in recent years. One, Charles Gbenyon, was bayoneted to death in November 1985 while in the custody of the Executive Mansion Guard. The government has never acknowledged responsibility for his death, and it has refused to release the body to his family.
These grave abuses in the recent past have set a context in which more recent events have unfolded. By completely ignoring the momentous events of previous years, the State Department gives an unduly optimistic impression of human rights conditions in Liberia. Even if the government had less reason to crack down in 1987, the rules of the game remained abundantly clear. President Doe's government has repeatedly demonstrated a capacity for extreme brutality and contempt for the rule of law.
The continuing relevance of past abuses was illustrated in mid-1987 by the appointment of Charles Julu, a notorious close associate of President Doe, as head of the Executive Mansion Guard. The EMG, as it is called, is essentially President Doe's personal militia, and it was implicated in many of the most savage reprisals that followed the 1985 coup attempt. It was also implicated in the brutal attack on student demonstrators at the University of Liberia in August 1984, in which an undetermined number of students were killed and a number of women were raped by soldiers. Julu, in turn, has been accused of personally ordering dozens of summary killings in Nimba County, where he served both as the local chairman of Joint Security and as head of the Plant Protection Force of Lamco, a multi-national mining concern. We extensively documented Julu's role in the vicious reprisals that followed the 1985 coup attempt in our published report. The government has never investigated these charges. No single individual in Liberia has been more personally identified vwth human rights abuses in the recent past than Charles Julu. The fact that he has been promoted to head the President's own personal militia is a powerful signal of the President's continuing contempt for human rights. The State Department fails to mention Julu's promotion.
100
