SRI LANKA
This year's report on Sri Lanka is more forthright than last year's. In several places it states that there is credible evidence of abuses, rather than merely asserting that abuses were reported by some observers or critics and denied by the government. The elimination of this spurious even-handedness is a significant improvement. The State Department still seems reluctant, however, to state directly that abuses occurred or to apportion responsibility. The situation in Sri Lanka is confusing, and the events of the past year (the signing of the Indo-Sri Lanka accord, the assumption by the Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) of the burden of fighting those Tamil militants who have rejected the accord, and the resurgence of Sinhalese radical nationalist violence) have only made it more so. Nevertheless there are a number of facts about which we believe the evidence warrants more definite statements. We summarize below both the improvements we see in the State Department's reporting and those places where further improvements are needed.
This year's report provides a more accurate assessment of the political system in Sri Lanka. In the section on political rights, last year's statement that "Sri Lanka is an open, working, multiparty democracy" has been changed to assert that "Sri Lanka has a multiparty, parliamentary form of government." We particularly welcome the implication that there is more to democracy than a particular/orni of government, and we wsh that the writers of reports on other countries, particularly in Central America, would reflect on this. Sri Lanka has many more functioning independent institutions and a more independent legal system than a number of countries that the Reagan Administration nevertheless calls "democracies" without qualification.
Unlike last year, the present report on Sri Lanka notes that the 1982 referendum, which constituted the current government, was marred by irregularities and a lack of freedom for the opposition. Accordingly, it now states
145
Critique
that the opposition has questioned whether it actually is possible for citizens to change their government in Sri Lanka.
In the section on political killing (which has now been separated from a new section on \iolations of humanitarian law in armed conflicts), the report clearly states:
As in previous years, there were credible reports of extrajudicial killings by members of the government security forces, particularly in the Eastern Province, before the July accord. Following a pattern set in 1983, no results of official inquiries into these incidents were published, nor was disciplinary or judicial action taken against any member of the security forces accused of himian rights abuses.
This relatively direct statement appears to contradict last year's claim in the same section that "the Government dealt with misbehavior [i.e., illegal killings by the security forces] administratively [rather than judicially], a policy which many observers believe does little to deter wrongdoers." Although this pattern of abuses by the Sri Lankan security forces diminished with the army's withdrawal to barracks in the North and East after the accord, some examples, which are included in the section on \iolations of humanitarian law in armed conflictis, would have strengthened this section.
Another problem with this section is its failure to distinguish political killings that violate international law from other killings (such as those that result from combat) that do not. In addition, although the section provides a number of official and non-govemmental estimates of killings of security forces by Tamil militants and Sinhalese radicals, killings of Tamil militants by government and Indian forces, and killings of civilians by Tamil militants and Sinhalese radicals, it provides no estimates of killings of civilians by government and/or Indian forces.
The new section on violations of humanitarian law in armed conflicts accurately conveys the varied forms and sources of death in armed conflict in Sri Lanka over the past year. The major problem with this section, like the section on political killings, is that it does not make clear what actions are and are not violations of humanitarian law. For instance, the report states that "Tamil militant forces continued their well-established practice of land mine and
146
Sri Lanka
ambush attacks against government forces." This is true, but it is not necessarily a violation of international humanitarian law regarding the conduct of armed conflicts. (Of course, it is a violation of the law of Sri Lanka.)
There are, of course, many events that are virtually impossible to analyze in a multi-sided conflict involving ethnic strife, guerrilla war, and both foreign and local security forces. A human rights report, however, should at least make clear what the actual violations may have been. In particular, in incidents of armed conflict where civilian casualties have occurred, the report should have tried to clarify to what extent the civilian casualties may have resulted from intentional targeting of civilians, from indiscriminate use of arms against civilian or partly civilian targets, or from unfortunate but legally permitted actions.
The section on himianitarian law violations also somewhat carelessly includes incidents of killings by government forces in a paragraph with a topic sentence that appears to introduce accounts of "[IJoss of civilian life resulting from Sinhalese-Tamil violence." The same confusion occurs in the introduction, which describes the situation since July 1983 as one of "accelerating violence between its majority Sinhalese and minority Tamil communities." In the South Asian context in particular it is vital to distinguish acts by governments, even if communally motivated, from inter-ethnic violence by mobs or nongovernmental organizations.
This year's section on disappearances, imlike last year's, summarizes some of the evidence supporting the charges that many "disappearances" of Tamil young men before the accord were actually concealed extra-judicial executions by the Sri Lankan security forces. It fails, however, to tell the reader just how persuasive the evidence is and to what extent the government's response has been imconvincing, and at times in bad faith.
The report accurately notes the difficulty claimed by the government in accounting for young men who may flee or give pseudonyms in a war zone with tens of thousands of displaced persons. It fails to mention, however, that in incidents accounting for a significant share of the reported disappearances, there are scores of sworn affidavits attesting to arrests of men who later disappeared, to which the government's response has been a total denial that the
147
Critique
security forces — whose activities were witnessed by entire villages — were even
present in the area where the arrests took place. Neither this year nor last year
did the report mention the evidence produced in court durii^ the 1986 trial of
Paul Nallemayagam, a retired senior civil servant and President of a local
Citizens' Committee, who was arrested by the government for sedition and
"spreading false rumors" when he reported "disappearances."
Mr. Nallanayagam was acquitted on all counts, and the High Court stated that
he "was genuine in the discharge of [his] duties" and "would not compromise
with the rights of citizens." This evidence would justify a stronger statement than
what appears in the report:
In many cases, detained persons who were subsequently released reported having seen a disappeared person in government custody and, in a few cases, having seen the corpse. These reports have led local citizens to believe that the disappeared persons were killed by the authorities while in custody, in reprisal for attacks on security forces by Tamil militants.
The State Department should also say what it believes, as it does not hesitate to do about governments with which U.S. relations are hostile. The evidence supports the contention that from July 1983 to July 1987 the Sri Lankan security forces executed himdreds of Tamil yoimg men, of whom they later deny any knowledge.
This year, reports of torture in Sri Lanka are evaluated as "persistent" and "credible," rather than merely "persistent." We have criticized the State Department in the past for not commentii^ on the credibility of the reports, and we welcome this change. Unfortunately, the report contains no specific information on torture in Sri Lanka in 1987. Detailed information on continuing torture is available from attorneys for those detained under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA) and Emergency Regulations (ER) and from released detainees.
The report also gives a one-sided analysis of the legislation affecting torture in Sri Lanka. It notes that the Constitution prohibits torture, but fails to mention that several provisions of the PTA and the ER in practice promote torture. These include provisions for lengthy incommunicado detention without
148
Sri Lanka
charge, permitting the use in court of confessions made to police officers, and placing the burden of proof on the defendant to show that a confession was obtained imder duress.
The discussion of the PTA and ER in the sections on arbitrary arrest and denial of fair public trial accurately describes many of the abridgements of normal due process under their provisions. Unlike last year's report, it notes that the advisory board empowered to review detentions imder the PTA may make only nonbinding recommendations and that the Government has delayed or refused to carry out some such recommendations. It also describes in greater detail the many obstacles to the other available redress — petition to the High Court — and does so in its own voice rather than qualifying this as it did last year, wth "[sjome observers claim."
The report does not, however, fully convey the draconian nature of the PTA and ER. The report should have noted that the offenses covered in these laws and regulations include vaguely defined non-\iolent political offenses, described how the PTA denies detainees a fair trial, and referred to the above-noted inducements to torture during interrogation. We welcome the observation, not found previously, that "most people held under [the PTA] are never formally charged and therefore do not enter the appeals process."
The section on fair trial also appears to use a rather unorthodox definition of political prisoner, including only those who have been convicted under extraordinary legislation. The report states:
Estimates of the number of political prisoners vary widely. Accordìi^ to Sri Lankan human rights activists, approximately 200 persons had been convicted of crimes under the PTA and the ER and were serving prison terms by the end of 1987.
The report should have noted that, in addition to the 200 convicted, hundreds are detained without trial under these two laws.
In discussing freedom of the press, the report should have noted that the IPKF refused to allow the press access to the areas of combat during its offensive against Jaffna in October, and that this restriction may have facilitated violations of the laws of war by the Indian forces. It also fails to mention that government-owned newspapers have either censored or refused to run advertisements placed by the Civil Rights Movement of Sri Lanka calling on the
149
Critique
government to permit the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to perform its full range of protection activities in the country.
The section on the government's attitude toward investigation of alleged human rights violations is somewhat more positive than we believe the facts warrant, although the government's actions did improve in the last year, in particular in permitting a visit by a member of Asia Watch, as the report mentions. It does not mention that the request for such a visit was granted more than six months ai^er submission of a formal request and more than one year after initial inquiries. The report does acknowledge the government's refusals to permit Amnesty International to send a mission or to permit the ICRC to undertake its protection activities.
We are not sure what the report means in stating that "senior government officials made themselves available to visitors looking into human rights issues." As far as we know, Asia Watch was the only international human rights monitoring organization permitted to visit Sri Lanka in 1987. Its representative was granted access at the additional secretary level, whereas the phrase "senior government officials" normally applies to ministers or at least secretaries. Asia Watch's request to visit prison or detention centers and to interview prisoners received no positive response.
150
