MALAYSIA
This is a misleading report even though there are few inaccuracies and few significant omissions. The report discusses the relevant legal machinery and historical questions, the problem of ethnic relations and the nature of the economy. What makes it misleading is the lack of coherent analysis of poUtical controls and, especially, of the significance of the events of 1987 to human rights in Malaysia.
The discussion of these events is presented out of context, with many crucial details omitted. We realize, of course, that some of the events with greatest hmnan rights significance took place late in the year, and that describing them at length might have required significant additions and editing as the report was nearing completion. However, in purporting to cover issues throughout 1987 the State Department should have dealt with the implications of events in the latter part of the year. It did not do this.
The report begins by summarizing accurately the justifications offered by successive Malaysian governments for laws that permit detention without trial. It would have been useful to note immediately that these laws and their justifications are objected to by many Malaysians on three basic grounds: that current circumstances of Malaysia do not justify such extraordinary powers; that the laws provide few procedural safeguards to prevent abuses; and that the laws have been used to curb the exercise of human rights in circumstances that do not meet internationally recognized criteria.
The most significant development for human rights in Malaysia in 1987 was the arrest and detention without trial of more than 100 persons under the Internal Security Act (ISA), beginning in late October. The government also closed down three newspapers. When describing the ISA arrests and detention orders, the report uncritically cites the government's initial justification — that they were necessary to avoid serious racial strife — but does not offer the views of oppositionists, independent observers, or its own analysis. In fact, many observers believe that the arrests, and the two-year detention orders against dozens of those initially held, were primarily the result of increasing and
101
Critique
legitimate challenges to Prime Minister Mahathir's rule. The factors underlying this view include:
•	The government produced no credible evidence that those arrested either advocated or engaged in violence; indeed, many are well-known for their efforts to promote racial harmony.
•	The common characteristic of those remaining detainees about whom information is available is their peaceful opposition to government policies; a mmiber of the detainees are opposition members of parliament. This fact is mentioned without comment in the section of the report on the right of citizens to change their government.
•	The government handed down long-term detention orders sixty days after the arrests despite the passing of October's racial tensions.
The section of the report on torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment omits discussion of threats and physical mistreatment against those detained without trial in late 1987. Information on this issue was not readily available as the report was being prepared, but we will examine next year's report to see if it contains discussion of this issue. In addition, the report should have noted that Malaysian criminal law provides for caning, and should have described this punishment.
Under the section on the denial of fair public trials, the report states that defendants have the right to counsel and that lawyers are able to represent clients without reprisal. This is misleading. A defendant may be denied counsel for weeks while in custody if the police are "making inquiries." In security cases, the police have refused access to counsel during investigations. This section of the report also fails to mention that the families of some of the recent detainees withdrew their applications for habeas corpus after being harassed or pressured by authorities.
Most important, the fair trial section should have discussed official efforts to limit the judiciary's power to curb abuses of executive discretion. These efforts followed a number of cases in which the courts curbed arbitrary state action against those attempting to exercise their rights. In December the government passed legislation that removed even the limited judicial review that had previously existed of the government's attempts to ban publications. Under the amendment to the Printing Presses and Publications Act, the Minister now has
102
Malaysia
"absolute discretion" to prohibit publications that, in the Minister's opinion, contain material that "is likely to alarm public opinion." In announcing the amendment — whichisdiscussedin the free presssectionofthe report — Prime Minister Mahathir criticized "the tendency among certain circles to resort to unwritten law to obstruct the functions of government." At about the same time, in an annoimcement widely regarded as foreshadowing efforts at further reducing judicial review, the Prime Minister aimoimced that he would introduce legislation to codify and formalize the powers of the three arms of government, so as to ensiu"e they would check and balance each other. Early this year, such legislation — in the form of a constitutional amendment — was indeed enacted. Among other measures, the amendment empowers the Attorney General to decide where cases will be heard, enabling the government to steer issues away from judges considered too independent.
Pressure on the Malaysian bar is another important issue that the report neglects. On several occasions, lawyers have been harassed and their offices searched in relation to the defense of clients. In 1986, an officer of the Bar Council was unsuccessfully prosecuted for sedition because he had publicly called for equal treatment under the law in sentences and pardons. (This prosecution is mentioned in passing and without comment in the section on freedom of speech.) A government Minister described the Bar Council as a subversive organization in 1987.
These issues are also omitted in the section of the report on the government's attitude toward non-governmental investigations of human rights violations. The section also fails to mention that some of those detained in October 1987 were involved in efforts to monitor human rights. This is widely believed to have contributed to the decision to detain them.
Under the section on arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home and correspondence, brief mention is made of the ISA powers of search and seizure. It should also have been noted that these powers were used widely m 1987.
The par^aph introducing the issue of freedom of the press contains so many qualifications that it is difficult to see the justification for its opening sentence, which states: "Freedom of the press is assured...." This assertion
103
Critique
should be omitted in next year's report. Moreover, the report's introduction contains a misleading comment on the freedom of the press. It states that laws restricting freedom of the press are "seldom used." The frequency wth which such laws are invoked is not the issue, however. Their presence creates a climate that deters writers and publishers from transgressing official boimdaries. In any case, we note that in recent years officials have prosecuted journalists under the Official Secrets Act, expelled certain journalists, temporarily banned th& Asian Wall Street Journal, and closed domestic publications.
The section on freedom of assembly and association notes that the law requires police permits for public meetings, and adds that few such permits were refused until October 1987. However, the report omits the numerous conditions imposed on meetings, such as the number of speakers, when they can speak, how long the meetings can go on, etc. The report does not mention that uniformed and non-uniformed police often attend meetings for which permission has been given. In such circumstances, they often note, photograph, and/or videotape participants, even when the government has given permission for meetings. Moreover, permission is often granted at the last moment, making planning difficult.
This section should also have discussed the effects of the 1987 detentions on non-governmental organizations in Malaysia. Described in the past by government officials as "thorns in the flesh" and "opportunistic elitist groups," such citizens' groups were principal targets of the crackdown. Those arrested included members of Aliran (an organization largely concerned with issues affecting human rights and democracy), the Consumers Association of Penang, the Institute of Social Analysis, the Environmental Society of Malaysia, Friends of the Earth Malaysia, the Perak Anti-Radioactive Committee, the Centre for Developmental Issues, Pentas (a drama group), and the National Organization for Human Development.
Finally, the section on labor rights does not mention that three of those subjected to two-year detention orders are trade union officials, whose arrests may have been due in part to their union activities.
104
