YUGOSLAVIA
The State Department's reporting on Yugoslavia has continued to improve in the details it provides, particularly in depicting the subtleties of the limits on press freedom and the complexities of ethnic and worker unrest. But the report continues to suffer from a tendency to give Yugoslavia the benefit of the doubt in human rights matters, evidently because it is a large recipient of U.S. aid, and a neutral non-aligned Communist country that the U.S. views as a bulwark gainst Soviet-bloc Communism. The report exploits the genuine differences between the Soviet and Yugoslav systems to lower the standards for judging human rights practices under Yugoslav Communism, displaying a tendency to accept government statements uncritically while scrutinizing reports of abuses by victims.
The difference in the State Department's treatment of the two Communist systems can be readily seen in the contrast between the grim description of the Soviet Union as a "one-party dictatorship" and the description of the League of Communists of Yugoslavia (LCY) as merely "the only legal political party." True, there are significant differences between the two Communist Party structures, but it is more accurate to describe both as "one-party dictatorships" with Yugoslavia having a more lenient version. The report fails to grasp that the decentralized Yugoslav model creates, in turn, local Communist mafias or fief-doms that exercise unchallenged control over the population in their realm. Decentralization is not democracy, and it is a mistake to view a communist line that diverges from Moscow or, for that matter, from Belgrade, as necessarily any less controlling of society.
When speaking of the Soviet Communist Party, the report states in its own voice that the Party "attempts to direct all aspects of public life and prohibit the development of independent centers of political or ideological influence." When speaking of Yugoslavia, however, the report distances itself from the criticism by noting that the "authorities are widely believed to interfere on
181
Critique
occasion in the private lives of citizens," even though the direct statement about the USSR could reasonably apply to Yugoslavia, given the attributes of a one-party Communist system that they share.
Other differences in tone between the two reports cushion criticisms of Yugoslavia: in the Soviet Union even mdAqt glasnost, the media is described as "strictly controlled and subject to Party discipline." With regard to Yugoslavia, the report asserts:
Some issues, however, appear to be so sensitive that free speech is only partially tolerated. Hence, Yugoslav officials, wary of historically rooted separatist sentiments, have taken stem measures to repress displays of what they term ethnic "nationalism."
By referring to "sensitive" issues and "separatist sentiments," the report seems to excuse suppressing free speech in the interest of maintaining the peace.
Moreover, the focus on ethnic unrest obscures the suppression that results from a one-party system. Even when efforts at cross-republic solidarity outside Party confines have been made, the authorities have suppressed them, as in the case of the Solidarity Fund, a charitable fund started by journalists to help those in all republics who lost their jobs because of censorship.
Throughout the report, statements by the Yugoslav government are presented without qualification, whereas statements by human rights activists and political dissidents are prefaced by words like "allegedly" and "reportedly." By contrast, the same types of statements by human rights activists in the Soviet report are presented as objective assessments. A typical example is in the Yugoslav report's section on arbitrary interference with privacy, where it is explained that "the judicial system provides elaborate safeguards concerning procedures for conducting searches." While the report acknowledges that these safeguards are "sometimes ignored," the evidence for this consists of "allegations of such interference...from those citizens actively engaged in nonofficial political activity." The report says that many Yugoslavs "believe that authorities eavesdrop on conversations." In the Soviet report, by contrast, the State Department describes such government activity in its own voice: "The electronic monitoring of the residences and telephones of certain Soviet citizens and foreigners is done routinely."
182
Yugoslavia
Similarly, the report softens several criticisms of governmental practices by prefacing the criticism with reference to how those practices operate theoretically. For example, the introduction to the report states that "police forces are generally subject to, and heedful of, overall direction from the political level," acknowledgii^ only later the existence of police brutality. Likewise, the report notes that "[w]orkers' self-management theoretically provides that the workers run their own enterprises through a system of elected workers councils," acknowledging only later that powerful local of&dals sometimes drcum-vent this system. By contrast, in the Soviet chapter, the report critically examines general laws or theoretical statements by the government by measuring them i^ainst actual practice, as is appropriate.
The report also tends to credit the government alone for liberalization, when in fact substantial credit should go to human rights activists, bold journalists, striking workers, and civic action groups who have pressed to expand government-imposed limits. In the section on freedom of speech, for example, the report states that "the Yugoslav Constitution and Yugoslav law affirm these freedoms," but it speaks of efforts to test "the limits of official tolerance" only in the context of certain publications that were banned."
The independent social movements of Yugoslavia are given only cursory attention in the report, mainly under the section on the government's attitude toward nongovernmental investigation of alleged human rights violations. They are without substantial treatment in such other sections as those on freedom of expression and freedom of assembly. This contrasts sharply with the extensive descriptions of such independent organizing efforts that appear throughout the reports on the Soviet-bloc nations. For example, although a Helsinki Watch group has been formed for the first time in Yugoslavia — an effort that involves 35 prominent human rights activists in four republics — the report describes the group as "nascent" without elaboration. The Committee for the Defense of Freedom of Thought and Expression, which does extensive work on free expression, and publishes petitions and letters several times a month, is described only as a "loosely-organized" committee which continues to "speak out from time to time on human rights and political issues." The Serbian Writers' Associations Committees, which organized well-publicized mass meetings at
183
Critique
which leaders openly called for free elections in Yugosla\ia, are described merely as conducting "numerous public meetings" and issuing "many statements on human rights." Moreover, in the section on freedom of assembly, the report notes that the Serbian Writers' Association held a series of 15 meetings about Kosovo, the predominantly Albanian province that has been racked by unrest since 1981. But the report appears to endorse the position taken by some officials — that the Writer's Association should not stray beyond purely literary matters — by commenting that, "[a]lthough organized as 'literary evenings,' the participants heatedly examined the state of political events between ethnic Serbs and Albanians."
The section on nongovernmental human rights monitoring concludes: "There has been some criticism of these groups and the leading figures in them." But the report does not attribute this crjticism, nor specify the activities criticized. It should have explained that the criticism in the press comes from the government, and is aimed at suppressii^ human rights work and independent political organizing. By not attributing the criticism, the report implies that these groups and leaders are genuinely suspect or unreliable.
Similarly, the section on free speech states: "A short-lived Solidarity Fund, set up last year with the stated intent of aiding journalists and others who might suffer because of their political opinions, was denounced, as were many of its adherents, when Party officials concluded that it had taken on a political cast and constituted an attempt to organize an opposition political party." This statement implies that the Fund was legitimately punished because it appeared to stray from its "stated intent," and because it is inappropriate for an independent group to adopt a "political cast," thereby uncritically accepting the government's view that grass-roots initiatives are a threat to its power. In fact, as the report should have noted, there is no evidence that the organizers intended to form an "opposition party." The Fund's offense was that it represented an all-Yugoslav effort that crossed nationality lines outside Communist control, thus implicitly challenging the official mythology that only the Party can keep the republics together.
Although the report notes that press criticism at times "sparks government charges of irresponsibility and may result in the transfer of editors and
184
Yugoslavia
journalists from one publication to another," it provides no examples. Moreover, it neglects to note that reporters who cover taboo subjects have been fired and stripped of Party membership, includmg, most recently, Dusan Bogavac, Sinisa Nikolic and the entire editorial staff oi Student, the Belgrade University paper. The report does describe the arrest and detention of Milovan Brkic for "disparaging socio-political organizations" in an unpublished article, but states simply that "[h]e was released before his 45-day sentence was completed." This effort to soften the fact of Brkic's imprisonment by highlighting his early release neglects to note that Brkic had commenced a hunger strike upon his arrest, and that this protest, rather than the m^nanimity of the government, was the more likely reason for his early release.
The introduction to the report includes a paragraph on the economic system which describes Yugoslavia's inflation of "well over 100 percent," "uneven foreign trade performance," "high level of hard currency debt," "need to protect the living standard while enforcing fmancial discipline." But the introduction makes no mention of the most significant economic development from a political rights perspective: the massive strikes that rocked Yugoslavia throughout the year involving 200,000 workers in 1,200 work stoppages. This information is buried later in the report at the end of the section on freedom of assembly.
It is well known that Yugoslavia's republics vary widely in the degree of tolerance shown for civil liberties. The report attributes this to political decentralization, but that is only half the story; it should have noted that historical, cultural and geographical reasons apart from the Communist movement also help to explain these differences. In addition, the report inaccurately states that "in some republics and provinces ... local political officials exercise considerable, and frequently decisive, influence over the management of enterprises in areas under their jurisdiction." In fact, this is the case in all republics and provinces.
The report describes "relatively open debate on the implementation of workers' self-management, the boundaries of permissible political and cultural expression, and the functioning of the political system." It should have emphasized, however, that this debate occurs within Communist Party bodies, not
185
Critique
in the sodety at large. Those with the right connections and Party credentials can debate points which can lead to criminal prosecution for ordinary citizens.
The report is incomplete in stating that the "police in Macedonia used cattle prods to break up a protest about water rights." The report should have e?q)lained that the protest "about water rights" in Vevcani, Macedonia, involved an effort by townspeople to gain access to water sources for their village which were being diverted to the villas of local Communist Party bosses, and that the cattle prods were used against women and children.
Each year, the report mentions press coverage of police brutality. This year, the report states that "the press reported on steps taken by the authorities to deal with unwarranted use of force by police." Because of a number of eyewitness accounts and prisoners' testimonies (including articles by ex-political prisoner Dobroslav Paraga in the Slovenian press), authorities were compelled to respond and a commission was formed. Although the commission has apparently investigated abuse, there is no evidence as yet that any steps have been taken to curb abuse, such as dismissing or disciplining offenders or establishing active oversight committees. Moreover, the report unjustifiably casts doubt on Paraga's reports by describing him as making "allegations" and as having been "found guilty" of "spreading false news" about prison conditions.
The report fails to ^ve a comprehensive view of the problem of police brutalit)^, more information can be found even in the official press. For example, in its September 11,1987 issue, the official newspaper Vecemje Novosti said that police brutality rose sharply this year. The article mentioned what it termed the latest in scores of incidents of unprovoked policy brutality throughout the country. It said that policemen in a Belgrade suburb brutally beat a 24-year-old woman, dragged her to a police station, and left her six-week-old baby crying in the street. In Zrenjanin, three policemen were jailed for rape. The State Department should have included such details.
The report states that Croatian officials have announced their intention to close the infamous Goli Otok prison island. Although there are many well-documented reports of mistreatment of political prisoners in the prison — for example, a serialized account of a prisoner's mistreatment can be found in the official weekly newsmagazine NIN, beginning January 10,1988 — the report
186
Yugoslavia
states only that "prison staff allegedly have singled out political prisoners for especially harsh treatment" (emphasis added).
The report states that defendants are usually brought before a judge within 24 hours of arrest and that there is a functioning system of bail. In fact, by law defendants must be brought before a judge within three days, and most are held for that long; the bail system seems to be applied only to foreigners. There are no reports of political prisoners released on bail.
187
Critique
