SOUTH AFRICA
The report on South Africa is detailed and well-documented. It is particularly effective in addressing torture and other abuses of police powers. The introduction to the report paints an accurate and thus clearly negative picture of overall conditions, concluding that "the human rights situation in South Africa continued to deteriorate in 1987." The introduction places particular emphasis, as it should, on the "pervasive, legally sanctioned discrimination based on race" in all aspects of South African life. It points to "harsher curbs on the media" and a "virtual halt" in the government's program of limited reforms. The report describes, in some detail, discriminatory laws affecting housing, employment and education. It even comments on the "unusually high income disparity between whites and blacks," and notes that black opposition to apartheid has increased "dramatically" in recent years.
The report would have been strengthened, however, if it had discussed certain developments in greater detail. One such development is the South African government's growing sophistication in confronting protest, particularly the organization of the so-called National Security Management System (NSMS). The NSMS was established to coordinate intelligence activities and, as the report p>oints out, has "assumed greater influence in the last few years" over various aspects of state security. The report cites unidentifiable "critics" who charge that the NSMS has become a "parallel government" accountable only to the State Security Council, but the State Department declines to endorse this view. The report also omits any discussion of the effective spread of the NSMS to the local level, the NSMS's increased sophistication in compiling intelligence, including its use of informants, and the NSMS's resort to coercive actions designed to preempt or remove potential protesters or critics.
In the section on political killing, the report acknowledges that in some cases the South African police either "assisted or stood aside" during attacks on civilians by vigilante groups. The report should have gone further in probing the
142
South Africa
extremely close and sustained relationship between the South African police and the vigilantes. It should have discussed, for example, the reported instances, at Crossroads and elsewhere, of police providing arms and other tactical support to the vi^antes. These actions were extensively reported by local monitoring groups, trade unions and others in South Africa. To cite one example, while the report notes violence against United Democratic Front (UDF) supporters in Natal, it does not mention an extensive memorandum on violence in the Pietermaritzburg area which was published in November 1987 by Cosatu and the UDF. The memorandum provides numerous well-documented examples of police complicity in vigilante activities in 1987.
The report is also too tentative and upbeat in its discussion of the South African judiciary. The report devotes five full paragraphs to describing how the court system functions before it acknowledges what it terms "indications" that in 1987 the government was seeking to increase its political influence over the judiciary. In fact, the South African government has, over many years, ignored traditional adherence to seniority among advocates in making appointments to the high courts. Moreover, the report fails to note that in recent years most sensitive security cases have been assigned to conservative, pro-government judges. The retention of the Chief Justice of the Court of Appeals after he reached the mandatory retirement age of 70, which the report mentions, is merely one highly visible manifestation of this pattern.
With regard to freedom of the press, the report accurately describes a number of measures which were taken to restrict the local and foreign press in 1987. In the third paragraph of that section, however, the report is tentative in stating that "the government repeatedly threatened to take action against the press" and particularly the alternative media. In fact, the government took prescribed steps to warn several publications, including the New Nation, South and The Weekly Mail, a first step toward shutting them down. Two of these publications, New Nation and were later ordered to close down, after the Country Reports went to press.
On the positive side, the report includes for the first time a discussion of the large number of public-violence cases arising out of incidents of political unrest. Such arrests are often indiscriminate and based on extremely inadequate
143
Critique
evidence. Many of the accused in these cases spend long periods in jail awaiting trial and are not represented by counsel when they finally api>ear in court.
The 1987 report also contains a more detailed discussion than did prior reports of forced removals, such as the removal of600 people from Noordhoek near Cape Town in December. In addition, notes and criticizes various efforts to move blacks to remote, arid lands where malnutrition and other health and welfare problems are particularly grave.
Finally, we note three minor points of disagreement. First, the section on freedom of movement within the country, the State Department says that "some government critics charge" that a de facto system of influx controls has been maintained through anti-squatting laws, urban housing shortages and sanctions against employers who hire illegal aliens. The State Department should have come to the same conclusion.
Second, in its discussion of political r^ts the report notes that in 1987 the Government proposed a National Advisory Council to which blacks would be elected or appointed to provide input on a new constitutional, political structure. In fact. President Botha first announced his intention to establish such a National Statutory Council in January 1986.
And third, in the discussion of the denial of fair public trials, the report notes the unprecedented length of the Delmas treason trial, now in its third year. In fact, the so-called great treason trial of the late 1950's lasted for more than four years.
144
