ZIMBABWE
As in previous years, the report on Zimbabwe is generally accurate and fair. The State Department observes that since the beginning of 1986, "there has been a trend towards decreased himian rights abuses by the government of Zimbabwe," and this conforms for the most part with our own information. Certainly, there have been few if any recent reports of summary killings, political kidnappings, mass detentions without charge or widespread torture — all of which had been reported on a significant scale between 1982 and 1985.
The only real weakness in the State Department's report is its failure adequately to explain the political context in which this improvement has taken place. That context changed significantly in 1987, and the changes have a direct bearii^ on human rights.
As the State Department notes in its first paragraph, the two main political parties in Zimbabwe, President Robert Mugabe's Zanu and Joshua Nkomo's Zapu, announced a long-awaited "unity agreement" in December 1987. The agreement between these two bitter rivals after more than two years of sporadic negotiations is expected to clear the way for President Mugabe's long-standing goal of establishing a one-party state in Zimbabwe.
The report simply notes the unity agreement without describing its relevance to the violence in Matabeleland. An uninformed reader would have no sense that the agreement represents an attempt to resolve political problems that have been the basis for human rights abuses in the recent past. In fact, the "trend" toward decreased human rights abuses by the government, as well as decreased violence by the so-called "dissidents" in Matabeleland, dates precisely from the time when negotiations between Zanu and Zapu began m late 1985. When the negotiations broke down temporarily in April 1987, violence in Matabeleland renewed on a significant scale. Most of the murders, rapes and robberies attributed to the dissidents in 1987, and accurately noted by the State Department, occurred after the unity talks broke down. Likewise, the
190
Zimbabwe
detentions of 21apu officials, including a member of Parliament, coincided with the breakdown of the talks and renewed violence by the dissidents. Both sides appeared during these months to be exerting pressure in hopes of "softening up" the other side. The detentions of Zapu leaders, ordered by the erratic Home Affairs Minister, Enos Nkala, thus constituted a significant exception to the "trend toward decreased hiunan rights abuses by the government." There is no hint in the State Department's report of the relationship between rights problems, dissident violence, and the political process.
In addition to a lack of political perspective, the report occasionally suffers from a lack of historical perspective. For example, it is correct in noting that there were no political killings by government forces in 1987; it should have noted, for purposes of perspective, that there were significant numbers of political killings by government soldiers in previous years, including an estimated 1,500 in late 1982 and 1983, for which no one has been held accountable. The report does note the lack of progress in investigating the disappearances of Ndebele villagers in 1985, while pointing out that there were no reported disappearances in 1987.
The discussion of tortxu-e is brief but fair, noting that the government of Zimbabwe does not condone it as official policy. Various methods of torture were used for many years in Zimbabwe, dating back to before independence in what was then Rhodesia. There have indeed been far fewer reports of such abuses during the last two years, in part reflecting the significant reduction in security-related detentions during this period. Nevertheless, few if any police or intelligence agents have been disciplined or prosecuted for the torture of detainees in the recent past.
The discussion of the legal state of emergency is generally accurate, but it leaves somewhat unclear the most important feature of the emergency powers: the provision for long-term detention without charge or trial. It should have been noted that this provision has been used in the recent past to detain a number of prominent opposition political figures, including five members of Parliament in 1985-86. It is also worth noting in this context that Enos Nkala, the volatile Home Affairs Minister responsible for some of the worst abuses of
191
Critique
the emergency powers, was finally removed from the Home Affairs Ministry in January 1988, soon after the unity agreement was announced.
Finally, it is regrettable that the report fails to identify South Africa in its discussion of unnamed "forces intent upon attacking persons and buildings believed to be associated with the A&ican National Congress (ANC)." The South African menace — including periodic South African support for the so-called "Super-Zapu" dissidents in Matabeleland and for Renamo guerrillas in neighboring Mozambique — is too important a factor in the security considerations of Zimbabwe's leaders not to have been even mentioned by name.
192
