 UPPER VOLTA
 Upper Volta has a freely-elected, democratic government
 which has established the framework for a multi-party
 system. The military regime which governed Upper
 Volta for more than a decade voluntarily returned the
 country to civilian rule in 1978. A new Constitution
 based on the French model of a strong democratically-
 elected executive and parliament had been approved
 overwhelmingly by national referendum in 1977. The
 legislative and presidential elections held last April
 and May were open and freely contested. The presidential
 election went to a second ballot when none of the four
 contenders, including President Lamizana, won an
 absolute majority on the first round. Opposition
 political parties control nearly one-half of the
 National Assembly seats. Free speech and other civil
 and political liberties are guaranteed in the 1977
 Constitution and are fully exercised. Upper Volta
 continues to emphasize the fulfillment of the needs of
 its people, to develop programs to bring women and the
 disadvantaged rural majority more actively into economic
 and political life, and firmly to support human rights.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture is not practiced in- Upper Volta.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment.
 No such treatment or punishment in Upper Volta is known
 to the Department of State.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 There have been no reported incidents of arbitrary
 arrests or imprisonment in recent years, nor are there
 
 (188)
 
 
 any political prisoners in Upper Volta. Freedom from
 arbitrary arrest or imprisonment is guaranteed by the
 1977 Constitution and is respected in practice.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair public hearing and trial is observed.
 The right to trial is guaranteed under the 1977 Consti-
 tution.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 The home is considered inviolable and a search warrant
 can only be obtained under conditions specified by
 law.
 2. Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of
 Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 The right to work, health care and education are
 guaranteed under the 1977 Constitution. Government
 economic and financial policies focus on improving the
 conditions of the rural poor, about 95 percent of Upper
 Volta's population. Upper Volta's third five-year
 development plan (1977-81) attaches its highest priority
 to the rural sector, followed by education, economic
 infrastructure and mineral development. Earlier
 . development plans resulted in annual increases of
 agricultural output of 3.2 percent and in industrial
 output of seven percent from 1970 to 1976. One of the
 world's poorest nations, Upper Volta actively seeks
 foreign assistance for economic and social development.
 With the help of foreign assistance, the Government is
 pursuing programs designed to meet basic needs for
 food, shelter, health care and education.
 While development programs have been moderately successful
 in the past, progress in social and economic development
 has been limited in the last two years largely because
 of unfavorable weather conditions. Upper Volta's
 inadequate financial resources seriously limit the
 provision of health and education. While enrollment in
 primary schools increased at an annual rate of four
 
 
 190
 percent from 1965 to 1975, as of 1975 only fourteen
 percent of the school-age children were enrolled in
 primary schools. Access to adequate health care
 continues to be limited, largely due to the severe
 shortage of trained medical personnel and budgetary
 contraints. Corruption of government officials is not
 a serious problem and is punished when detected.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberities, Includ-
 ing:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 The 1977 Constitution guarantees freedom of thought,
 speech, press, religion and assembly, all of which are
 respected in practice. Labor unions are free from
 government control, and the right to strike is guaranteed
 by the new Constitution.
 b. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Freedom of movement within Upper Volta is unrestricted
 and there are no controls on foreign travel or emigration.
 c. Freedom of Participate in the Political Process
 The freedom to participate in the political process,
 guaranteed by the 1977 Constitution, was put to the
 test during the legislative and presidential election
 campaigns and balloting in April and May of 1978.
 Opposition party platforms, statements and activities
 were fully reported on the government radio and television
 and in the press. Four parties fielded candidates for
 each legislative seat in all ten departments and three
 other parties ran candidates in selected departments.
 The opposition group in the new National Assembly holds
 28 of the 57 seats. In the Presidential election,
 General Lamizana, head of the outgoing military govern-
 ment, ran as an independent supported by five parties
 and failed to win an absolute majority on the first
 ballot against three other contenders. He received 55
 percent of the vote in the run-off election to become
 
 
 191
 first president of the new Third Republic. Universal
 adult suffrage was respected. Only one Upper Voltan,
 former President Maurice Yameogo, continues to be
 denied political rights. Although some minor voting
 irregularities were charged, the Supreme Court determined
 after review that both the legislative and presidential
 elections were legal, fair and valid.
 A Ministry of Social Affairs and Conditions of Women
 was created under the new Government to promote better
 participation by women in the nation's economic, social
 and political life.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Department of State is not aware of any requests
 by international bodies to visit to investigate human
 rights conditions in Upper Volta.
 
 
