Afghanistan
This year's report on Afghanistan was prepared under the most difficult conditions imaginable. In April, the Soviet-backed government that had ruled Afghanistan for the past 14 years collapsed. Although an interim coalition government was established, as the report correctly points out it lacks any effective central authority. In the ensuing power vacuum, chaos has reigned, with various parts of the country under local de facto rule. Fighting between various political parties, ethnic groups and religious sects has at times surpassed in intensity fighting during the previous 14-year civil war. The number of groups vying for control throughout the country and the shifting of fragile coalitions made it extremely difficult to determine government responsibility for human rights abuses, as it was often unclear who the government was.
As if the above conditions were not challenging enough, the report states that the U.S. government has had no official presence in Afghanistan since 1989, adding that it "draws to a large extent on non-U.S. Government sources." Furthermore, the United Nations and other western aid groups withdrew their personnel from Afghanistan as the fighting intensified, further hindering the compilation of credible information.
Under these circumstances, the report should be highly commended for providing an overall accurate and fair assessment. The introductory section presents a very clear overview of the year's events. It correctly identifies the ineffectiveness of the interim government as the most significant human rights
factor of 1992, citing the government's inability to enforce its guarantees of human rights, creating an environment in which individual rights were neither defined nor protected and were routinely violated. Most sections of the report were particularly strong, providing as much detail as was available. The listing of prominent victims of political killings is thorough.
In certain other sections of the report, a lack of such detail led to statements that while not false, were misleading as to the seriousness of the problem. The prime example is found in the section on rights of citizens to change their government. There, the report mentions the election of President Rabbani to an additional two year term by a Grand Council in late December. The report's lone comment on this event is that a number of Afghan leaders questioned the legitimacy of the Grand Council and the means by which its members were elected. However, no mention was made of the following significant developments relating to the election. In early December, Rabbani indicated that he would refuse to surrender power at the end of his four-month interim term. This caused General Abdul Rashid Dostam, a former communist military commander who entered into an alliance with the interim government, to seize control of the Kabul airport and several other key installations around the city, and engage in fighting with government troops from December 6 to 11. Rabbani only assented to elections after this show of force by Dostam, which resulted in about 100 deaths. Furthermore, several mujahidin parties compris-
7
Afghanistan
ing the interim government boycotted the elections amid reports that Rabbani's camp bribed Council delegates to improperly influence the outcome. These details omitted from the report cast the legitimacy of the Rabbani government and its respect for political rights in greater doubt than the report's language would lead the reader to believe.
In another section, the report cited "numerous reports of assaults against Sikhs and Hindus during the general disorder in Kabul." While true, this statement alone fails to convey the extent to which these groups were targets of persecution and the seriousness of the abuses. In June, a Hindu family in Kabul was killed when armed mujahidin tied them up in a power cable and electrocuted them. Agence France Presse, Reuters and the Indian press carried numerous reports in June and July of killings, rapes and abductions of Hindus and Sikhs in Afghanistan, as well as the looting of Hindu and Sikh homes and businesses. The Indian government lodged a formal protest with the interim Afghan government and then interim President Mojadidi felt compelled by the gravity of the abuses to issue a formal apology to the Sikh and Hindu communities.
Finally, the report failed to discuss the human rights situation of the Afghan refugee community in Pakistan which numbered some 3.5 million at the start of 1992. Although this subject has in the past been covered by the country report on Pakistan, this year the Pakistan report specifically stated that this subject would be found in the Afghanistan report. In fact, the Afghanistan report's only reference to this topic was to mention that at
least 1.1 million Afghans returned from Pakistan during 1992. No mention is made of the conditions facing the over two million refugees remaining in Pakistan.
Much of the report is lacking in specific detail. However, this is largely attributable to the lack of credible information or to the still unsettled nature of the new government's legal system and institutions.
8
