Albania
The State Department's 1992 report on human rights conditions in Albania is both thorough and accurate. Given the extensive political changes Albania has experienced during the past year, the report's detailed description of the changing face of the Albanian polity is particularly incisive. The report's focus on political reforms and government initiatives, however, tends to minimize the stagnation that has occurred during 1992 in the human rights field.
As the report notes, the Democratic Party's success in the March parliamentary elections was an event of unparalleled significance. The resignation of Ramiz Alia and the Socialist Party's ouster ended an era in Albania's history noted for pervasive human rights abuse. Without underestimating the importance of the March elections, however, the report itself illustrates that the election's promise of fundamental change in Albania's human rights practices has been, to date, left largely unfulfilled. While Albania may, as the State Department maintains, have "continued on the path" toward legal guarantees of human rights, 1992 demonstrated that the road to protection of human rights is not always straight and free of obstacles.
Perhaps the primary obstacle to enhanced protection of human rights in Albania is the slow pace of constitutional reform. As the State Department correctly notes, "[deliberations on a new constitution that would further strengthen the judicial system are ongoing, but it is unclear when any such changes might take effect." Since 1991, Albania has
been governed by the Law on Major Constitutional Provisions, a makeshift statute which was not designed, and does not suffice, as an enduring constitution. For example, the guarantees of fundamental human rights in the Law are almost aspirational in character and lack any real binding force. On March 31, 1993, the Albanian Parliament passed an amendment to the law, creating a "bill of rights" which may rectify this situation. The government's ability to implement the new bill of rights by providing effective recourse for human rights violations remains, however, untested.
The 1992 amendments to the Law, mentioned in the report, strengthened executive authority without providing any additional protection against the abuse of such power. Article 28 of the Law permits the President to issue emergency decrees that may not be declared invalid as a result of the Parliament's failure to ratify them. Under this provision, the presidential decree has gained increasing importance as a source of Albanian law.
Upon gaining control of Parliament, Democratic Party officials apparently scrapped ongoing constitutional drafting efforts in favor of a new constitutional drafting commission. While the new government's desire to start the constitution building process anew is understandable, the delays which have accompanied the commission's efforts are unfortunate. By one report, as many as four drafts of the constitution have been considered and rejected even before being submitted to Parliament. As of the end of 1992, the draft constitution had not been pre-
9
Albania
sented to Parliament for consideration and, perhaps more importantly, the method by which the constitution will be ratified had not been decided. The protracted constitutional drafting process has undermined Albanian legal reform generally: preparation of new criminal and civil codes, both substantive and procedural, has been stalled pending ratification of the new constitution.
Other delays mentioned by the State Department also demonstrate Albania's somewhat uneven human rights record in 1992. For example, the report notes that plans to open and examine the files maintained by the Albanian secret police (the Sigurimi) "are being developed." The report fails to mention, however, that in the interim, the Sigurimi's files remain in the control of the Sigurimi's successor organization, the National Information Service (ShIK). Recognizing that ShIK and its agents may have an interest in preventing disclosure of the files or even in destroying them, the Minnesota Lawyers International Human Rights Committee recommended in a March 1992 report that the files be immediately placed under secure and impartial control. While there have been no reports of tampering with or destruction of the files in the past year, the inherent risk posed by ShIK's control of the files remains.
Reforms in the criminal justice system have also proceeded in a halting fashion during the past year. As the State Department mentions, an October 1991 parliamentary decree declared innocent all persons who had been interned or imprisoned for convictions involving agitation, propaganda and anti-government activities under Articles 53, 55 and 57 of the
Albanian Penal Code. Despite calls by the Association of Former Political Prisoners, the Albanian government did not extend the 1991 act during the past year to those convicted of other political crimes.
Further, many Albanians convicted of non-political crimes under the former regime remain imprisoned, despite the fact that they were denied basic human rights during their trials, including the right to a lawyer. Rather than confirming this fact outright, the report notes that "[ajccording to the Lawyers' Association" those convicted under pre-March 1992 penal procedures do not have the right to appeal their convictions. The State Department should affirmatively acknowledge that the continued imprisonment of these persons is itself a fundamental human rights violation. In addition, the report states that "prison conditions do not appear to threaten the lives and health of prisoners," but does not mention that there are no current standards for treatment of those detained in Albania's prisons. Revised guidelines for the operation of the prisons have not been issued since the change in government; the system continues to operate, at least with regard to written policy, according to the same standards which permitted severe ill-treatment of prisoners in the past.
The report also fails at times to differentiate between legal rights now afforded Albanians by law and actual practice in the Albanian criminal justice system. After enumerating the basic procedural guarantees accorded under Albanian criminal law, the report notes that the "court system attempts to follow these procedures as closely as possible, but a
10
Albania
severe shortage of trained, experienced legal professionals slows down the process considerably." The report would have been greatly strengthened by a more detailed analysis of which procedural rights are violated, how frequently such violations occur, and who is responsible for the violations. While some denial of human rights may properly be attributed to (but not excused by) resource shortages, continued problems also reflect more fundamental failings within the legal system and those who work within it. In particular, the integrity of the system is undermined by the continued employment of judges, prosecutors and investigators responsible for serious human rights violations under the former government. Although wholesale dismissal of those associated with the prior regime would itself violate human rights, some method of case-by-case review using objective standards is essential to ensure that past perpetrators of human rights abuse do not remain in positions of authority.
In fact, as the report recognizes, the "rule of law and principle of an independent judiciary were not yet firmly established in practice." The report mentions, but does not comment upon, the fact that judges on the Constitutional Court are appointed and may be dismissed by Parliament, a fundamental encroachment upon the independence of the judiciary.
The report discusses two of the most glaring examples of abuse of power and failure to respect the rule of law: the reprimand of a Tirana judge based on a disagreement with President Sali Berisha and the dismissal of General Prosecutor Maksim Haxhia.
Mr. Haxhia's case is illustrative of existing problems within the administration of justice system. Under Albanian law, the General Prosecutor may be dismissed only for mental incompetence or committing a serious specified crime. The State Department reported that Democratic Party leaders in Parliament sought to dismiss Mr. Haxhia because he had not moved quickly enough to compile evidence against former government officials believed to have committed crimes under the prior government. Other reports have cited the government's anger with Mr. Haxhia for opposing a parliamentary law giving the police the right to search houses without a warrant and for challenging excessive use of force by police. When Mr. Haxhia challenged his dismissal as extralegal in the Constitutional Court, the Court found that an amendment to the Law of Major Constitutional Provisions relating to dismissal of the prosecutor which had been designed to ensure independence of the judiciary and separation of powers did not govern the case. The Court ruled instead that the Parliament's action was proper as part of its general right to "control" the activity of the General Prosecutor. To rule otherwise, according to the Court, would grant the General Prosecutor "an entirely special unjustified protection and would put [him] in a privileged position as against all other state organs that hold a high position in the organization of the state." The failure of the Court to recognize that such separation of powers and independent functioning of the judiciary is not only appropriate, but essential, is especially troubling.
Several months after his dismissal, Mr. Haxhia was charged and convicted of
11
Albania
falsifying official documents in an apparent attempt to create a statutory ground for his dismissal. As the report notes, Mr. Haxhia's one-day trial "did not meet international standards." Mr. Haxhia's alleged "falsification" was his appointment of three prosecutors without the approval of the High Council of Justice as a whole. Defense motions, subpoenas and calls for witnesses were ignored by the court, including, for example, a motion by the defense to call two other members of the High Council who were said to have also made appointments similar to Mr. Haxhia's (establishing a de facto procedure that such acts did not require full Council approval). The failure of the Albanian justice system in this highly public case (the trial was attended by numerous foreign observers, including a member of the U.S. embassy staff) exemplifies the existing discrepancy between the protection Albanian law provides to defendants in theory and the very different practice in Albanian courts.
While mentioning several troubling developments in the Albanian police and security services, the report does not adequately address the significance of these events. As the report notes, a separate police force charged with responding to grave threats against public order, the Rapid Intervention Force (RIF), was established in 1991. It also discusses the creation of two additional special police forces: the "criminal police" and the "target police." According to the State Department, these forces have "wide-ranging authority with little, if any, institutional oversight." Especially given the role Albania's security forces have played in recent years, the creation of autonomous police with extraordinary
powers warrants grave concern. While increasingly alarmed over rising crime rates, the Albanian public has openly questioned the legitimacy of the police. This problem, and the growing threat of crime, cannot adequately be addressed by simply creating new police forces and granting them expanded powers. Indeed, these newly created forces are likely to exacerbate the situation by giving the public further grounds for mistrust of police authority. The report notes, for example, the death of a student who was pulled from a bus and beaten by RIF forces. Although this incident occurred before the March 1992 elections, the failure of the Albanian police to investigate the incident either before or after the elections remains unexplained. The RIF's broad search powers described in the report are an invitation to further abuse of human rights, and should have been identified as such.
The report correctly recognizes the important steps taken toward political pluralism in Albania in 1992. These changes, however, must be viewed along with the significant constraints upon the democratic process which still remain in Albania. As the report notes, "radio and television remained state monopolies." State media control continued to impede Albania's progress toward free expression in 1992. Three members of an Albanian television crew were fired in mid-year after conducting an interview with Albanian Democratic Party co-founder Azem Hajdari, which was never aired. Television management was apparently unhappy with comments made by Hajdari that could be viewed as critical of the government. A court order overruled the dismissals.
12
Albania
In addition, the newspaper Albapol, a publication of the Ministry of Public Order, was banned by the government. Xhemal Lamcellari, a former lawyer and journalist for Albapol who had criticized Democratic Party leaders (including Pjeter Arbnori), went on a hunger strike in July to protest his arrest. The Albanian Parliament voted to ban the Communist Party newspaper Voice of Truth (Zeri i se Vertetes) in July.
The State Department also reports that the daily paper Koha e Jone was banned after the Democratic Party accused its staff of being pro-communist. Koha e Jone is, however, still being published. The report fails to mention that this paper was founded by former Democratic Party leaders who were expelled from the party and formed an opposition party, the Democratic Alliance. Helsinki Watch reported that the paper's editor-in-chief was arrested during 1992 by local authorities because of statements made against the Albanian Socialist Party (the renamed Labor party) in a campaign speech. A second editor of the paper, Alexander Frangaj, was also placed under house arrest. Frangaj was tried and acquitted on April 30, 1993.
While state control of the media can be viewed as a "holdover" from Albania's recent past, more troubling are anti-democratic actions affirmatively taken by the newly elected Albanian government. In July, Parliament passed a law banning all "Fascist, racist, antinational, Marxist-Leninist, Enverist [followers of Enver Hoxha], and Stalinist" parties, including the Communist Party. After this law was passed, the Ministry of Justice relied on its provisions, and its authority to refuse
or accept applications to form political parties, to declare the Communist Party illegal. When the matter was taken before the Albanian Constitutional Court, the Court upheld the law and the ban of the Communist Party, but refused to rule directly on the Ministry's action as not presenting a constitutional questidn. In addition, the State Department reported that "the Constitutional Court upheld a prohibition of the activities of a group of former military officials who had failed to get the necessary authorization." This summary omits reference to the context of this event and gives the Court's holding more credit than it deserves. The Court's ruling upheld a ban of an army reservist organization which had criticized proposed army reforms as a "purge." The decision coincided with the dismissal, and possible trial, of 49 Albanian army and police officers for trying to "destabilize the armed forces and oppose reform in the army." Those dismissed included Kostaq Karoli, the Army Chief of Staff.
As the report notes, the Law on Major Constitutional Provisions itself bans parties formed on an ethnic or religious basis. In February, the Parliament passed an election law implementing this provision and prohibited all ethnically-based parties from participating in the March elections. The law was designed to bar the Omonia, an ethnic Greek party which won five seats in the 1991 elections, from participating in the elections. A reorganized party made up of members of Omonia, the Union for Human Rights, won two Parliamentary seats in the 1992 elections.
While the report accurately records many of these events, its failure to as-
13
Albania
sess the significant threat to freedom of expression and association that they represent is regrettable. By arguing instead that 1992 presented a seemingly unfaltering movement toward political pluralism and respect for human rights in Albania, the State Department gives the appearance of condoning these violations in light of other more positive developments, rather than urging the Albanian government to take further steps to protect human rights.
The government increasingly relied upon the death penalty in 1992, apparently as a supposed deterrent to violent crime. Amnesty International reports that 12 death sentences were issued in Albania between February and early July, all for murder. By July, six men had been executed and three sentences had been commuted. Two brothers were hanged in the main square of Fier on June 25 for the murder of five people during a robbery on May 29. While the execution was not public, the bodies of the two men were left on the gallows for hours while spectators, including many who had travelled to Fier for the execution, were allowed to gather in the square. The report includes an account of this event in the section on torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment. Although noting that "[m]any Albanians were shocked at this callousness," the State Department does not itself comment upon either the rapid sequence of the brothers' trial, sentence and execution or upon the brutal method of their death. The report does not mention at all the other executions carried out in Albania during 1992.
The report also does not comment
upon the arrest, and continuing imprisonment or house arrest, of 19 former Labor Party leaders in Albania. Some of those arrested have been held without trial for periods exceeding one year. In September, former President Ramiz Alia was placed under house arrest. The charges against Alia reportedly include a charge of violating the provision of Albanian law which makes it illegal to serve simultaneously as president and chair of a political party despite the fact that this law was passed after Alia had resigned from both positions. The charges against the other former officials include corruption, abuse of privileges and appropriation and misuse of state property. Both the retroactive application of laws and the lengthy detention without trial are violations of international law.
In many other areas, the report provides a comprehensive description of the Albanian human rights situation. For example, the report's summary of discrimination against minorities, especially the attention paid to the status of Roma (gypsies), is helpful. Unlike last year, the 1992 report recognizes that despite equal access, women have not been accorded equal treatment in education. The report also expressly acknowledges that while domestic violence "undoubtedly exists," police are "seldom called to intervene . . . and women almost never bring charges against their spouses."
The problems faced by Albania, like other former communist countries in transition, are certainly profound. By focusing on the scope of this challenge, and on the progress Albania has made toward democracy and protection of human rights, the State Department
14
underestimates the importance of ongoing threats to human rights in Albania and misses an opportunity to challenge the Albanian government to improve its practices. Albania's human rights record in 1992 is undoubtedly better, but improvement alone is not the standard by which the Albanian government's actions should be judged, especially given the massive human rights violations in Albania's past. Instead of accepting a "two-steps forward, one-step back" record as long as Albania remains "on the path" to democracy, the State Department should promote full protection of human rights in the country.
