Argentina
1992 was a mixed year for human rights in Argentina. Reform legislation focusing on the problem of police violence was enacted but largely unenforced at year's end. Torture, murder and excessive use of force by the police and other security forces persisted and one "disappearance" was confirmed. While some courts for the first time convicted police officers of such abuses, others continued to absolve the police in cases involving gross human rights violations. The Argentine press continued to operate with few formal restrictions, but journalists received death threats or were otherwise harassed while covering controversial cases, and the government continued to use the legal system to silence investigative journalists and critics. Judges, witnesses and victims also were routinely subjected to extralegal threats in prosecutions involving the police or public corruption.
The State Department's report discusses many of these issues, but often fails to provide facts necessary to illuminate their scope or significance. More fundamentally, the report fails to address the causes and cumulative impact of these deeply rooted problems on Argentina's emerging democracy, and their resulting harm to the protection of civil and human rights within Argentina.
The report correctly notes that "there continued to be credible reports of extrajudicial killings as a result of the frequent use of excessive force, torture or weapons by the police." It cites two specific examples in which persons taken into police custody were killed and mutilated.
However, the State Department fails to mention a widely publicized report issued in December by the Center for Legal and Social Studies indicating that 126 persons in the greater Buenos Aires area were killed in alleged "shootouts" with the police and other security personnel during 1991 and the first six months of 1992 (43 in the latter period). Almost all of the victims were 30 years old or younger, and the majority were minors. The report does not mention the shooting death at a police roadblock in March of Eric Anthony Garcia, an 18-year-old U.S. citizen. Although the police claimed that Garcia committed suicide by placing a gun in his mouth and pulling the trigger, numerous others, including a lawyer retained by Garcia's family who had been a judge during the former military dictatorship, claimed he was murdered by the police. Despite calls from U.S. government officials for a thorough investigation, the case remained unresolved at year's end.
The State Department correctly notes that police brutality, including death, disappearance and torture, and the impunity of the police from meaningful punishment by the courts, is an ongoing and serious problem. Nevertheless, the report creates the false impression that such impunity is abating by citing instances in which life sentences were sought or obtained against policemen for torture and murder. Although courts returned verdicts against the police in some cases, the report fails to mention that in several significant cases policemen were absolved by the courts on dubious grounds despite strong evidence of illegal conduct.
19
Argentina
For example, in November, the Sixth Court of Criminal Appeals in Buenos Aires absolved a police officer in the April 1991 death of Walter Bulacio, a minor who died while in police custody, even though the police had failed to advise a juvenile court judge of Bulacio's detention as required by law. Bulacio's death was among the five most notorious cases of police brutality since Argentina's return to democracy, sparking widespread protests. The appeals court held that the police properly relied on a secret memorandum purportedly granting the police unreviewable discretion to detain juveniles without court approval. At the same time, the appeals court held that the secret memorandum was patently unconstitutional. The court also ignored significant evidence that Bulacio died as a result of beatings while in custody. Despite such evidence, the police officer accused of killing Bulacio was subsequently promoted. Similarly, in October 1992 a criminal court judge in Rosario absolved a police officer accused of murdering soccer fan Marcelo Burgos by firing into a crowd in 1988 -- holding that the officer acted in self defense despite strong evidence that Burgos was unarmed. In May 1992, five police officers convicted of torturing a prisoner who later died in custody were given light sentences -- between three to nine years - by the Third Court of Criminal Appeals in La Plata, even though the prosecutor had called for life imprisonment.
The report also seriously understates the persistence of torture as an accepted mode of interrogation and repression, especially of the young in Argentina. The report fails to note the continued use by the police in 1992 of methods which are
indistinguishable from those used by security forces during the prior military dictatorship (1976-1983). For example, in August, Sergio Gustavo Durán, 17-years-old, died in custody after he was illegally detained and tortured by the police in Moron. The torture included repeated blows to the face and testicles, and subjection to the "dry submarine" (suffocation with a plastic bag placed over the head). In May, Ruben Aicardi was tortured by the police in Villegas in an effort to determine the location of a suspect in a criminal investigation. In July, a military officer was arrested for allegedly torturing military conscripts with an electric cattle prod (picana eléctrica), an instrument of torture routinely employed during Argentina's military dictatorship. Government critics and human rights groups charge that the persistence of torture in Argentina is a direct result of President Menem's pardons of police officials and military officers accused of torture during the military dictatorship, many of whom still hold high posts in government.
The report correctly cites the formation of a commission of families of victims of institutional violence, the firing or demotion of certain police officers charged with various crimes and official misconduct, and the upgrading of the human rights office to subsecretary level as evidence that the government is beginning to recognize police violence and the persistence of torture as a serious problem. However, the report fails to address adequately numerous institutional barriers to meaningful reform, including the continued tenure of many judges appointed by the former military dictatorship who have long condoned extralegal police
20
Argentina
tactics, including torture; judicial dependence on the police to investigate accusations of police violence; insufficient judicial resources to conduct independent judicial investigations; frequent threats and intimidation of judges who attempt independent investigations; and the absence of effective civilian oversight of the police and security forces. Further, the report fails to address open resistance by the police to meaningful implementation of amendments to a new federal code of criminal procedure. Although a new code was enacted in September to restrict police powers and to protect individual rights, it remained largely unenforced at year's end.
Although the report indicates that "intimidation of the judiciary continued to be a problem" in 1 992, it fails to highlight the problem with examples. In March, Judge Carlos Rousseau, the head of the criminal court in Quilmes, received death threats connected with his investigation of the desecration of a Jewish cemetery in Berazategui. In April, bomb threats in Buenos Aires disrupted proceedings against 25 military sub-officials involved in a 1990 barracks rebellion. In May, Judge Daniel Hermanos of Lomas de Zamora received threats against himself and his family in connection with his investigation of industries that allegedly distributed contaminated products for human consumption. In June, Judge Ricardo Mario Fernandez Bernengo of San Martin received death threats in his home and office after he ordered the arrest of five police officers accused of extortion. In July, unknown persons broke a window in the courtroom of the Cámara Federal in Buenos Aires, where six judges were meeting to discuss the disposition
of various cases. One of the judges then received a telephone call in which the window-breaking was referred to, and the caller warned "that's how each one of your heads will be." Also in July, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court was repeatedly threatened with death in connection with an investigation into the conduct of a judge in Mar de Plata accused of lying and abuse of authority. In November, Judge Silvia Nogueras of Santa Fe received telephone threats during an investigation into a gambling and prostitution ring in which police officials were implicated.
The report is silent not only about the specifics of these threats, but also about their overt political overtones, and their frustration of the rule of law in Argentina. For example, in its 1991 report, the State Department correctly praised President Menem for "busting" the "polibanda" kidnapping ring in November and December 1991 whose members included high-ranking police officers, intelligence agents and military officers implicated in torture, murder and "taskforce" operations during the prior military dictatorship. However, this year's report fails to mention that the "polibanda" prosecution has been hampered by harassment and intimidation. In February 1992, while investigating that kidnapping ring, Judge Nerio Bonifatti received threatening telephone calls in his home and office after he published a newspaper advertisement seeking information about the case. At year's end, the case remained unresolved.
The report also underplays significant intimidation of persons connected to politically sensitive cases, including prosecutors, witnesses and family members of
21
Argentina
victims. Although the report mentions that family members and others pressing for a full investigation of the murder of Senator Regino Maders "claimed" to have received telephone threats, it fails to discuss multiple reports supporting these charges, or to identify such threats as part of the larger campaign against persons who publicly challenge the police and security forces. The report mentions the ongoing investigation of cover-up charges arising from the September 1990 rape and murder of Maria Soledad Morales without mentioning intimidation in January 1992 of Diego Guglielmi, the Catamarca prosecutor assigned to the case. While Guglielmi was driving in Buenos Aires, three men in a Ford Falcon pulled him over, struck him on the head with a police-grade 9mm pistol, and warned him not to continue his investigation. Also in January, Eugenia Todica, a known witness in a police brutality case, was beaten at her doorstep by an unknown man dressed in civilian clothing. When Todica went to the police station to file a complaint, she identified her attacker as one of the police officers present at the station. In August, Luciano Villalba, 16 years old, was beaten and threatened in an effort to influence his testimony against 17 police officials implicated in the death of Christian Gonzalez, 19 years old.
The report also seriously underplays official government interference with the independence of the judiciary by mentioning charges of "potential" executive branch influence in court decisions without citing substantial evidence supporting such accusations, and without stating, as required by State Department instructions on the preparation of the reports, whether
it believes such reports are credible. For example, in March, Manuel Garcia Rey-noso, a criminal court judge investigating smuggling charges against customs officials and against a duty free shop owner at Ezeiza airport, reportedly received official pressure from a judge closely tied to President Menem, allegedly on behalf of Supreme Court Justice Rodolfo Barra, regarding the importance of the case and the degree of involvement of the duty free shop owner. In May, the Secretary of Natural Resources and Human Environment and the Minister of the Economy reportedly warned Federal Judge Roberto Marquevich of San Isidro to keep a low profile in an investigation into the discharge of untreated industrial wastewater into the Reconquista river. The president of one of the companies under investigation was well-connected with several top government officials. There was no serious investigation of these charges in 1992.
The perception that judges are answerable to forces within and outside of the government prompted a crisis of faith in the judiciary during 1992. In April, at a national judicial conference, numerous judges expressed concern over the increasing subordination of the judiciary to the executive branch and the resulting erosion of public faith in court decisions. A March poll indicated that 66% of those polled believed the government improperly influenced the decisions of the Supreme Court, and a majority believed the judiciary was not impartial. In May, another poll indicated that 77% believed the Supreme Court was corrupt. In July, former prosecutors Luis Moreno Ocampo and Anibal Ibarra denounced President Menem for firing the heads of the Tribu-
22
Argentina
nal de Cuentas (charged with fiscal monitoring), the Fiscalía de Investigaciones (an office of independent prosecutors) and the Procuración Fiscal (charged with oversight of the justice system). These three offices are formally dependent on the Executive Branch but exercise quasi-judicial watchdog functions. Moreno and Ibarra also stated their view that the Supreme Court had not been more closely aligned with official government positions since the military dictatorship of 1976-1983. Articles in the business press within and outside of Argentina in 1992 questioned whether the absence of an independent judiciary was having a deleterious effect on foreign investment. The State Department report largely ignores these issues.
In September, a federal law was enacted codifying protections against torture and other police abuses, establishing oral and public trials in federal criminal cases, and creating a new federal appeals court for the review of such matters. Although the report notes that "budgetary problems and longstanding institutional interests must be overcome before the system of trials based on oral testimony takes root," it fails to report efforts by President Menem to utilize the law to his own political advantage by packing the newly created appeals court with political allies, repeating patterns established when he packed the Supreme Court in 1989 and 1990. President Menem's Justice Minister, Leon Arslanian, a well-respected former appeals court judge, resigned in protest after publicly criticizing Menem for appointing underqualified judges for political reasons. Seven of the 13 judges nominated to the newly created court were vigorously opposed by
human rights groups and opposition parties because of the nominees' support for and participation in repression during the former military dictatorship and their ongoing close ties with the military and police. With one exception, President Menem's appointments were confirmed by the Argentine Senate, which is controlled by the President's party. President Menem then named the one nominee rejected by the Senate to the newly-created post of court's chief prosecutor. These appointments supported the views of critics who questioned whether President Menem was committed to penal reform, or was instead seeking to further undermine the rule of law through political appointments.
The State Department is similarly myopic on press freedoms. The report notes that "the vigor and openness of the Argentine press increased in 1992." However, it fails to address numerous threats and physical attacks against journalists covering politically sensitive stories. For example, in March, journalists covering an investigation into the murder of Senator Regino Maders received death threats. In September, unidentified persons fired shots at the home of Enrique Sdrech, an investigative journalist, and spraypainted in red: "This is a warning: the next time it will be your grandchildren." A week later Sdrech received telephone calls warning him not to pursue certain topics. In September and October, journalists covering weekly marches by retired persons protesting cuts in pension benefits (a topic covered in a New York Times article as well) were repeatedly beaten by the police, and two were detained for several hours. In November, two bomb attacks against the
23
Argentina
weekly Noticias occurred the night before the magazine was about to publish a controversial article about President Men-em's brother.
Other significant attacks on the press are omitted from the State Department report. In March, the newspaper Pdgina 12 and two radio stations received a series of telephone calls threatening the immediate explosion of bombs in their offices. P^gina 12's offices had been bombed in February 1991. Also in March 1992, journalists for a newspaper in Lomas de Zamora received death threats in an attempt to shut down the paper. In August, one journalist and four photographers on assignment for the weekly Noticias were assaulted by six unidentified men in front of the residence of Maria Julia Alsogary, Secretary for Natural Resources and the Human Environment. One of the attackers fired a shot and destroyed the camera of one of the photographers. The Minister's security team, which usually remains in front of the Minister's home, disappeared minutes before and reappeared minutes after the attack. In November, editors of the newspaper El Liberal were threatened over the telephone. That same day, unknown persons tried to force their way into the newspaper's office and unidentified persons threw a firebomb into the parking lot. Also in November, a bomb temporarily suspended Radio Splendid's broadcast. The chilling effect of these incidents on the Argentine press should not be underestimated. The report should not have ignored them.
The report compounds these omissions by failing to mention the indifference of President Menem's government
to attacks on the press, or the government's aggressive use of antiquated laws criminalizing political speech to silence dissent. In January, the Minister of the Interior announced that, with President Menem's approval, he would sue any media that slandered or offended public officials. In May, a judge ordered Jaime Emma, a journalist for Humor magazine, arrested for having published a series of articles a year earlier criticizing official corruption. The charge was "repeated libel" of public officials. A month later, amid widespread protests, Emma was released. Also in May, a judge ordered documents related to charges of official corruption seized from a television station.
The rulings of the Argentine Supreme Court on freedom of expression also are given inadequate attention. The State Department correctly notes that the Supreme Court reversed a lower court's imposition of a prior restraint on a television show. However, the report fails to mention an August ruling upholding the criminal conviction of a journalist who accurately reported the testimony of Jacobo Timmerman at a 1985 trial of former junta members for human rights abuses. At the trial, Timmerman accused his former editor of conspiring with the military in the repression and torture of alleged subversives. A majority of the Supreme Court held that the journalist should not have reported sworn testimony without verifying the underlying truth of Timmerman's accusations, making it virtually impossible for the press to report stories about judicial proceedings in a timely manner.
The report also fails to mention that
24
Argentina
in February, tne Supreme Court declined to review the criminal conviction of Horacio Verbitsky, journalist for Página 12 and author of a controversial book charging numerous government officials with corruption. Verbitsky had been convicted of offending the dignity of a public official for referring to a Supreme Court justice as "disgusting." He alleged that his prosecution was an attempt to intimidate journalists and publishers. When the Argentine Supreme Court declined to review the case, Verbitsky challenged the conviction before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. Only then did President Menem announce that criminalizing political speech was "contrary to the principles of a democratic society." Although the Argentine government temporarily averted a ruling by the Inter-Am-erican Commission by representing that it would repeal the law under which Verbitsky was convicted, at year's end the law remained on the books, and as many as 20 journalists were still being prosecuted for publicly criticizing government officials. These matters did not find their way into the report's insubstantial discussion of free speech issues.
The report fails to address two recent significant and contradictory decisions, one by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, the other by the Argentine Supreme Court, that display in full relief the reluctance of the Menem government to prosecute officials accused of committing torture and murder during the 1976-1983 military dictatorship.
In October, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights held that laws enacted in 1 986 and 1987 by the Argentine Congress to limit prosecutions of
those accused of human rights violations during 1976-1983 and President Me-nem's 1989 pardon of those for whom prosecutions were still pending violated the right of access to the courts for victims of human rights abuses guaranteed by the Inter-American Convention of Human Rights. Conversely, as human rights groups have noted, the Argentine Supreme Court in the same month illustrated the complicity between President Menem and his appointed justices by upholding the 1989 pardons law.
While the Inter-American Commission ruled that Argentina must provide the victims and their families with just compensation and adopt necessary measures to clarify the facts of each case, identifying the individuals responsible for human rights abuses during the military dictatorship, the State Department report does not address what, if any, steps the Argentine government has taken to comply with its international obligations in general and this ruling in particular. Indeed, rather than complying, the Argentine Government has challenged the authority of the Inter-American Commission to review its domestic laws. President Menem has repeatedly refused to open archives allegedly maintained by the military, the police and intelligence services during the dictatorship. Calls for a freedom of information law that would compel the release of such files were ignored in 1992. Despite this, the State Department incorrectly maintains that "[t]he Government has cooperated with requests for human rights information from all areas and individuals."
The report also fails to mention several significant cases raised in previous re-
25
Argentina
ports that have never been resolved: charges of torture against police subcom-missioner Luis Patti; the "disappearance" of Andres Alberto Nunez, even though Nunez's name was later discovered in a police precinct register; and the absence of an independent investigation into the apparent murder of an armed group that raided the military quarters of La Tablada in 1989. Strong circumstantial evidence suggests that at least four of the attackers at La Tablada were killed by the army after they surrendered. In 1992, several prisoners arrested in the La Tablada incident were transferred to remote prisons, far from their families, for no apparent reason.
In 1991, the State Department's report properly criticized the government for failing to support the investigation of cases involving children of those who were "disappeared" by security forces during the military dictatorship. This year's report cites "significant progress" on such cases in 1992, apparently based on a widely publicized meeting between President Menem and the Grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo, and Menem's agreement to create a special commission to address these cases. Although political responsiveness on the part of President Menem to these issues may not be entirely without meaning, there was little evidence of concrete progress on these children's cases at year's end.
The State Department's report incorrectly states that large public protests took place in 1992 without governmental interference. In November, the government reacted to a general strike organized by the largest affiliation of Argentine unions, the CGT, by threatening to curtail
the right to strike of public sector employees. In the days before the strike, the government launched a massive media campaign intimidating workers from participating in the strike, threatening reprisals and suspensions. In July, President Menem criticized a teachers' demonstration by alleging that a noted Peruvian guerrilla was linked to their labor organization. Menem then warned that there could be "new contingents of parents claiming their children in the Plaza de Mayo" if the protests continued. His comment was criticized by unions, opposition parties, human rights organizations, and student groups as a threatening intimation of reprisals similar to the 1976-1983 period of military dictatorship.
As Argentine lawyer and scholar Alejandro Garro has noted, "the reinstatement of constitutional rule is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for the rule of law to prevail" in Argentina. So long as President Menem rules the country by decree and continues to manipulate and discredit the judicial system, there will be continued "mistrust, both by foreign investors and Argentines themselves, of the country's genuine commitment to the rule of law." To accurately assess the state of human rights and democratic consolidation in Argentina, the State Department's reports must begin to examine human rights issues taking into account these institutional concerns, which form the basis for many of Argentina's recurrent human rights problems.
26
