Armenia
The 1 992 State Department report on human rights in Armenia is particularly important because it is the first comprehensive report focusing on Armenia specifically, rather than on selected events relating to the country within the larger context of the former Soviet Union. Although the report is intended only as a review of 1992 events, it is impossible to accurately report those events without the benefit of some historical context. Recognizing this, the drafters of the Armenia report referenced some of the events preceding 1992 in addition to providing a 1992 chronicle.
While the report addresses most of the key issues and events of 1 992, and is therefore an important beginning with respect to dealing with the Republic of Armenia as an independent entity, it is lacking in three respects. First, the report fails to adequately address factors from previous years that have shaped events in 1992. The historic references that appear in the report are selective and incomplete, leaving the reader with misconceptions on important points. Second, the report is, in some areas, inaccurate with respect to reported facts. Finally, the emphasis, or gloss, placed on some issues tends to be misleading.
In 1992, the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict continued to "dominate the lives" of Armenians -- both because of the ferocity of the dispute and because of the devastating effects of Azerbaijan's blockade of Armenia that has reached its fourth year. This blockade, which is actively supported by Turkey and some factions in Georgia, has greatly intensified the economic
crisis that began with the 1988 earthquake and the disintegration of the Soviet Union. The report refers to "severe shortages" of fuel, electricity, food and humanitarian aid and states that 95% of the population lives in poverty. In reality, the situation is much more desperate than the report indicates. The conditions may well be the worst in all of the former Soviet Union. Armenians live in a continuous struggle for survival due to the absence of fuel, food, medical supplies and adequate shelter.
As the winter of 1 992 approached, Armenia was without any source of fuel, could provide no heat or electricity to schools in the cities which were forced to close, and could provide only two hours of electricity per day, and no heat, to residents of its cities. The shortage of adequate housing for hundreds of thousands of refugees from the earthquake and from Azerbaijan makes them particularly vulnerable and at risk of freezing to death or dying of starvation or disease, but the crisis is such that the entire population faces similar risks.
The report's introduction of the conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh is limited to a discussion of events since 1 988. While it is true that a majority of the citizens of Nagorno-Karabakh voted to secede from Azerbaijan in 1988, the source of the conflict is found much earlier. The Armenian population of Nagorno-Karabakh viewed this action as a move toward "reunification" of Nagorno-Karabakh with Armenia, which were separated by the Soviet Union in 1923. Azerbaijan, however, viewed the action as an unlawful at-
27
Armenia
tempt by the Armenian people to divest Azerbaijan of its sovereign territory. Armenia has since disavowed its early position proclaiming Nagorno-Karabakh a part of Armenia, and Nagorno-Karabakh now claims to be an independent republic. Nagorno-Karabakh has not, however, been recognized as independent by any nation, including Armenia.
Armenia's 1991 declaration of independence from the Soviet Union was accomplished through legal means by which the elected Supreme Soviet that represented Soviet Armenia continued intact as the parliament of the independent Armenia. The report's discussion regarding a lack of governmental structure and rivalry between presidency and parliament should be considered in light of the fact that the government that exists has some measure of legitimacy and stability. Similarly, the report's criticism of the government's failure to adopt a constitution is perhaps overstated given the Parliaments' 1991 resolution to adopt the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) as the supreme law of Armenia to insure protection of human rights in the absence of a constitution, as well as to provide a basis for the passage of specific human rights legislation.
The introduction of the report concludes with a brief description of the state of Armenian law which is factually inaccurate. While noting that the Parliament enacted a new law on protecting freedom of speech and press, the report states that no other new legislation protecting freedom of assembly, association, religion, movement or worker rights had been enacted. However, in addition to
the adoption of the ICCPR, the Parliament enacted the following laws during 1991 and 1992:
•	The Law on Religion and Freedom of Conscience, enacted on July 23, 1991, which guarantees nondiscrimination on the basis of religion or belief, and establishes separation of church and state;
•	The Law on Land and Property Ownership, enacted in February 1991, which established privatization of land;
•	The Law on Employment, enacted in April 1992, which guarantees the right to organize and bargain collectively, provides minimum wage and age standards, sets acceptable work conditions, prohibits forced labor and provides for nondiscrimination in employment; and
•	The Law on Language, enacted in December 1992, which guarantees minority rights to use native languages in schools, publications, etc.
These laws have had little immediate impact, however, because industry in Armenia continues to be almost completely shut down. While the enactment of such laws is obviously an important first step, the practical effect of these laws, especially the laws on employment and language, remains to be seen.
No laws apart from the ICCPR existed in 1992 guaranteeing the freedom of assembly and association, but as the report states, public demonstrations and political groups were commonplace and
28
Armenia
generally not subject to abuse or censorship.
Missing from the report's discussion of arbitrary arrest, detention or exile is the March 8 Armenian guerrilla attack on an air-defense unit of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) located near Artik, Armenia. Two CIS officers were killed and several were wounded. The attack followed an abduction earlier that day of 10 CIS officers from that unit. The officers were held hostage for four days before being released. They later reported that the guerrillas included Armenian soldiers. The guerrillas were reportedly demanding GRAD missiles and other arms in exchange for the officers' freedom.
In the discussion regarding the expulsion from Armenia of Dashnak leader Hrair Marukyan, the report correctly notes that the Armenian government's treatment of political opposition has been suspect. The Dashnaks have complained that the expulsion of Marukyan is only a part of a systematic campaign by Ter-Petrosian to squelch political opposition in Armenia. Ter-Petrosian's allegations in support of the expulsion centered not on Marukyan, but rather on the Dashnak leadership. In addition, Ter-Petrosian's reluctance to convene a constitutional convention and his tendency to ignore parliament are seen by various political opposition groups as evidence of his continuing efforts to concentrate power in the executive branch to the detriment of the opposition parties. This issue could become increasingly problematic in light of President Ter-Petrosian's recent decline in popular support.
The report includes a detailed description of public trial procedures. The information available provides no basis for criticism with the exception of the report's statement that "the presumption of innocence does not exist" in Armenia. The presumption does exist - it appears in the ICCPR and in Armenia's Criminal Code. The extent to which it is observed, however, is unknown.
The report similarly ignores the existence of the ICCPR in stating that "there is no legal protection for the privacy of citizens." As the report implies, because of the continued existence of the former Soviet National Security Agency, it is unclear whether Armenians actually enjoy any freedom from undue government surveillance.
With respect to violations of humanitarian law, the report states that the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict "has led to a series of economic blockades," equating Armenia's blockade of the Nakhichevan region of Azerbaijan with Azerbaijan's blockade of Armenia. In reality, the two situations are not comparable. While it is clear that rail service through Armenia from Azerbaijan to Nakhichevan has been disrupted on many occasions, Nakhichevan has an open border with Turkey, with which it actively trades. Nakhichevan is not dependent upon Azerbaijan for humanitarian supplies. Armenia, on the other hand, is effectively isolated by Azerbaijan's blockade because Turkey actively supports the blockade. The only other trade routes available are a mountain road to Iran, which is unusable in winter, and a road and rail lines through Georgia which are frequently impassable due to the political unrest in this country.
29
Armenia
It should be noted that Armenian forces in Nagorno-Karabakh have succeeded in opening and securing a corridor through Azerbaijan territory linking Armenia with Nagorno-Karabakh. Although this has been described by Armenia as a "humanitarian corridor," in reality it is used to supply arms and military supplies to Armenian forces in Nagorno-Karabakh. Armenia still officially does not recognize Nagorno-Karabakh's declared independence or support its Armenian militia there, but it is likely that Armenia's unofficial military aid to the enclave is substantial. This corridor has become a significant factor in the conflict, but its existence is not addressed in either the report on Armenia or in the more detailed discussion of Nagorno-Karabakh that appears in the report on Azerbaijan.
The conflict continues to escalate, with human rights abuses perpetrated by both sides. The report on Azerbaijan documents some of those for which Armenian forces in Nagorno-Karabakh are responsible, the most infamous of which is the massacre at Khodjaly. Other violations include ill-treatment of prisoners, summary executions of Azeris, threats of summary executions of ethnic groups fighting with Azeris, and travel restrictions imposed on the civilian population (see the critique of the report on human rights in Azerbaijan).
30
