Azerbaijan
The State Department's 1992 report on human rights in Azerbaijan is a significant first attempt to discuss the transgressions of human rights specific to this country. Certainly Azerbaijan faces a serious human rights situation and the report is laudable in its attempt to come to grips with many of these problems.
The report, however, is lacking in two significant respects. First, there is little mention of the historical background to the human rights issues, including the conflict between the ethnic Azeris and Armenians. Second, while the report identifies the larger human rights issues that arose during the year, it neglects to discuss many of the specific incidents relating to those issues.
The two-page introduction to the State Department's report gives an overview of the political changes in Azerbaijan and attempts to relate human rights issues to those political changes. While the report accurately summarizes the transfer of power from Ayaz Mutalibov, the former Communist Party First Secretary, to the Azeri Popular Front (APF) and the leadership of Abulfez Elchibey, it only briefly mentions the conflict that accompanied that transfer. Among other things, just before the scheduled elections in late spring, then-President Ayaz Mutalibov put in place a sweeping order that suspended the presidential election and declared a state of emergency in Baku, Azerbaijan's capital.
Although the state of emergency was short-lived, it prohibited activities of all political parties, severely restricted travel.
implemented a curfew, and subjected the press to orders of prior restraints. At subsequent demonstrations against President Mutalibov, the press reported that guns were fired at the crowd. The elections were finally held on June 7, and most independent observers confirmed that Abulfez Elchibey, leader of the APF, won by an overwhelming majority.
The report notes that, after the election, the APF Government began acting more like a democratic state. But it does not mention the harassment, intimidation and even arrest of many of President Elbichey's political adversaries. In addition, the police force that replaced the militia remained a very active political weapon throughout the year.
The report should have analyzed and assessed the role of military leaders Isk-ander Hamidov and Ragim Ghaziev. Although not an elected official, Mr. Hamidov wields substantial power. He leads the Interior Ministry troops, which are reportedly responsible for widespread human rights transgressions, including "disappearances" and torture. Mr. Ghaziev was, until recently, Azerbaijan's Defense Minister. The remarks of these two officials alone provide basis for concern that Azeri forces are being ordered or encouraged to commit human rights violations against ethnic minorities, particularly Armenians. According to Azerbaijani press sources, Mr. Hamidov has said that he would use nuclear weapons to eliminate Yerevan, the capital of neighboring Armenia. He also threatened to send corpses of 2,000 Armenians to Baku. His comments are directed at
31
Azerbaijan
others as well: he has attempted to send troops to overthrow the government of Nakhichevan (an autonomous republic geographically separate from Azerbaijan but under Azeri sovereignty) and stated that Nakhichevan's president, Geidar Aliyev, would be "better off dead." Likewise, Mr. Ghaziev has repeatedly stated that he would expel every Armenian from Azeri territory and he has threatened to "take the war home to Armenia." Attacks along the Azerbaijani-Armenian border followed those threats.
The report accurately focuses on the conflict between the ethnic Azeris and Armenians as the most important human rights problem in 1992. Fighting between the Azeris and the Armenians has been constant throughout Azerbaijan since 1988, and the conflict in the majority Armenian enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh has grown more fierce in the last year. As discussed below, there are nearly daily reports of civilians being killed or maimed in Nagorno-Karabakh, often due to the almost constant indiscriminate shellings, aerial bombings and sniper shootings by both sides. The violence has destroyed homes, hospitals, churches, monasteries, power plants, and water pumping stations. The remaining civilian population has been terrorized by the warfare, which is in clear violation of the Protocols to the Geneva Convention. In particular, the use of the GRAD (BM21) missile system, the SU-25 bomber, the Alazan missile and the threatened use of nuclear and biological weaponry, all directed at civilian targets, is an appalling transgression of basic humanitarian rules governing warfare.
The towns along the border of Armenia and Azerbaijan, only briefly mentioned
in the report, have also suffered greatly as the conflict between these two countries continues to escalate. These towns are also subject to indiscriminate bombings, and the number injured or killed is alarming.
As a result of this conflict, the Armenians who live in Azerbaijan -- who may number far less than indicated in the report - are in constant fear of forced exile. And, given the history of violence, many civilians fear even worse. In 1988, pogroms against ethnic Armenians occurred in Sumgait, Baku, Kirovabad (Gan-je) and elsewhere, resulting in many violent deaths and massive emigration.
The report says little about human rights concerns outside Nagorno-Karabakh. The refugees who continue to flee Azerbaijan include Kurds and Russians, and reports claim that both ethnic groups have legitimate reasons to fear persecution based on past events.
The report's introduction concludes that the APF government attempted to respect human rights and that parliamentary elections would be an important step in achieving a democratic system. It should be noted that the implementation of a written constitution containing certain guarantees would also be a milestone in ensuring the protection of human rights. Moreover, the press has reported that, toward the end of the year, 36 deputies to parliament appealed to President Elchibey to end restrictions on democratic rights. Thus, while Azerbaijan has taken some steps toward democracy, those steps have not been enough.
Finally, the report's introduction is
32
Azerbaijan
incorrect in implying that all of Azerbaijan has benefited from the political changes. Nakhichevan apparently has changed little since independence, and gains in freedoms enjoyed by citizens of Azerbaijan proper have for the most part not been shared by the citizens living in this geographically separate republic.
The State Department states that no reported political or other extrajudicial killings have occurred outside of those associated with the conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh. Yet several killings appear to have been politically motivated and should have been included in the report.
The murder of Rahbar Bashiroglu, an editor of a newspaper that had published articles on human rights abuses perpetrated by the Soviet army in Baku during 1990, is one such politically motivated killing. Mr. Bashiroglu and his wife were reportedly shot to death in August. And in December, Mumtaz Halaskerov, a professor of law and the Deputy Secretary of the New Azerbaijan Party, was stabbed repeatedly in Baku. It was not reported whether Professor Halaskerov survived the attack.
The report also has scant information concerning "disappearances" outside Na-gorno-Karabakh. It mentions that several ethnic Armenians were abducted and later exchanged at the front, but it only details three such cases. In fact, such abductions and "disappearances" seem to occur at an alarming rate in all of Azerbaijan. The systematic nature and scope of these abductions lends credence to claims that they have been led by Azeri authorities, perhaps to provide Armenian hostages for exchanges against Azeri
combatants and civilians held by Armenians in Nagorno-Karabakh.
The report inadequately covers the topic of torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment. It discusses only one incident of an Armenian who claims he was tortured by the militia, and it glosses over other reports of Armenians who were beaten by "unknown groups." Independent human rights groups have confirmed many incidents of Armenians who were held hostage and tortured in Baku, Agdam or Shusha. Thus the report ignores the repeated assertion that these beatings are the result of state-sponsored or state-condoned violence against the ethnic Armenians remaining in Azerbaijan.
Press releases indicated that torture often resulted in death. In one instance, a man and his 16-year-old son were purportedly kidnapped by Azeri armed units along the border between Azerbaijan and Armenia. The fate of the teenager is unknown but the mutilated body of his father was found near the kidnap site.
There is also a disturbing pattern of women who were raped by Azeri forces. In one reported incident, a woman was raped at four different prisons by as many as 20 men. Her four-year old son was also reportedly held hostage and burned with cigarettes.
Independent observers obtained access to prisons inside Nagorno-Karabakh. The Armenians in that region permitted such access much more freely than the Azeris. Some observers noted that the Armenian-held prisoners, while kept in sanitary conditions, seemed malnour-
33
Azerbaijan
ished, and there was concern about the shortage of blankets in the unheated facilities. Also, the conditions in these prisons were reportedly inadequate. While those conditions were not materially worse than those faced by the Armenian civilian populace in Nagorno-Karabakh as a whole, international covenants nonetheless mandate minimum standards of prisoner treatment, which include adequate food and blankets. In addition, many Azeri hostages held in Nagorno-Karabakh were reportedly housed in Armenian homes, in clear violation of the Geneva Conventions.
Prisoners held by the Azeri forces seemed to be treated far worse. Reports from the rare occasions when Azeri forces permitted observers access to the Azeri prison in Shusha while it was under Azeri control indicated that prisoners were being tortured and otherwise maltreated. One former prisoner's head is now permanently misshapen reportedly from beatings.
The report is also silent concerning the use of corpses as hostages by both the Azeris and the Armenians. Rather than permitting the return of the dead, there are reports that both sides are holding corpses for bargaining purposes in the conflict. Such conduct is in clear violation of the Geneva Conventions.
The report's section on arbitrary arrest, detention and exile is incomplete without mention of the several decrees that permitted arrests for virtually any reason, in blatant violation of international law. For example, a decree issued in June permitted "internal department chiefs" the right to administratively detain
civilians for 30 days, twice the already long administrative detention period previously permitted. Several civilians were subsequently detained and held for 30 days; some of them were held for even longer. In addition, at several times during 1992, a state of emergency was declared permitting detention or arrests on almost any ground. Document inspection was commonplace and it is reported that such inspection was often a cover for harassment of political opponents to the ruling party. Thus, members of the former Communist Party (including former President Mutalibov), and associates of other political parties like Etibar Mame-dov, were detained or arrested during these periods.
Likewise, the report only briefly mentions the forced exiles resulting from kidnappings. Dozens of Armenians have been "arrested" or "detained," and then brought to either Nagorno-Karabakh or the Azerbaijan-Armenian border to be exchanged for Armenian-held hostages. In one incident, nine of ten "arrested" men were exchanged for a sum of 8,000 rubles; the tenth is reportedly still missing.
Regarding the report's analysis of the issue of fair public trial, it inaccurately implies that the five Armenians who were convicted and sentenced to death for the 1991 murder of three soldiers and a journalist have confessed guilt. While the Azeri prosecutor may claim this, the prisoners have repeatedly denied any involvement in the murders to a representative of the Lawyers Committee. In addition, as the Association of the Bar of the City of New York and other legal groups have concluded, it is clear that the mini-
34
Azerbaijan
mum rights afforded individuals accused of capital crimes under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights were not met, including the right to access to counsel and the right to confront witnesses. In the face of these human rights violations, President Elchibey's stay of their execution is justified.
Azerbaijan's most pressing problem is the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, and the report does a commendable job in describing the violations of humanitarian law regarding that conflict. Both the Azeris and the Armenians living in Nagorno-Karabakh have been guilty of attacks on civilians, and the report presents incidents from both sides. But, again, the events should be placed in an historical context. Certainly, there is long-standing tension between the ethnic Azeris and Armenians, which has been fueled by the fact that an Armenian enclave has existed in Azerbaijan territory since 1923 as an independent Oblast. Little violence had occurred until 1988, however. In that year, many Armenians were involved in pro-perestroika demonstrations in both Armenia and in Nagorno-Karabakh. Not long after these demonstrations, Azeris conducted attacks against the ethnic Armenians, and violence exploded. While the report only mentions the mob violence in Sumgait, attacks directed at Armenians occurred in several places throughout Azerbaijan, and Armenians began to flee the country. In fact, as New York Times columnist William Safire has noted, the active campaign of persecution engineered by Azerbaijan's leaders in 1989-91 to drive Armenians from their territory gave etymological birth to the term "ethnic cleansing."
The changes in government have not eased the tension. As the report notes, Armenia claims the territory, and, at times, Nagorno-Karabakh has guarded its independence from both Armenia and Azerbaijan. Moreover, there are instances in which it appears that members of the APF government exaggerate the Armenian-backed violence. For example, while there is no question that there was a massacre at Khojaly, former President Mutalibov intimated in an interview with the Nezavisimaya Gazeta that the APF greatly exaggerated the number of Azeris killed, and several independent observers claim that the death toll is less than 200 for both civilians and armed forces. The report cites the estimate by the International Committee of the Red Cross of 600 to 1,000 civilians killed, which is far higher than the estimate of other independent human rights organizations. The State Department should have included estimates from other sources and indicated that estimates of casualties vary greatly.
Also, while Khojaly is certainly the most infamous example of Armenian-led violence in Nagorno-Karabakh, there are many other instances of Armenian violence or forced exile of residents. As Armenian forces gained control of parts of Nagorno-Karabakh, reports of human rights abuses directed at Azeris grew. And, when Azeri forces attacked, human rights transgressions aimed at Armenians increased.
Nonetheless, there were far more reported incidents concerning Azerbaijan's excessive use of force against Armenian civilians than Armenian force against Azeris. In town after town, near-
35
Azerbaijan
ly daily incidents involved repeated bombings and gunfire with a variety of weapons, causing great civilian suffering. For example, in the city of Stepanakert/Chan-kandy, the capital of Nagorno-Karabakh, many buildings have been destroyed, including the hospital and private dwellings.
The destruction of the hospital itself deserves comment. The hospital was reportedly hit directly by rockets and gunfire early in the year, and treatment of patients thereafter was limited by a lack of medical supplies. Even those few critically ill patients who could be accommodated by limited helicopter flights from Stepanakert/Chankandy to Yerevan risked death because shots were routinely fired at the helicopters. Moreover, Armenians outside Stepanakert/Chankandy could not bring wounded into the capital; even Red Cross and Blue Cross transports were reportedly attacked.
In general, the report does not include enough discussion regarding the types of weapons used in Nagorno-Karabakh. Since January 1992, the Azeris have been reportedly using GRAD (BM21) missiles throughout the region. The GRAD, which is capable of firing up to 40 rockets at one time, can destroy everything within a 12 hectare area. Even people who are seeking shelter reportedly would not survive a GRAD rocket. The Armenians have also used GRAD missiles, supposedly in response to the Azeri use. There have been similar reports concerning other weapons, including the SU-25 bomber and the Alazan missile. The use of any such weapon against a civilian populace is prohibited by the Protocols to the Geneva Convention.
In addition, there are numerous, troubling reports from both sides about the use of chemical and bacteriological weapons. While none of these reports has been verified by independent observers to date, there are quite credible reports that both Armenian and Azeri combatants are equipped with such weapons. Use of such weaponry against a civilian populace would constitute an appalling human rights abuse with few parallels since World War II.
Likewise, the report is largely silent regarding the effects of the blockade in Nagorno-Karabakh. The blockade resulted in intermittent electricity, running water, and gas during most of the year. Lack of water in Nagorno-Karabakh's cities meant fires (frequently started by incoming missiles) could not be extinguished, which added to the destruction.
Commerce in the entire Nagorno-Karabakh Oblast is reportedly at a standstill due to both the blockade and the excessive violence. Stores and factories have been closed. Farming in villages has been impossible due to constant Azeri attack. Livestock has been stolen in almost every village. And, at times, flour, sugar, milk, and other basic foods were in short supply. The population in Stepanakert/-Chankandy showed signs of malnutrition, according to observers. While this crisis eased up somewhat when a corridor to Armenia opened, Armenia itself is suffering from severe shortages.
Although the Azerbaijan government has made no announcement concerning the status of ethnic Armenians who remain in Azerbaijan, the statements of some Azeri politicians have given a fright-
36
Azerbaijan
ening glimpse of where the conflict is heading: toward the latter part of the year, Azeri politicians repeatedly announced that their purpose was to drive Armenians out of Nagorno-Karabakh. With such statements, there is little hope that the human rights abuses will end in the near future. The report should have at least acknowledged these statements.
Regarding freedom of speech and press, the report concludes that these rights were generally respected, and it notes that there are perhaps 50 local daily and weekly newspapers in Baku. However, this conclusion does not accurately reflect the transgressions against freedom of speech and press that occurred during the year. For example, the report does not mention that at times paper shortages prevented all papers from being published except for the state-run paper. Also, the report does not mention the fact that the offices of one newspaper that was especially critical of President Elchibey were reportedly set on fire in December. And, as detailed above, one editor of a newspaper was killed, allegedly for publishing articles involving human rights violations. In addition, the Azeri government has reportedly censored Armenian-based speech, including prohibiting the operation of Armenian-based schools and television programs, about which the report is silent.
Also, although the report covers freedom of religion, it seems to gloss over the treatment of Armenians. While there are no reports about anti-religious campaigns against most of the minorities in Azerbaijan, the fact is that Armenian citizens cannot practice their faith due to fear of attacks. Indeed, many politicians
have claimed that Azerbaijan has begun to slide toward religious intolerance. Not surprisingly, the fact that so many Armenians as well as Russians have fled the country is a strong indication of limited religious freedoms.
Regarding freedom of movement, as noted above there have been travel restrictions at several times during the year. Most of those restrictions were directed at political opponents and at Armenians. The report only briefly covers these incidents, noting that the issuance of paperwork is limited and the mere existence of passport checks is enough to deter some from travelling.
In its discrimination section, the report seems to accept the government's declarations and single law regarding the protection of minority rights. Some government leaders have said that they wished that Azerbaijan would remain a multi-ethnic state, but others have said that Armenians should be expelled, and the action of many Azéris, whether supported by the government or not, has been discriminatory rather than in support of a multi-ethnic state. In addition, the dwindling numbers of other minorities, including Jews, Russians and Kurds, particularly in Baku (once a multiethnic city) provides reason to doubt the sincerity of the leaders' statements. Other ethnic minorities, including Lezghians, have reported pressure to assimilate and use the label "Azeri" in internal documentation. Likewise, the report notes that women and minorities are not prevented from participating in politics. But it does not indicate how many women or how many minorities actually did participate in 1992.
37
