Bulgaria
This year's State Department report on Bulgaria continues in the positive vein established in each report since the overthrow of Bulgaria's communist dictator, Todor Zhivkov, in 1989. The 1992 report, however, appears to be better balanced and more sharply focused than prior reports. It applauds Bulgaria's progress toward constitutional democracy, in spite of an unstable government, while recognizing that constitutional constraints on the participation of minorities and ethnic groups in government still exist and fundamental laws for protection of some rights remain weak. It discusses the government's success in addressing problems relating to Bulgaria's Turkish minority, while noting that there are increasing problems for other ethnic minorities, particularly Romanies (gypsies). This report avoids a weakness in past reports in focusing primarily on political events. It addresses, instead, the progress Bulgaria has made on human rights issues and discusses with candor the remaining hurdles. The report has serious shortcomings, however, in repeatedly failing to consider the implications, both long- and short-term, of the events which took place in Bulgaria in 1992. Much is riding on the decisions Bulgaria makes in the next few months -- decisions which arise from these critical events. Their implications must be considered if the purposes of the State Department's report are to be served.
It is important to stress the huge strides Bulgaria has made in the past three years, as it emerges from its communist past. Freedom of the press, of
religion and of assembly continue to flourish. With two or three exceptions, discussed in the report, and in spite of an unstable government in which former Communists still play a substantial role, there were no significant human rights violations in Bulgaria in 1992. Some problems do exist, particularly with regard to ethnic minorities, but these are being addressed, not ignored. Grounds for hope for continued progress rest on the new government, which was established in December pursuant to parliamentary procedure. It was formed by the Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF), which represents the ethnic Turkish minority, after both the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF) and the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) failed to form a government.
The instability of the government was the single greatest political issue during the year. The government, headed by Prime Minister Philip Dimitrov, was popularly elected in late 1991. It faced its first major crisis a mere six months later, when Dimitrov was forced to reshuffle the Cabinet to meet rising criticism. A former UDF ally, MRF suddenly withdrew its support for Dimitrov's government and unexpectedly combined its votes with the representatives of the former Communist Party, now the BSP. In October, however, even that reshuffling failed, and Dimitrov's government received a parliamentary vote of no confidence. Both the BSP and the UDF were unsuccessful in their attempts to form a government. The MRF succeeded, nominating Lyuben Berov as Prime Minister. The State Department report accurately details these events, but fails to discuss the implica-
48
Bulgaria
tions of these changes or the pivotal role the MRF now plays in determining the course of political events in Bulgaria. The report completely ignores the significance of the fact that the linchpin of government is now the political party which represents the ethnic Turkish minority, in a country whose single largest human rights issue has been the treatment of that minority.
This single issue, discrimination against ethnic Turks, Roma and other national minorities, has loomed large in Bulgaria since 1990. The MRF made significant strides in the 1991 parliamentary elections by winning 24 seats in the 240-seat National Assembly. The BSP challenged the legality of the MRF before Bulgaria's Constitutional Court under a constitutional provision prohibiting ethnically based political parties. The MRF survived this challenge on a technicality. The State Department report accurately notes this event and the likelihood of future challenges, but once again fails to consider the implications of the Berov government with the MRF as its core.
The report gives cursory treatment to the significant strides Bulgaria made regarding its ethnic Turkish citizens, focusing instead on the human rights problems of the Romanies. In 1992, Zhelyu Zhelev was chosen as Bulgaria's first directly elected president, on a decidedly pro-Turkish platform. In March, in spite of some protests, school children in Kardzhali began attending optional Turkish language classes. Two Muslim schools for the training of imams were opened, one in Rousse and one in Glod-zhevo. Legislation was passed to restore property taken from Turkish citizens who
left the country during Zhivkov's 1984 assimilation campaign. There were no restrictions on observance of religious customs, instruction or use or import of religious publications. The Labor Code was amended to grant leave from work for religious holidays for workers of faiths other than Bulgarian Christian Orthodox. While some protests occurred, there were few incidents of violence directed toward the Turkish minority. Thousands of ethnic Turks did migrate to Turkey, but this phenomenon appears to be economic, due in part to Bulgaria's abysmal economy and the dearth of employment opportunities.
As the report correctly notes, however, violence and incidents of discrimination increased against Romanies in Bulgaria. There were two incidents of violent confrontation between local police and gypsies, one in Khaskovo and one in Pazardzhik. In each instance, police forcibly entered a number of Romany residences, harassing the residents and destroying property. These were accompanied by beatings and harassment. In addition, the report notes continued discrimination in housing and employment against Romanies and other minorities. These incidents, however, appeared to be localized, rather than widespread. The government immediately announced reforms to address the problems, including investigating and prosecuting charges of excessive use of force by police, programs to hire Romanies as police officers, programs to improve relations between the Romany community and local police and job and literacy training for gypsies. In spite of these efforts, however, gypsies were still discouraged from participating in political life. ROMA, a political
49
Bulgaria
organization that represents the Romanies, was prohibited from registering as a political party under the constitutional provision prohibiting the formation of parties on ethnic or racial lines.
As mentioned, the BSP nearly succeeded in using this provision to challenge the constitutionality of the MRF. Nationalists within the BSP have a history of provoking unrest over ethnic issues, particularly resisting efforts to allow instruction in the Turkish language in Bulgarian schools. In that light, the report surprisingly failed to comment on the BSP's Fortieth Congress, held in Bulgaria in January 1992. During that Congress, the BSP denounced the MRF for attempting to "Turkesize" Bulgaria and for instilling "non-Bulgarian awareness" in certain regions. It will be interesting to monitor how these policies play out under the Berov government, with the current political and economic instability.
The report recognizes the linkage between Bulgaria's economic situation and its human rights progress. It fails, however, to address the longer-term implications, especially if Bulgaria continues receiving refugees from developing countries or begins to receive refugees from Bosnia. The issues of refugees and temporary workers became critical in 1992 as Bulgaria received thousands of refugees from developing countries on their way to Western Europe. As noted by the report, many have stayed in Bulgaria and reside in substandard housing. As discussed, the economy has also caused thousands of Bulgaria's ethnic Turkish population to emigrate to Turkey. This situation could be exacerbated as privatization of the public sector acceler-
ates. The implications should be carefully analyzed and monitored in the future.
Last year this critique criticized the State Department report for not mentioning Bulgaria's failure to pursue prosecutions of serious human rights violations committed under former dictator Todor Zhivkov. This year's report correctly notes that Zhivkov was convicted of abuses of power in 1992 and faces criminal charges connected with the forced assimilation and expulsions of ethnic Turks during 1984. The report fails to mention, however, that over 40 other government or Communist Party officials under Zhivkov have been indicted or tried for a variety of crimes. Many of the claims include embezzlement and misappropriation or misuse of government funds. That group also includes, however, General Vlado Todorov, the former head of Bulgaria's intelligence service, and a former Deputy Minister of Internal Affairs, who have been accused of destroying the official files on the assassination of Bulgarian dissident Georgi Markov in London in 1978. In addition, four former wardens of reported "death camps" in Lovech and Skravena have been arrested. If convicted, this latter group faces prison terms of 15-20 years.
One obstacle to the investigations of prior government and party officials is that prosecution of many offenders is barred by the statute of limitations. In 1990 the statute was amended to allow offenders to be tried up to 35 years after committing a crime, though some legal experts dispute the legality of this action. To get around the problem, the UDF has proposed the statute be suspended for certain criminal offenses, including crimes
50
Bulgaria
against humanity such as the death camps.
Interestingly, one of the complaints against the Dimitrov government was that it became overzealous in pursuing former communists. This zeal was manifested in a variety of laws aimed at "decommuniz-ing" or "lustration" which would bar former high-level communist officials from participating in government. The report accurately notes that the Constitutional Court overturned one such provision in a new banking and credit law. Several other draft laws contain similar provisions and certainly will face challenge if enacted. The report's statement that "[t]hese laws in their current forms would almost certainly conflict with international human rights standards by applying a presumption of collective guilt" is a clear and commendable declaration.
In addition to these "decommuniza-tion" provisions, the Parliament passed the Property Confiscation Act which allows the confiscation of property of political organizations of the former regime, primarily the Bulgarian Communist Party. Pursuant to this law, the Minister of Finance seized the DUMA publishing house. DUMA is the principal newspaper of the BSP. This action generated charges of government interference with freedom of the press, until the government announced the property will be leased back to DUMA at commercial rates, and the paper will continue to publish. In addition, the government announced that the archives of the BCP will be opened to the public, including the archives of the Politburo, the Central Committee and the Secretariat.
The report's discussion of worker rights during 1992 cites the key events, as well as background information. As in the past, trade unions in Bulgaria played a significant role. Though the Podkrepa confederation of unions had, in the past, been supportive of UDF programs, that support eroded in 1992. UDF, in an effort to reduce the influence of Podkrepa and the Confederation of Independent Trade Unions (KNSB) (formerly the trade union of the Communist Party), tried to exclude them from the three-way dialogue among the government, the unions and a group of company managers and private businessmen. Discussions and negotiations had previously been held within the framework of the Tripartite Commission, established by the BSP-dominated government in 1990. This commission developed into a forum for the discussion of major economic and social issues and was instrumental in keeping labor peace. In 1992, the Tripartite Commission reappeared as the National Council on Social Partnership. Podkrepa proposed that the decisions of the council be binding on the government. Instead, its powers have been severely circumscribed. This action was partially responsible for a number of major strikes in 1992, by miners, hospital workers and transport workers. The disharmony between the labor unions and the Dimitrov government is cited as one factor in the no-confidence vote that brought the government down.
The report notes many bright spots in Bulgaria's human rights record. Freedom of speech and a free and independent press continue to grow. More than 25 new radio stations were licensed in Bulgaria in 1992. Over 50 private publishers
51
Bulgaria
are currently in business. Freedom of religion continues, and there are no restrictions on attendance at religious services or religious instruction. B'nai B'rith, banned in Bulgaria in 1941, opened a lodge in Sofia during the year. A number of international human rights groups are operating openly in Bulgaria, as well as several indigenous Bulgarian groups. As noted by the report, Bulgaria ratified the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms in 1 992 and the First Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, thereby permitting individual complaints to be filed against it.
Most significantly, the report fails to comment at all on Bulgaria's remarkable stability in the face of an unstable political and economic environment. Since overthrowing the communist government in late 1989, Bulgaria has peacefully held five national elections, including runoffs. It elected a Grand National Assembly to draft a new democratic constitution and subsequently elected a National Assembly to carry the reform forward. In 1992, it chose its first President by direct national election. In 1992, Bulgaria reshaped its government not once, but twice, through parliamentary process rather than through gunfire. Problems remain with its treatment of ethnic minorities, but they are, for the most part, being addressed and resolved peacefully, unlike the situation of Bulgaria's immediate neighbors. If Bulgaria can hold to this path, it could play a key role in ensuring the future stability of the region. Tough times are ahead. Competition for scarce jobs in an unstable economy will increase, along with an influx of refugees and immigrants. Shortages of fuel will continue, at least for the
near term. If this results in continued discrimination and substandard living conditions for its minorities, the pot could well boil over into the ethnic strife and violence that has become so characteristic of the region. The next year will be a pivotal one for human rights in Bulgaria.
52
