Bosnia and Herzegovina
The State Department's 1991 report on Bosnia and Herzegovina made only 11 references to human rights abuses in the then Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Yet, in only a year's time, the fledgling democratic State of Bosnia and Herzegovina (Bosnia) has been thrust into an armed conflict that has produced the most egregious and widespread human rights abuses in Europe since World War II.
In its 1 992 report, the State Department provides its first report on Bosnia as an independent country. Although the outbreak of armed conflict in April 1992 made human rights reporting in Bosnia extremely difficult, the report is a comprehensive and accurate account of the human rights situation. However, the report notes at the outset that limitations of space and its format "make it difficult to detail the true scope and horror of the atrocities committed by the paramilitary forces (both Serbian and Bosnian-Serbian)."
The report accurately outlines the political background that gave rise to the present conflict, albeit in rather a disjointed fashion. It would be easier for the reader to understand the political undertones of the conflict if the information were provided up front, perhaps in the introduction.
The report correctly notes that Bosnian politics had undergone increasing ethnic polarization since the 1990 multiparty elections. Following the elections, three nationalist parties -- the Muslim
Party of Democratic Action (SDA), the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) and the Serbian Democratic Party (SDS) -- formed a government under the leadership of the Muslim president, Alija Izetbegovic. However, although the Muslims and Croats wanted independence for Bosnia, the Bosnian Serbs wanted the country to remain within Yugoslavia.
In December 1991, Bosnia applied to the European Community (EC) for recognition as an independent state in response to an EC deadline for such requests from republics of the former Yugoslavia. In order to meet the EC criteria for recognition, the government of the Republic of Bosnia also announced that a referendum on Bosnia's independence would be held on February 29 and March 1, 1992. In the referendum, the Muslims and Croats voted overwhelmingly for independence in what were described by international monitors as free elections. However, the Serbs, a full third of the population, were opposed to independence and thus boycotted the referendum.
Prior to the referendum, the Bosnian Serbs, led by Radovan Karadzic, had declared their own Serbian region within Bosnia, claiming 70% of the territory, and later named it "the Serbian Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina." By April 1992, the Bosnian Serbs had created their own army, the "Serbian Army," which was under the command of Ratko Mladic, a former general of the army of the former Yugoslavia (JNA).
When Bosnia was formally recognized as an independent state in early April
38
Bosnia and Herzegovina
1992, the tensions between the Serbs and the remainder of the population had escalated dramatically. The report correctly points out that much of the violence predating recognition was caused by paramilitary units from Serbia and Montenegro, which committed acts of violence and intimidation against non-Serbs. The report also correctly states that the war did not erupt spontaneously but was stimulated from the outside in the absence of any threat to the Serbian population. This outside stimulus was provided by the Serbian paramilitary forces, the JNA and Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic, who has used Serbian nationalism to secure his position in the former Yugoslavia.
The tension in Bosnia was exacerbated on July 3, when Mate Boban, the leader of the Croatian Defense Council and the Vice-President of the Croatian Democratic Union, declared a self-governing entity within Bosnia, which was called "the Croatia Community of Herceg-Bos-nia," and claimed the remaining part of Bosnia not yet claimed by the Bosnian Serbs. Although Croatian President Fran-jo Tudjman has denied territorial ambitions in Bosnia, the declaration of Mate Boban, together with the presence of Croatian forces in Bosnia, suggest that the role of Croatian military "support" to Bosnia may be primarily to secure territory to be annexed to Croatia in the future.
The report also accurately states that immediately following recognition in April, Serbian paramilitary forces, together with the JNA, began a campaign of terror, starting in the predominantly Muslim town of Bjeljina in eastern Bosnia (only a few kilometers from the border with
Serbia). In this systematic campaign, known as "ethnic cleansing," the Serbian and former JNA forces expelled much of the non-Serbian population. However, the report fails to mention the reason for this campaign: in order to remain geographically tied to Serbia, the Bosnian Serbs (who were then located predominantly in the north and west of Bosnia) sought to move to the predominantly Muslim districts in the northeast and southern parts of Bosnia. But first, they intended to remove the Muslims from these areas.
The report also correctly states that by mid-April, Bosnian territorial defense forces (later renamed the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina) had blockaded JNA installations in Sarajevo and elsewhere, demanding that the JNA surrender its weapons. It also notes that in early May, the JNA announced that it would withdraw from Bosnia by May 19; however, the JNA withdrew only 15% of its personnel, claiming that the remaining 85% were Bosnian Serbs, and it left behind (for the Serbs) all of the army's equipment.
The report fails to note that after the JNA withdrawal, "ethnic cleansing" in northwest Bosnia began in earnest. The goal of this planned campaign was to link the Krajina regions of western Croatia and Herzegovina to Serbia through an ethnically Serb corridor.
Although the report correctly documents various incidents and methods of "ethnic cleansing," it does so in a haphazard way that understates the policy and the goal of such an operation. "Ethnic cleansing" is the term that the Serbs have
39
Bosnia and Herzegovina
applied to a process of population transfers aimed at removing the non-Serbian population from large areas of Bosnia. As described in the U.S. Senate Committee on Foreign Relations' report, ethnic cleansing has three main elements: 1) the deliberate use of artillery and snipers against the civilian population of the main cities including Sarajevo, Mostar, Bihac, Tuzla and Gorazde; 2) the systematic destruction of homes, the looting of personal property, beatings, selective and random killings and massacres; and 3) the mistreatment of prisoners and detainees, including beatings and executions. As the Special Rapporteur of the UN Commission on Human Rights has stated, "[ejthnic cleansing does not appear to be the consequence of war but rather its goal. This goal, to a large extent, has already been achieved through killings, beatings, rape, destruction of houses and threats."
One aspect of the ethnic cleansing campaigns that the report fails to mention is that prior to this operation, the Serbian residents of the soon-to-be "cleansed" villages were evacuated. Helsinki Watch reported that prior to the ethnic cleansing of Zaklopaca on May 16, Serbian women, children and elderly persons were evacuated from this area. According to a former Muslim resident of Zaklopaca who survived the ethnic cleansing, "[wjhen we asked our Serbian neighbors where and why they were leaving, they refused to tell us. Some made excuses about having to visit relatives but most refused to talk about it at all." Helsinki Watch also reported that on the morning of the ethnic cleansing of the village of Skelani, "buses belonging to the Raketa bus company in Serbia came into Skelani and all the Serbs
in the village left."
Although the report contains chilling accounts of human rights abuses in various detention centers and prison camps, it fails to mention that the Bosnian government claims that there are 94 Serb-operated detention centers and prison camps in Bosnia, as well as 11 such centers and camps in Serbia and Montenegro in which non-Serbs are being held prisoner. In addition, Serbian sources claim that there are 17 Muslim- and Croat-operated detention centers and prison camps in which Serbs are held prisoners. Although these statistics cannot be independently verified, they emphasize the extent of incarceration of both civilians and combatants on both sides.
The report notes that the violations of humanitarian law in the treatment of civilians in time of war were so egregious and systematic as to defy full description. These violations included: 1) indiscriminate attacks against civilians, including massacres; 2) detention of civilians and the torture and killing of prisoners; 3) forced movements of populations; and 4) the use of paramilitary groups, including criminals. While recognizing the limitations on reporting that conditions in Bosnia dictated, well-documented massacres of civilians are not included in the report.
For example, the U.S. Senate committee report on ethnic cleansing provides the following account:
On May 6-7, without much opposition, Serb forces took the large town of Brcko in Northeast Bosnia. According to our sources,
40
Bosnia and Herzegovina
the Muslim men were then herded to the center of town and given 2 to 3 minute summary trials. The trials were generally followed by executions. The number killed there over 2 days is indeterminate, but some sources say it may be as high as 500.
The report also does not discuss the summary executions of at least 83 unarmed Muslims, including women and children, on May 16 by Serbian paramilitary units in the village of Zaklopaca, an almost exclusively Muslim village.
The report correctly states that massive systematic rape, committed by Bosnian Serb military units and prison guards, was used as an extension of ethnic cleansing to terrify the population. However, this single statement, coupled with statistical information on the number of women who reportedly have been raped, is insufficient to depict both the methods employed by Bosnian Serbs as well as the possibility that rape is being used as a weapon of war.
For example, Dr. Milika Kreitmayer, head of the gynecological team that examined 25 of the 40 rape victims from Brezovo Polje, concluded that the object of the rapes was "to humiliate Muslim women, to insult them, to destroy their persons and to cause shock. These women were raped not because it was the male instinct. They were raped because it was the goal of the war. My impression is that someone had an order to rape the girls." Serbian soldiers have confirmed the "order to rape," stating that they would be killed if they did not rape.
One graphic account of rape, described in a complaint filed in a U.S. federal court lawsuit brought in February 1993 (Jane Doe /, et at. v. Karadzic) illustrates the cruelty employed by the Bosnian Serbs against their victims. The complaint alleges that Jane Doe I, who was imprisoned in a Bosnian Serb concentration camp in Trnopolje, was one of six women separated from a larger group of women by a group of soldiers. The six women were taken to a small house where they were ordered to undress and move around in a circle while the soldiers shouted obscenities at them. After about 15 minutes, the rapes began at gunpoint. Jane Doe I asserts that when she resisted, she was hit several times until she fainted. When she regained consciousness, she was in the process of being raped by another soldier. She was raped by at least eight soldiers. After the rapes, one of the soldiers slashed her breasts with his knife.
The report also fails to discuss the establishment of "rape camps" outside Sarajevo, one of which maintained a steady population of approximately 70 Muslim women and girls. According to an article in Newsweek, "those who were killed were quickly replaced." Journalists also reported that "entire villages, such as Miljevina in eastern Bosnia, may have been converted to rape camps."
The report also fails to discuss the specific "goals" of the rapes. One of the consequences of the rapes is to make it less likely that the raped women will ever bear Muslim children because of the societal stigma attached to rape in the Muslim community. Another consequence is to force Muslim women to
41
Bosnia and Herzegovina
bear Serbian children. In many instances, women were raped repeatedly until they became pregnant and then imprisoned for months to keep them from terminating their pregnancies. There were reported rapes by the Muslim forces also, but their numbers were low in comparison with the Serbian-committed rapes and were not part of an organized campaign of ethnic cleansing.
The report contains comprehensive documentation of the use of paramilitary forces and their leaders, as well as the various atrocities carried out by these forces. In particular, the report contains detailed accounts of the ethnic cleansing carried out by these forces, formed on the principle of volunteer participation.
The report also conveys accurate and detailed descriptions of continued attacks on population centers such as Sarajevo. These attacks included violence against civilians as well as attacks on the infrastructure of the city and on the deliveries of humanitarian aid.
The report also accurately notes that those who promoted the war encouraged religious hatred to motivate their followers. In addition, the report states that religious sites have been intentionally destroyed by all sides. However, the report does not adequately portray the extent of the destruction of religious sites. According to published reports, 200 mosques were destroyed and another 30,0 damaged between April and July, and in areas of Serb occupation, 90% of the mosques have been destroyed. According to an architect from Tuzla, the Serbs "are not destroying some historical monuments but every historical monu-
ment which represents the culture, tradition and continuity of a people."
Although the report presents a fair and accurate portrayal of the human rights abuses perpetrated by all parties to the armed conflict, it properly emphasizes the responsibility of the Serbians and Bosnian Serbians for the most egregious human rights violations. As the report states in its opening paragraph, "the atrocities of the Croats and Bosnian Muslims pale in comparison to the sheer scale and calculated cruelty of the killings and other abuses committed by Serbian and Bosnian Serbian forces against Bosnian Muslims."
42
