Brazil
This year's State Department report on Brazil presents a far more complete and thorough analysis of human rights problems in Brazil than its predecessor. The report, which is substantially improved in virtually every area of weakness cited in last year's critique, provides a generally accurate assessment of the grim human rights situation in Brazil in 1992. The historic impeachment of President Fernando Collor on charges of corruption was the lone achievement of the rule of law in a year characterized by increasingly severe human rights problems. Widespread police violence, extrajudicial killings of minors, extreme social inequalities, racial discrimination and violence against women again topped the list of significant human rights problems in Brazil.
Although the report is generally free of any of the glaring inaccuracies or omissions which weakened last year's report, this year's version contains some notable flaws, in particular in its analysis of the underlying causes of the widespread climate of impunity. This is unfortunate given the promise of an introductory section which accurately concludes that "a widespread climate of impunity remained the single largest obstacle to effecting improvement in human rights in Brazil."
The problem of impunity is most clearly evident in cases involving police violence. In an October 2 incident that attracted international attention, military police put down a riot at Carandiru prison in Sao Paulo so violently that 111 inmates were killed. The incident was
termed the "the largest slaughter in prison history" by a federal human rights commission investigating the killings. The State Department's account, although generally accurate, is misleading because it mentions the widely discredited charge by military police that the inmates were armed and shooting at the police and fails to note that no police officers were killed in the incident. All of the evidence suggests that egregious human rights violations were committed by the military police involved, including reports that the police used machine guns to fire 5,000 bullets on surrendering prisoners in the space of one hour. None of the most incriminating details cited by the report are adopted as the State Department's conclusion as to what occurred: "some investigators have stated" that the police indiscriminately fired on prisoners, who were "reportedly" forced to run a police gauntlet. Unless the State Department has some doubts about the veracity of such charges -- which it should then state -- it is inappropriate to avoid stating its own conclusions. By shifting voices, it dilutes the account of one of the most appalling abuses of governmental authority in Brazil's recent history. Its analysis-free recitation of the results of three investigations -- one exonerating the police, one condemning them, and a military inquiry yet unfinished - gives the terribly misleading impression that police responsibility for human rights violations is not at all clear. This is a serious failing in the report's coverage.
The report omits two specific examples following the prison incident which are representative of the manner in which
43
Brazil
government inaction may have a deleterious effect on human rights by reinforcing the climate of impunity. First, the government failed to take swift punitive action against the military police involved in the massacre. Although six police officials were suspended from their jobs, the State Department should have also mentioned the more significant failure of the government to make any arrests in the mass killings in 1992. Second, despite complaints by human rights monitors of possible bias in the military justice system with respect to the case, the government failed to appoint an independent tribunal to hear evidence from the investigations into the incident. The tribunal responsible for convicting and sentencing any officers for crimes committed in the mass killings is a military court. Given that Sao Paulo's new police commander has described the operation as "perfect," and the record of military courts in prior human rights cases, it is unlikely that those responsible will be brought to justice. As in other sections of the report, the State Department must also assess the government's fulfillment or abdication of its responsibility to investigate and punish the guilty parties.
Although the severity of the Caran-diru killings attracted international attention, the incidents of police violence are by no means isolated or restricted to large-scale operations. In the past five years, killings of civilians by the military police in Sao Paulo have risen from 284 in 1988 (or fewer than one a day) to 1,264 in the first nine months of 1992 (or between four and five a day, not including the Carandiru killings). By contrast, New York City police killed an average of 27 people a year over the last
10 years. The killing of criminal suspects, a national practice in Brazil, takes different forms in other cities: lynchings in Salvador and death squad activity in Rio de Janeiro. A report released in November by the Sao Paulo chapter of Brazil's Bar Association said the military police and death squads paid by shanty-town shopkeepers killed most of the nearly 1,000 street children slain in Sao Paulo in 1990. The State Department, while mentioning the huge number of persons killed by police "in the course of arrest [sic]" again fails to directly criticize the blatantly obvious. Instead, it notes only the criticism by human rights groups. Given that the statistics come from the police themselves, it is hard to imagine a principled basis for the State Department's reluctance to draw its own, virtually unavoidable, conclusions.
The statistics demonstrate a pattern of human rights violations by the police which is reinforced by the impunity they enjoy. According to statistics compiled by the military police, in the first half of 1992, the Sao Paulo military police's Tropa de Choque (Shock Troop), which includes the infamous Rondas Ostensivas Tobias de Aguiar (ROTA) battalion, killed 170 civilians and wounded only six. During the same six-month period, no policemen from these battalions were killed and only eight were wounded. Americas Watch has cited these extraordinarily high ratios of civilians killed to civilians injured and of civilians killed to police killed as evidence that the Sao Paulo police are "deliberately assassinating" suspects. In the vast majority of cases of homicide committed by the military police, the cases are dismissed, the officers are found innocent, or the
44
Brazil
matter is so protracted that the case is effectively buried in the military justice system. The State Department should have mentioned these factors in its report as evidence of the government's failure to prosecute cases of police violence.
The lawlessness of the police was recorded by Caco Barcellos, a Sao Paulo journalist, in a book published recently called ROTA 66 in which he studied the cases of 4,170 people killed by the Sao Paulo police over the last 20 years. In his book, Barcellos reports that 57% of the victims had no criminal record. Although the State Department notes that Barcellos received death threats in September, it should have provided details which reflect the impunity the police assume for their actions. The report should have mentioned that 15 military police officers named in the book appeared at a public book launching reception on August 31 where they openly threatened the life of Barcellos and his guests. Later that day, some of the same men reportedly followed Barcellos in two marked police vehicles. At the Sao Paulo Biennial Book Fair, several of the officers named in the book appeared and again threatened Barcellos's life, warning him that he was in grave danger as he had offended the high command of the police. As a result of the death threats, Barcellos has taken refuge in New York. In another instance of downplaying the harassment of human rights workers, the report accurately notes that Carlos Alberto Ivanir dos Santos, executive secretary of a Rio de Janeiro human rights group, received repeated death threats in June, but fails to mention that dos Santos was allegedly shot at by a military police officer on August 24. The State Department wasted a valuable
opportunity to highlight the manner in which Barcellos, dos Santos and others who speak out against police killings themselves become targets of police violence and are not protected by the government, even where those responsible act overtly. The government's failure to protect those who are targeted is important because it is a critical ingredient in the climate of impunity to which the report alludes.
Although the State Department's discussion of racial discrimination is improved over last year's report, it fails to capture the correlation between police violence and racial discrimination in Brazil. Police violence is of particular concern to Brazil's blacks, who represent at least 40% of Brazil's population, because the killings of civilians by police often represent the severest form of racial discrimination in Brazil. Results from a nine-month investigation concluded in March by a federal commission into the killings of minors, found that of the 4,611 children that were murdered between 1988 and 1990, 82% of the victims were black. Statistics such as these are important to note since there are relatively few statistics documenting racial discrimination in Brazil, although it is widely believed that discrimination is pervasive.
The report accurately observes that overt forms of racial discrimination are on the rise in Brazil with the emergence of self-styled neo-Nazi gangs in Sao Paulo state in September, advocating white supremacy. But the State Department's analysis of less overt forms of discrimination generally lacks adequate depth. It is widely known that help-wanted advertisements in local newspapers and employ-
45
Brazil
ment agencies often use code phrases such as boa aparencia (good appearance) to screen applicants on the basis of race and recent studies have provided evidence of racial discrimination in access to employment, rates of pay for the same work and housing. The State Department correctly asserts that black consciousness organizations have "denounced" discrimination, but, by omitting specific examples of discrimination and by failing to explicitly adopt the criticisms as the report's own findings, it detracts from the weight of these assertions.
The State Department also falls short of the reporting standards set forth in its own instructions for the preparation of country reports which explicitly state that where there is evidence of societal discrimination, the report should "indicate the government's attitude and any efforts it has made to prevent or minimize such discrimination." While the report correctly notes that comprehensive data detailing the nature and patterns of racial discrimination is largely unavailable, in part because discrimination against blacks does not receive great attention by the government, the media or the general public, the report fails to point out that the lack of governmental enforcement of Brazil's 42-year-old anti-discrimination statute allows violators to enjoy absolute impunity for civil rights violations. This omission is particularly evident because the report addresses the absence of government enforcement in other contexts. For example, in the section on sex discrimination, the report accurately observes that the constitutional provision prohibiting gender-based wage disparities is rarely enforced and then explains in detail the manner in which employers
discriminate against women in reaction to a maternity leave law.
Although the preceding discussion highlights certain flaws in the report, these shortcomings do not overshadow what is, on the whole, a sound report. Substantial improvements over last year's report are reflected, in particular, in the State Department's expanded discussions relating to the extrajudicial killings of minors and violence against women. Noteworthy improvements in the section on the killings of minors include the references to specific cases and the report's acknowledgment of the involvement of police, prosecutors and judges in at least some of the killings.
In another welcome change, the State Department corrects a material omission in last year's report by including a 1991 court decision that represents a major setback to women's rights in Brazil. In the section on violence and discrimination against women, the report now refers to the decision by a trial court on August 29, 1991 to defy a prior ruling of the Supreme Court which held that the "honor defense" had no basis in law by acquitting a defendant for killing his wife on the basis of that defense. The State Department also accurately points out that the "honor defense" is now being applied to cases involving violence against homosexuals.
The section on violence and discrimination against women has been improved in other respects as well. The report now recognizes the problems of the forced prostitution of adolescent girls in remote northern regions in Brazil and sex discrimination in employment. As noted above,
46
Brazil
the problem of impunity is effectively addressed in this section as the State Department correctly observes that in spite of the efforts of Brazilian women's organizations, the government has done little to address the problems of combatting violence against women.
Perhaps most indicative of the improvement of the report over prior years is the introductory section. Fittingly, with the demise of the Collor administration, the State Department appears less charitable toward the government's policies on human rights and, in particular, its tolerance for extreme social inequalities. Although former President Collor adopted free market trade and economic polices that were praised in preceding reports, the State Department now accurately observes that "economic and administrative reform initiatives designed to move Brazil toward a market economy have had little effect in alleviating the extremes of wealth and poverty or bringing about social change." In fact, while Brazil experienced declines during the 1980s in per capita income by 5.6%, and in health, education and social service programs, it has progressively become one of the most unequal societies in the world. According to a recent national study, the richest 10% of Brazilians earn approximately 48% of the national income, while the poorest 50% earn only 11 % of such income.
Recently, President Itamar Franco, who assumed the presidency following the impeachment of President Collor, has made some promising public statements about addressing the serious but often ignored human rights problems in Brazil. While it is commendable that the State
Department has refrained from its habit in prior reports of giving unwarranted praise to such official pronouncements, the report should address, in a systematic manner, the government's failure to enforce laws that would punish those responsible for human rights violations. Nevertheless, the report accurately captures the paradox of a country whose democratic institutions seem securely intact (as demonstrated by the adherence to constitutional processes by the military and politicians in a year of political turbulence), but whose human rights situation continues to deteriorate.
47
