Chile
As in previous years, the State Department's report is technically accurate and generally comprehensive. It devotes considerable attention to issues that have assumed increased importance, including the continued incidence of human rights violations and the rights of indigenous people and women. However, in some instances, it fails to place the events it recounts in their larger context, and omits additional facts. In doing so, it overlooks the structural constraints that impinge on the Chilean government's ability to deal with human rights issues.
In 1992, as during the rest of President Aylwin's tenure, the principal human rights issues related to abuses that occurred under the prior military government. The policy of the Aylwin government has been that even if prosecution of those culpable for the abuses is not prudent or possible, the truth of what occurred during that period is not subject to compromise and must be made known. Additionally, there must be reparations to the victims of human rights abuses. This policy is frustrated by many impediments, which, while mentioned in the report, are not portrayed as institutional obstacles that may continue to forestall progress in the future. Therefore, the reader is left with a good catalogue of events, but no sense of how human rights issues may be treated in the future.
A lack of context is shown in the report's introduction. While this section is taken almost verbatim from last year's report, it omits an important qualification concerning the nature of the judiciary. The 1 992 introduction states that "[t] here
is a separate, constitutionally independent judicial branch, which is largely dominated by appointees of the former military regime." Without noting that many of the appointees acquiesced in the military government's lack of respect for human rights, the fact that they were appointed by a previous government is neutral on its face. In contrast, the 1991 report added that the independent judiciary, "however, is dominated by appointees of the former military regime" (emphasis added). This formulation at least offers, to the careful reader, the inference that formal independence may not be matched in practice. The omission of the conjunction in the 1992 report is both important to a proper understanding of Chilean judicial autonomy, especially in the Supreme Court, and not justified by events during 1992. However, it is only in its discussion of fair trials that the report states unequivocally that "the (Supreme] Court is often partial in decisions involving military personnel."
Supreme Court decisions have contributed to the impunity surrounding human rights abuses. While the 1992 report states in the section on political or other extrajudicial killings that the Supreme Court has been criticized for impeding justice and for being partial to the dictates of military tribunals, this observation loses its force because it is buried in the discussion of the 1978 amnesty law and is couched in terms of an evaluation that only some might hold. By way of background, the report correctly points out that military courts routinely apply the 1978 amnesty law, covering the armed forces' conduct from 1973 to 1978, to close investigations of cases involving the
58
Chile
armed forces. It also notes that the government has been unsuccessful in pressing an interpretation of the amnesty law which would allow prosecution but not punishment of those responsible for abuses. As an example, the report then states that the Supreme Court transferred theChanfreau "disappearance" case from civilian to military jurisdiction, and that the decision was criticized for ending the investigation of the case. While this is accurate, the report fails to highlight the significance of the highly-publicized Chan-freau case, which was seen as a test case for future human rights prosecutions. The presiding judge, Gloria Olivares, had conducted extensive investigations. She personally inspected the premises of the former secret police (DINA), where Chanfreau was allegedly secretly detained and tortured. Moreover, she discovered the identity of a former secret police agent, Osvaldo Romo, then in Brazil, and pressed for his extradition on grounds of his alleged participation in such crimes. As the report points out, she obtained crucial testimony about the practices of the agency during the military government. The Supreme Court's decision to remove jurisdiction of the case to the military court was important for more reasons than just establishing a precedent, as the report asserts. Through its transfer to a military court, the Supreme Court effectively stalled all fact-finding in the case. Given the prominence of the defendants, including an army colonel, the information yet to be gathered from former DINA officials in the Chanfreau matter might have directly assisted the investigation into other "disappearances." For example, Romo is reported to be involved in more than 100 cases of "disappearances." The Supreme Court's
decision provoked an uproar of criticism and a battle among the branches of government; in January 1993, after the period covered in the report, several congressmen brought [essentially] a constitutional impeachment proceeding against the four justices that voted with the majority. The justices were temporarily suspended pending the outcome of the proceedings. Given the Supreme Court's notorious compliance with the military government's dismal record on human rights, it would have been more appropriate for the report to emphasize the Supreme Court's ineffectiveness in the human rights area.
The report's introduction also states that "[cjivilian control of the military is increasing but not complete." Most of the paragraph containing the cited sentence has been copied from the 1991 report, yet no evidence is given to show how civilian control over the military has increased since 1991. As support, the report might have cited the congressional initiative to repeal the 1978 amnesty law, backed by the pledge of human rights organizations to obtain a million signatures in support of it. Nevertheless, the following facts call the report's observation into question: the armed forces continue to enjoy constitutional autonomy from the government; they have ventured into foreign policy in disregard of the government; they have spied on the civilian population on their own initiative; and they have brought proceedings in military courts against journalists for reporting events embarrassing to them. In this context, the report's observation may again mask institutional realities that have consequences for the observance of human rights.
59
Chile
The report's introduction also notes that the Secretary of Defense oversees the military; however, it does not mention that General Pinochet, who remains commander-in-chief of the army, largely disregards his obligation to report to the civilian Secretary of Defense, for example, when he travels abroad. In an interview, President Aylwin acknowledged that upon taking office, General Pinochet said to him: "You are my boss: I obey you, but no one else." However, obedience does not fully characterize the relationship between the military and its civilian government; rather it is one of guarded respect for each other and a constant testing of their respective boundaries. Since Chile's civilians are supposed to rule over the military, its tentative extension of authority over military affairs itself reflects the problem of insufficient civilian control. In January, for example, the army embarrassed the government by selling weapons, without the latter's knowledge, to Croatia in violation of Chilean foreign policy and the United Nations boycott. Newspapers reported that the military manufacturer, which is owned by the government, shipped to Croatia more than 11 tons of weapons, including rifles and rockets, under the army's direction. As to the amount of military expenditures, the report fails to note that the civilian government has no control over it. Under a law inherited from the military government, the defense budget may not fall under the 1989 amount, and it must be adjusted for inflation. The law also provides that 10% of total copper sales, reported to amount to $400 million, be allocated to the armed forces. This is an additional indication of the government's legal inability to control the armed forces.
The report mentions that there were political espionage scandals during 1992. What it does not say is that these incidents tested the relationship between the armed forces, the government and the civilian population. One of these scandals involved allegations that the government, through the intelligence police, spied on the armed forces; two others involved allegations that army intelligence agents regularly spied on the government, politicians. church leaders and other leading figures. In August, Evelyn Matthei, the daughter of a former junta member and herself a senator and presidential hopeful, alleged that Sebastián Piñera, a senator from her party, Renovación Nacional, and also a prospective presidential contender, was going to institute a "dirty campaign" against her. Her evidence was that he had been taped while discussing how to sabotage effectively her presidential aspirations. In the midst of the scandal revolving around the ethics of such a campaign, it was disclosed that the army had provided Matthei with the tape in question. Subsequently, in September, a former army intelligence agent declared on television that the army routinely eavesdropped on conversations of public and private individuals. The army's response was instinctively defensive: it put troops in a state of alert and began sedition proceedings in military court against the television station, Televisión Nacional, for reporting these allegations. Similarly, the army brought espionage proceedings against Abraham Santibañez and Manuel Salazar, director and chief editor, respectively, of the newspaper La Nación, for reporting the incident. If convicted, they could face a penalty of five to 20 years in prison. This incident clearly showed the extent of the military's power in the face
60
Chile
of perceived civilian attacks. The report minimizes its importance, though, by mentioning only that some journalists were charged with sedition, without further explanation.
In contrast, the discussion of the National Corporation for Reparation and Reconciliation isappropriately comprehensive, given the importance of the subject. This is an unprecedented effort to offer moral reparation to the 2,279 victims who died as a result of human rights abuses, identified by the Commission of Truth and Reconciliation in 1991, as well as material reparation to their families. Moral reparation consists of clearing the victims' names of alleged offenses for which they were ostensibly killed but never tried. Material reparation, as the report points out, consists of providing the victims' families with a pension, health benefits and education for the victims' children. As of September, 4,505 persons were receiving [monthly?] pension benefits ranging between US$55 and US$150. It is estimated that there will be about 8,000 pension beneficiaries. As of June, there were 5,007 health care beneficiaries, and annual education benefits had been granted to 560 students. In addition to continuing to investigate human rights violations during the military government, which the report mentions, the Corporation must also seek to prevent future violations by creating a culture that is respectful of human rights. Given the inability of many of the victims' families to obtain redress through the courts, as already discussed, this is a laudable effort by the government to accomplish at least some measure of justice.
The report's treatment of reports of
torture by the police has improved markedly from last year's coverage. It includes specific mention of the police unit allegedly most involved in torture as well as the methods used. In May, the Defense Committee of the Peoples' Rights (CODEPU), an independent human rights group, informed the United Nations Commission on Human Rights of 55 cases of torture committed during the democratic government, in addition to those discussed by the State Department. Similarly, the report's treatment of arbitrary arrests and detentions is thorough. It correctly highlights how police used excessive force against students who, in a symbolic rejection of the armed forces, tried to extinguish the eternal flame at the monument commemorating the military who died during the 1973 coup.
The report's discussion of indigenous rights also reflects the importance which it merits. The indigenous population of Chile tried to make their demands public in 1992, given the anniversary celebration of the European discovery of the Americas. The report notes that "in a rare decision" relating to the "disappearance" of Mapuche Indians, the Appeals Court of Temuco ordered the detention of two former Carabineros and one civilian in December 1991. Amnesty International reported that after years of inattention to extensive military abuse of the Mapuche, the "disappearance" of two Mapuches, José Julio Llaulén Antilao and Juan Cheu-quepân, was brought before the Criminal Court of Lautaro following the investigation of these cases by the Commission of Truth and Reconciliation in 1991. In November, the judge ended the factfinding proceedings (sumario) and acquitted the three men accused of participa-
61
Chile
tion. However, the Appeals Court of Temuco reversed the decision, and the three were arrested in January 1992, a fact not mentioned in the report. They were set free on bail; additionally, the defense lawyers lodged an appeal before the Supreme Court challenging the Appeals Court decision.
The report also points out that the Mapuche won an important victory in a land dispute. This is important given the decline in Mapuche land ownership resulting from poaching by white settlers. However, the report does not mention that the Mapuche also suffered setbacks. The Pehuenche Indians, a clan of the Mapuche, unsuccessfully opposed the construction of six dams in the Bio-Bio river, which they fear will affect their way of life. In Temuco, the Mapuche frequently demonstrated to demand territorial autonomy. In one instance, they gathered to unveil their flag for the first time; even though the demonstration was peaceful, police dissolved it with tear gas and water cannons. The Mapuche reported that there were 1,500 in the demonstration, but police reported that there were only 1 50.
The report also underscores that domestic violence is a significant problem. The report segregates, in a sophisticated analysis, the incidence of violence against women in different sectors of society, and thoroughly informs of the government's efforts to deal with this.
In conclusion, while the report correctly relates the year's events, in several cases it does not provide the background necessary to understand their importance or the institutional patterns of which they
form part. As a result, the significance of much of what is reported is lost on all but the very well-informed reader. In other instances, the report provides very good coverage, often substantially over last year's report.
62
