China
The 1992 report on the People's Republic of China (PRC), like its recent predecessors, is a generally accurate and comprehensive portrayal of the numerous continuing human rights violations in the PRC. The report takes into account criticisms by the Lawyers Committee and others of the 1991 report, and leaves relatively few areas for criticism. Nonetheless, the 1 992 report continues to be too uncritical than available information warrants with respect to alleged improvements in the human rights situation (particularly regarding the release of political prisoners) and the PRC's cooperation with the international community on human rights matters. Inaccuracies in the report also persist in references to the PRC legal system.
The report reaches questionable conclusions based on admittedly inadequate data. The State Department acknowledges that it is unable to confirm PRC statistics on the official investigation of cases of torture, but then goes on to state that "severe punishments [of abusers] have been imposed in at least a few cases" of torture. Sources and examples should have been provided to back up this statement, given the difficulty of access to Chinese judicial reports other than through second-hand reports in official PRC newspapers.
The report correctly states that the PRC "Government still has not satisfactorily accounted for the thousands of persons throughout the country" who were arrested or detained for activity related to the 1989 democracy movement. However, in the next paragraph, the report goes
on to say that "most persons held in connection with the events of 1989 . . . were no longer under detention by 1992.-" If the government has not satisfactorily accounted for individuals detained in 1989, it is unclear on what basis the report can make the conclusion that most have been released. That conclusion is not consistent with the findings of Asia Watch, which maintains that hundreds if not thousands of persons remain in detention in connection with the 1989 events. The fact that, as reported by dissident sources, 70% to 80% of Tiananmen detainees in Beijing have been released does not justify such a conclusion for the rest of the country. As the 1992 Asia Watch report on Hunan province, cited in the report, indicates, the situation in less visible outlying areas of China is often more severe than in the major cities. Still, the report does a good job of pointing out the continuing arrest and detention of persons for political activity occurring in the past year.
The report states that there was "renewed focus on legal reform in 1 992." It is true that the legal academic community has been turning its attention in a relatively open way to sensitive issues of law reform, such as improvements in the criminal process. However, to date there is no basis for concluding that the government and the Communist Party are committed to substantial law reform in these areas. Indeed, the divergence between the relatively open academic discussion and hard-line official pronouncements on issues such as judicial independence and the presumption of innocence is more striking than at any time since the Cultur-
63
China
al Revolution, a phenomenon the report fails to mention. The report correctly notes the continuing restrictions on the expression rights of certain controversial academics. However, it fails to note that in some instances, such as that of leading law reform scholar Yu Haocheng, not only are scholars deterred from exercising free speech, but they remain on a Party "black list" which prohibits them from publishing in official journals and bars them from all academic societies and conferences.
Reeducation through labor, one of the most severe abuses of due process in the PRC legal system, is treated somewhat confusingly in the report. It is introduced in the middle of a paragraph on review of death sentences without clarifying that it is an administrative sanction. The report cites 1990 statistics of the PRC that about 80,000 people are consigned to the administrative sanction of reeducation through labor each year. It should have noted that in the 1991 PRC "white paper" on human rights, the government used a statistic of 50,000 per year. This discrepancy between official statistics renders them even more suspect than one might have otherwise assumed. In addition, the report attributes to the PRC government the statement that the normal one to three year term of labor reeducation may be extended for one year if an individual's "reform attitude" is not good. In fact, under the relevant statute, the term may simply be extended "if necessary," without any indication of the basis or authority for such an extension.
The report notes that the PRC figures for counterrevolutionary prisoners do not include those held under reeducation through labor. However, it fails to note
that the numbers are further deflated by the failure to include political detainees held under other administrative sanctions, such as "shelter for investigation." The report's treatment of "shelter for investigation" and other forms of extrajudicial detention should have been expanded, given the continued extensive use of these sanctions. According to statistics in official PRC newspapers, close to one million detentions under "shelter for investigation" have been carried out annually in recent years. While such detentions may not necessarily fit the State Department's guidelines on "disappearance" contained in its instructions for the preparation of the reports, they do frequently result in long periods of incommunicado detention without notification of family or work units of the detainee. Even where the formal criminal procedure rules are invoked and individuals are detained for investigation, the report notes only that legal notification requirements (which attach within 24, not 48, hours) are subject to "several important exceptions." One of those exceptions -- for cases where notifying a detainee's family would "hinder the investigation" -- is so sweeping as to vitiate any protection the notification rule offers, and should have been specifically cited in this context.
With respect to the PRC's international cooperation on human rights matters, the report refers to the memorandum of understanding signed between the PRC and the U.S. in August 1992 on the inspection of prisons for exports of prison labor goods. Though noting that the memorandum "enables U.S. officials to visit suspect facilities," the report does not evaluate the implementation of the agreement. U.S. State Department and
64
China
Customs Service officials concede that the U.S. has had only limited access to a few of the 18 prison sites it has requested to visit under the memorandum.
The report does a more accurate job than last year's of characterizing China's "outreach" efforts on human rights, recognizing them as highly limited exercises directed by the government in an effort to improve its image and respond to critics. In noting that "representatives from some international human rights groups . . . managed to get permission to visit China," the report should have noted that in no case were such permissions granted to human rights groups per se, as opposed to visits by individuals on tourist or other visas. The PRC continues to reject or ignore formal requests for missions by human rights groups.
In a variety of contexts, the report either mischaracterizes or understates the deficiencies of the PRC legal system. With respect to the appeal process in Chinese criminal procedure, for instance, it notes that criminal appeals are rarely successful, but does not explain why the PRC criminal process in general is fundamentally defective. The right to appeal has little meaning under a system in which "adjudication committees" dominated by Communist Party members often dictate decisions to courts of first instance and appellate courts. On the issue of review of death sentences, the report fails to explain that the originally legislated system, which required all death sentences to be finally reviewed by the Supreme People's Court, was amended in 1983 so that in many cases the provincial high people's courts may now perform this function. Since the high
people's courts normally hear appeals of death penalty cases under the relevant jurisdictional rules, the effect of the 1983 change was to eliminate the safeguard of a second judicial review intended by the original legislation.
The report mentions briefly that individuals who have been released without prosecution or sentence after investigation in connection with the 1989 events may still suffer restrictions in society and are considered "guilty of counterrevolution." The report should also have described the process whereby the state prosecutor may usurp the role of the courts by declaring an individual guilty of a crime, thereby creating a criminal record, while exempting the case from prosecution on the basis of various extenuating circumstances. This procedure is a gross violation of international law which guarantees the presumption of innocence and core due process rights.
In discussing freedom of expression issues, the report correctly points out the government's position that the "four cardinal principles" --the leadership of the Communist Party, Marxist-Leninist-Mao Zedong Thought, the dictatorship of the proletariat, and the socialist system --circumscribe freedom of expression and related rights provided in the PRC Constitution. It might have been further noted that these principles are themselves enshrined in the Constitution's preamble, thus providing some legal basis for the official PRC view that they take precedence over civil rights provisions. Similarly, with regard to the right to assembly, the report could have pointed out that the Assembly and Demonstrations Law issued after the June 1989 Tiananmen crack-
65
China
down specifically prohibits demonstrations that violate the four basic principles.
In the worker rights section, the report correctly refers to increasing concerns about the poor treatment of Chinese workers in joint ventures in southern China, an issue that bears further investigation and reporting. It should also have been pointed out that the reported 12-hour workdays for these workers violate explicit provisions of legislation on labor conditions in the Special Economic Zones, which limit the workday to eight hours.
In two places, the report refers to legislation that is either mischaracterized or nonexistent. The Lawyers Committee has failed to uncover any 1983 State Council ruling on the resettlement of ex-convicts noted in the report, though the government issued rulings on this issue in the 1950s and the early 1980s. The issue of criminal convicts (or detainees under reeducation through labor) who are forced to stay on at labor camp sites after expiration of their sentence deserves further attention in the next report. Also, there is no "1988 religion law," as the report states, though there were a variety of regulations on religion that year to which the report may be referring.
Finally, the report raises several thematic issues that deserve further elucidation. One, already mentioned, is the question of continued detention after expiration of prison or labor camp terms. Second, the report implies that certain laws, such as revelation of state secrets, are being increasingly employed to sanction individuals for political conduct, in place of the laws on "counterrevolutionary" activity. Lastly, the report suggests
that some detainees awaiting trial are forced to work, the legality of which is ambiguous under 1990 detention regulations. These issues deserve further investigation for the next report.
66
