Zaire
1992 was a tumultuous year for Zaire, during which the country took its first major steps towards a popularly elected, democratic government. It is thus unsurprising that 1992 was also a year of continued gross human rights violations by President Mobutu's government, as Mobutu struggled to hold on to the power he seized 27 years before. In April 1990, Mobutu was forced by internal and external pressure to call for a transition to democracy but has worked very hard ever since to sabotage the process. Among the innumerable human rights violations perpetrated by Mobutu and his supporters in the past year, the ones that stand out are the excessive use of force to put down peaceful demonstrations by the opposition, the random looting and killing of private citizens by armed forces who enjoy complete impunity, the incitement of the worst inter-ethnic violence in years for political purposes and the machinations employed by Mobutu in his repeated attempts to thwart the National Conference.
The State Department report does a superlative job of chronicling the events of the past year in Zaire, continuing the steady improvement seen over the past several years' reports. The quality of this year's report is a reflection of the importance ascribed to human rights by the U.S. ambassador to Zaire, Melissa Wells. She was appointed to the post in 1991, having previously gained a reputation for her engaged diplomacy as U.S. Ambassador to Mozambique. On February 16, 1993, for example, she visited hospitals in Kinshasa as troops were attacking a peaceful march by Zairian Christians
protesting the suspension of the National Conference by the Mobutu government. She convinced the U.S. State Department to issue a strong condemnation of the march's brutal suppression the next day, in marked contrast to prior practice.
1 992 began in Zaire with the suspension of the National Conference on January 19 by Nguz Karl-I-Bond, leader of the Union of Federalists and Independent Republicans (UFERI). Nguz, formerly part of the opposition's Sacred Union, defected to Mobutu's camp upon being named Prime Minister by Mobutu in November 1991. The Conference's goal was to draw up a new constitution and to pave the way for parliamentary and presidential elections. It was made up of 2,800 delegates, representing political parties, public institutions, professional groups and the government. The suspension followed various government attempts to disrupt the Conference, including: spurious protests by pro-Mobutu supporters regarding regional inequity in representation at the Conference; withdrawal by pro-Mobutu delegates from the Shaba and Equateur provinces; and refusal by the government to pay for the food and lodging of the Conference delegates in Kinshasa.
By year's end, despite his public acceptance of the National Conference's election of opposition leader and archrival Etienne Tshisekedi wa Mulumba to the post of Prime Minister, Mobutu's obstruction of peaceful democratic transition had increased, not diminished. Examples of this are his dismissal of the cabinet named by Tshisekedi, his continuing
433
Zaire
control of the national bank by armed guards, his call for a resumption of the National Assembly '(which had been suspended indefinitely by the National Conference), his refusal to accept the sovereignty of the National Conference, and his refusal to honor the compromise established by the Conference's enactment of a Transition Act to govern during the two years leading up to full democratic elections. The Transition Act provides for power-sharing between Mobutu, the Tshisekedi government and the High Council of the Republic, a transitional legislative body headed by Monseigneur Laurent Monsengwo Pasinya. Monseigneur Monsengwo is the esteemed head of the Zairian Bishops' Conference and Archbishop of Kisangani. He was widely praised for his actions as President of the contentious National Conference.
The report does a fairly thorough job of discussing the relevant events and ascribing blame where blame was due --mostly to the Mobutu government. This was a continuation of the improvement shown by last year's report in this regard, and a marked change from years past. Thus the report states that "[m]any deaths in 1 992 resulted from the Mobutu-Nguz government's efforts to suppress political dissent and to fan ethnic tensions." Any details that are lacking are probably due more to the overabundance of violations to be chronicled than to anything else. The report is refreshingly objective in that it even ascribes blame to the opposition party when appropriate, such as comments in the section on freedom of peaceful assembly and association that "[sympathizers of opposition political parties also at times tried to suppress free assembly and association."
Examples of this were the stoning of the funeral procession of a pro-Mobutu leader of the Kimbanguist church (a Zairian Christian sect), and threats of bodily harm and property damage made to opponents of Tshisekedi by his supporters during the campaign for the National Conference's election of a Prime Minister.
The 1992 report commendably compares the rights to which individuals are entitled under Zairian law with those accorded individuals in reality. It is no surprise that there is a wide margin between the two, particularly with respect to Zairians' rights to be free from arbitrary arrest, detention and exile and torture and other cruel and degrading treatment and to be guaranteed a fair public trial. Leaving aside the deficiencies in the legally mandated protection for these rights, the report cites several of the local human rights groups as authority for the proposition that even these inadequate measures are not observed. Thus, security personnel regularly beat and otherwise mistreat suspects in criminal investigations. For example, the soldiers accused of taking over the Voice of Zaire radio station in January testified that after their capture they were "stripped naked, beaten with rifle butts, cut with bayonets, brought before faked firing squads and raped or otherwise sexually abused" in underground cells at Camp Tshatshi, the headquarters of the Special Presidential Division (DSP).
The plight of prisoners in general is appalling, and the report does an excellent job of bringing this to light. According to the Zairian Prison Fellowship (ZPF), prisoners die in large numbers from exhaustion, assault and disease, exacerbat-
434
Zaire
ed by malnutrition. In Makala Prison, Kinshasa's penitentiary, inmates are given on average no more that 70 grams of poor quality food a day, sleeping on bare floors without cover. The prisoners are often kept in communal cells with men, women and minors held in the same quarters. Sexual and other abuse is thus rampant. Moreover, in May 1992, the ZPF reported that nearly 85% of the 843 inmates then in Makala had never been tried and convicted and that some had been held there without charge for 10 years.
The report shows increased awareness of local human rights groups, citing them for the information provided, as in the section discussed above on prisoners' rights. Also deserving of praise is the way the report compares and contrasts the practices in the first eight months of the year under the government of Nguz Karl-I-Bond with the last four months under the Tshisekedi government. Thus, for example, the report states that the law provides that within 48 hours of arrest detainees are to be brought before a magistrate for a hearing to determine whether grounds for the arrest and continued detention exist. However, in the first eight months of the year, "many people were arrested arbitrarily and held in detention for varying periods without recourse to due process or judicial review." The report goes on to note that in September, the Zairian League for Human Rights made a number of recommendations to the Tshisekedi government to improve judicial administration. By December, many of the recommendations had been adopted, particularly those related to expediting trials; 30 prisoners were released from Makala prison alone.
Human rights groups reported better access, and the International Committee of the Red Cross was allowed to provide assistance in some prisons.
The total lack of respect accorded human rights in Zairian prisons is documented in a 1993 report issued by Human Rights Watch. Always neglected, the state of the disintegrating Zairian economy has left the prisons totally abandoned. The result is that prisoners who do not have relatives bringing them food starve, assuming guards allow the prisoner to receive food at all. The physical plants of the prisons are completely run down. Malnutrition and unsanitary living conditions result in a high rate of disease, exacerbated by the fact that doctors and medicine are scarce or unavailable. Moreover, the vast majority of those held under these conditions have never been given a hearing, much less a trial ~ it is estimated that only approximately 15% of the prison population has been convicted of a crime.
The report also does an excellent job of reporting on the deplorable state of women's rights in Zaire, an area neglected in the past. "Women are relegated to a secondary role in Zaire's traditional society." According to the report, they do more of the work and receive less education and less pay. Although women are represented in the professions and in the civil service, few are permitted to attain positions of higher responsibility where they would exercise authority over their male counterparts. Even the opposition's record on this score is not much better. Although several women participated in the National Conference, few were asked to join Tshisekedi's govern-
435
Zaire
ment.
Perhaps the best section of the report concerns the use of excessive force and violations of humanitarian law in internal conflicts, where the report states that "[t]he severity with which the authorities suppressed demonstrations in 1992 as well as the frequency of the incidents and the rarity of disciplinary action indicate that the authorities condoned, if not explicitly encouraged, the use of excessive lethal force, especially during the first three months of 1992." As the report goes on to discuss, the most flagrant use of excessive force occurred on February 16, in Kinshasa, when close to one million people marched in support of the resumption of the National Conference under the leadership of parish clerics and lay Christians. This was the first indication of how unified the population had become in favor of democratic change in the face of Mobutu's suspension of the Conference.
Troops brutally attacked the demonstrators, who posed no apparent threat to public safety, using nightsticks, metal-tipped whips, tear gas, live gunfire and water cannons. The government claimed 17 persons had been killed. However, early reports by the Zairian League for Human Rights counted 27 identified individuals and eight unidentified individuals killed. The report states that "some credible sources claim as many as 50 deaths. More than 200 persons were injured." Priests and nuns were singled out for particular brutality; 43 were arrested, including two Belgian priests who were subsequently deported despite the fact that one of them had been in the country for decades. The government
claimed that the march was iHegal and that the soldiers lost control when one of them was killed. However, the Lay Coordinating Committee, which organized the march, repeatedly sought a permit from the government, to no avail.
Marches also occurred in several other cities; in some locations, including, for example, Kikwit, the march went off without incident. In Mbuji-Mayi, however, the Zairian League for Human Rights reported that two people were killed. In Kisangani, where 500-600 marched, one nun, two priests and 12 parishioners were arrested and held overnight. On March 2, Ferdinand Tala-Ngai, leader of one wing of the Sacred Union opposition bloc, was arrested by men in Army uniforms, and other march organizers, François Kandolo, Pierre Lumbi and Buana Kabue, were sought by the authorities.
On March 1, government troops also attacked participants in a smaller "March of Hope" in support of the Conference. The attack was again unprovoked. The report states that at least five persons were killed and 10 wounded. The authorities arrested over 10 people, including five priests, who were held without charge until the last week in April. The report notes that the Nguz government refused to make an independent inquiry into the perpetrators of the brutality despite calls for an investigation by many foreign governments, including the United States. Perhaps that is because credible eyewitnesses identified Defense Minister Ngbanda on the scene of the February 16 march, personally inciting the troops under his command to violence.
The report also discusses the govern-
436
Zaire
ment's incitement of ethnic violence for political purposes in Shaba province and the violent incidents involving undisciplined military units in the northeast of Zaire. From January on, Nguz Karl-I-Bond and Governor Kyungu wa Kumwanza had been issuing calls to drive out the Baluba tribesman from Shaba province, because the Balubas were originally from the Kasai provinces, home of Etienne Tshisekedi. Following the destruction of their homes, some 100,000 Balubas found themselves relegated to shanty towns made of cardboard and burlap, with only what they could carry on their backs, unable to return to their homes for fear of massacre and with nowhere to go. As one Baluba said, "I know nothing about Kasai or the people there. It means nothing to me."
The worst violence flared up following the August 15 election of Tshisekedi as Prime Minister by the National Conference, and Mobutu's acceptance of Tshisekedi on August 19 as Nguz's replacement. A bloodbath ensued in which as many as 40 Balubas were killed, many hacked to death with knives and machetes and some burned to death in front of their families. Stuck at railway stations awaiting transportation to a homeland they do not know, the relief organization Doctors Without Borders reported that in September perhaps 60 Balubas a day were dying of starvation and disease. Their plight was exacerbated by the fact that the local authorities exhibit extreme antipathy towards them. Governor Kyungu has publicly referred to the Balubas as "insects" who have selfishly siphoned off the region's mineral wealth. Concerted action by Tshisekedi's government in defense of the Balubas could lead to full blown civil war. In fact, Nguz has stated
that many Katangans would support wresting the copper mines and other riches in the area away from the control of the government, just as they tried to do in 1977 and 1978. The report does not address these concerns or correctly identify the magnitude of the problem.
The ongoing looting and violence by the armed forces is equally ominous for the future of Zaire. As in the rioting of September 1991, the violent incidents which occurred almost monthly throughout 1992 were spurred by the lack of pay and poor living conditions of the armed forces, who would simply take what they wanted at the expense of the civilian population. The troops' depredations in North Kivu province were so bad that more than 30,000 Zairian's sought refuge in Uganda and Rwanda. Those who fled into Rwanda were pushed into the maelstrom of the ongoing civil war between the majority Hutus and the Tutsis from whom the Hutus had wrested political control. The Tshisekedi government "recalled" one of the responsible units from North Kivu in October. Unfortunately, the government has little control over the military, which is one of the worst paid professions in Zaire, earning on average less than $20 a month. Thus, incidents such as those described above are only likely to increase in frequency with the further breakdown of the Zairian economy.
President Mobutu has built up a system of overlapping security forces over the 27 years of his reign, almost all headed by members of his Ngbandi ethnic group, if not members of his family. In October, the National Conference alienated the one military leader who had been
437
Zaire
willing to cooperate, Army Chief of Staff Mahele Liyeko Bokongo, by a decision to deprive the military of the right to vote in the institutions of the Third Republic. General Mahele is unique in that he is the only military chief who is not a Ngbandi, although he is from the same Equator province as Mobutu. Moreover, the National Army, which Mahele heads, is a poor counterweight to the specialized forces and mercenaries loyal to Mobutu alone. In fact, opposition leaders told Africa Watch that they estimated the Kinshasa garrison to be able to withstand the specialized forces for no more than 48 hours, assuming that the Zairian Armed Forces (FAZ) would support the Tshisekedi government at all. As the report notes in its introductory statement: "[t]he allegiance of the security forces [remains] crucial in the evolving struggle."
Surprisingly, one of the weakest areas of the report is its coverage of the Mobutu government's lack of respect for the right of citizens to change their government freely and peacefully. It was here that the Mobutu government committed some of its most egregious human rights violations. The Mobutu government repeatedly tried to blame the opposition for "attempted coups" and civil unrest in order to create a pretext to harass opposition leaders. Thus, following the riots in September 1991, Tshisekedi and other opposition leaders were approached by soldiers who unsuccessfully sought their cooperation, a potential trap that was repeatedly tried by the government.
A similar plot was hatched on January 22, 1992, on the eve of a general strike called by the Sacred Union to pro-
test the Conference's suspension, when 30 members of the 31st Brigade of the FAZ announced that they had taken over the Voice of Zaire radio station. They called for a resumption of the National Conference and asked President Mobutu and Prime Minister Nguz to step down. However, they did not in any way suggest that other troops join them in their ostensible rebellion. The radio station was "retaken" by "loyal" forces some three hours later. Journalists who investigated the scene could find no trace of bullet holes or in fact any signs of the fight that the government said occurred when the "coup plotters" were dislodged from the radio station. The government immediately accused the opposition of complicity in the takeover, and, in the days following, used the incident as an excuse to put soldiers in control of radio and television broadcasts and to arrest or bring various opposition leaders in for questioning, e.g., Ferdinand Tala-Ngai of the Liberal Progressive Rally, and the editors of Le Potentiel and Umoja, two independent newspapers.
The report discusses various aspects of this bizarre event under the sections devoted to political and extrajudicial killings, torture and denial of fair public trial. The soldiers captured after the takeover of the Voice of Zaire were tried from March 9 to April 4, in what was intended to be a "show trial," providing a platform from which to lambast the opposition and to scare the population with the prospect of violent overthrow of the government. However, the trial adduced no evidence indicating that the opposition was involved in any way.
The spurious nature of the takeover
438
Zaire
became more evident as the mockery of a trial progressed. Only 12 of the approximately 30 soldiers involved were present, and they were the youngest and lowest ranking, teenage foot soldiers for the most part. The approximately 19 others were tried in absentia and sentenced to death. The government stated that missing soldiers had escaped from prison, but, as the report noted, there were credible reports that they had been summarily executed shortly after their arrest.
The report sets forth the rights guaranteed criminal defendants by the Zairian constitution and uses the trial as an example of the fact that "[i]n practice these guarantees are applied unevenly." For example, the defendants were permitted defense counsel, but the defense attorneys were not permitted access to the case files until the fourth day of trial. Many of the soldiers alleged that they had been tortured and raped while in custody, some in the presence of high government officials, yet these charges were never investigated. The majority of the trial was conducted in French, although some of the soldiers spoke no French. According to one of the defense counsel provided by the Zairian League for Human Rights, one witness, Sergeant-Major Maloba, was arrested in open court apparently for insulting Mobutu, because he testified that he overheard soldiers from the DSP state that "[i)f it were still the old days when President Mobutu reigned as sole master, they [the defendants] would be put in sacks and thrown in the river." The young soldiers were clearly political pawns. Despite the lack of any corroborating evidence, Defense Minister Ngbanda Nzambo ko Atumba made a speech on Zairian television following the
trial insisting that the "takeover" had been part of an attempted coup d'etat planned to coincide with the call for a general strike by Tshisekedi's Union for Democracy and Social Progress.
In September, Mobutu exploited the ethnic unrest cultivated by Nguz in his home province of Shaba following Nguz's dismissal and replacement by Tshisekedi in August. Nguz had been inciting his fellow Katangans to attack Balubas originally from Kasai, the home province of Tshisekedi. The Balubas had been forcibly relocated to Shaba province by King Leopold of Belgium in the late 1800s to work in the mines of that mineral rich region because they were believed to be more docile than the Katangans. The violence against the Balubas had been going on intermittently throughout 1992, but was rekindled in September by the killing of the 26-year-old son of a local leader of Nguz's UFERI party by two Zairian soldiers led by a Kasai businessman, Kanda Mutshipai. The angry reaction of the Katangans, which began in the town of Likasi and spread through the region, resulted in 20 deaths (the report stated that there were 30 deaths), 60 wounded, 100 arrests and over 60 Kasai homes razed to the ground. Local observers alleged that the whole scheme was cooked up by Mobutu.
Abandoned by his former allies, Belgium, France and the United States, all of whom cut off aid to Zaire by the end of 1991, Mobutu's isolation was typified by the fact that when he was forced by affairs of state to descend from his stronghold in Gbadolite in his native Equateur province to the Zairian capital, Kinshasa, he lived on a houseboat in the middle of
439
Zaire
the Congo River, complete with helicopter ready to whisk him away at the first sign of trouble.
In the meantime, Mobutu continues to run the Zairian economy into the ground, fueling the spiraling 4-digit inflation. Between October 1991 and April 1992, the price of a sack of cassava, a staple food, went from 525,0000 zaires to 2,850,000 zaires, beans went from 11,500 zaires to 67,500. In the beginning of September 1992, gasoline went from 1 30,000 zaires a litre to 450,000 zaires a liter. The crisis has been worsened by Mobutu's refusal to cede control of the National Bank to Tshisekedi's government. Tshisekedi's Finance Minister attempted to remove the Governor of the Bank of Zaire, Nyembo Shabani, in October following his illegal transfer of hard currency in connection with a diamond deal. Mobutu responded by surrounding the bank with members of the DSP and the Civil Guard. This created a shambles of the domestic economic sector. The bank continued to issue banknotes as quickly as they could be printed and shipped from Germany, while Tshise-kedi attempted to regain control over the skyrocketing inflation and to convince the international community to reinvest in Zaire.
One clear example was the five-million zaire bill controversy of December. Nyembo, at Mobutu's behest, wished to issue the five-million zaire note to reduce printing costs, as Zaire was considerably in arrears to the German firm that printed the zaires. The International Monetary Fund advised against the issuance of the large bills, which would fuel the inflation. Nyembo nonetheless issued the bills.
Tshisekedi then declared the bills worthless. Storekeepers refused to accept the bills, which resulted in violent looting by troops in Kisangani, who had been paid with them. The looting and rioting spread from Kisangani to troops in Bouta to the northeast of Kisangani and in Goma and Rutshuru to the southwest.
In contrast to prior years, the report takes note of the "crumbling of the country's infrastructure" and extreme crisis in the economy, recognizing the linkage between economic realities and human rights observance. The report states that the Zairian economy could not "recover dynamism to offset the losses from the looting and pillaging which occurred nationwide." Tragically, as the report astutely sums up, "Prime Minister Tshisekedi's Government has pledged a commitment to the rule of law and democracy and respect for human rights. However, the reality of divided government in a period of economic crisis means that the transition to democracy is far from assured. . . ."
440
