Colombia
Although the State Department's scrutiny of human rights practices in Colombia has improved over the past few years, this year's report is disappointing. While some sections of the report candidly describe human rights problems, repressive forces at work and alliances and contradictions between them, the State Department muddles its analysis of organized violence and the conceptual framework used to evaluate trends and practices. The report also downplays human rights violations by failing to illustrate systematic patterns of abuse by the army and police in some sections, by omitting significant details and incidents and by failing to assign responsibility to the security forces in other sections. Finally, the State Department should have done a better job describing legal developments which adversely affected human rights and civil liberties during the year.
Colombia's deteriorating human rights situation was fueled by political developments throughout 1992. By the end of the year, President César Gaviria's efforts at institutional reform and conciliation failed to bring about appreciable changes in the country's human rights situation. Increasing levels of violence prompted calls for counter-reforms and authoritarian measures. Beset by the breakdown in negotiations with guerrilla organizations in May, the escape of Medellfn drug trafficker Pablo Escobar from prison in July and spiralling cycles of political violence. President Gaviria reverted to Colombia's longstanding presidential tradition of rule by executive decree. The report fails to mention that twice during the year Gaviria invoked emergency powers and issued
decree laws aimed to counter drug-related violence and guerrilla activity. Unfortunately, many of the decree laws restricted civil liberties and threatened to aggravate existing problems.
Despite significant efforts to curb abuses, Colombia's human rights record for 1992 was among the very worst in the hemisphere. As the State Department notes, Colombian security forces targeted leftist politicians, labor organizers, human rights workers and peasants. In urban areas "the national police committed human rights violations including disappearances, arbitrary detentions, arbitrary killings, threats of violence and participated in 'cleanup' killings," and "members of the armed forces were responsible for violations including murder, disappearance, and torture." Paramilitary organizations continued to operate in rural areas during 1992, and the report correctly points out that officers, enlisted men and sometimes entire units participated in such activity.
Drug-related violence also escalated after Pablo Escobar's escape. Sectors of the drug mafia engaged in vendettas and feuds between rival traffickers and continued to eliminate political opponents. A campaign to intimidate judges and lawyers who worked on drug-related cases continued throughout 1 992 and reprisals were carried out against those who failed to heed warnings. In rural areas, private armies directed and paid by large landowners and drug traffickers -- often in collusion with local authorities -- attacked peasants, community activists, union leaders and others perceived to be
67
Colombia
ideological or political opponents. In Medellin, Pablo Escobar financed a war against agents of the Department of Administrative Security (DAS), the national security intelligence agency, and police who were trying to capture him and dismantle his military apparatus. As the State Department notes, more than 70 officers were killed in the city of Medellin alone.
Yet the State Department's conclusion that "the main perpetrators of human rights violations are narcotraffickers, leftist guerrilla groups, and right-wing paramilitary groups" is both conceptually flawed and simply wrong. As a factual matter, local human rights organizations report that state agents ~ not private parties - were responsible for the majority of politically-motivated murders in 1992. According to statistics reported through September 1992 by the Andean Commission of Jurists, 40% of cases where sufficient evidence of authorship existed to permit a conclusion (some 40% of the total) were attributable to state agents including the army and police, 30% to paramilitary groups acting in collusion with the security forces, 27.5% to guerrillas and 2.5% to others, including drug traffickers. Because the State Department draws the wrong conclusions from the facts, it skews the accuracy of the report. In addition, the report cites the 620 policemen who were killed in the line of duty during 1992, apparently to support the inference that those responsible for a large segment of Colombia's violence are not state agents. Without more, however, this figure obscures the issue at hand, particularly since the figure fails to distinguish between political violence and common crime.
Likewise, the report's assertion that drug traffickers "were responsible for widespread human rights abuses" improperly shifts responsibility to non-governmental agents. As pointed out in last year's critique, violent crime committed by private individuals is not properly characterized as a violation of international human rights law. Such acts, as the State Department is well aware, are punishable under Colombia's criminal code. Human rights law properly relies on governments to investigate and prosecute the criminal actions of those in opposition to the state. By "privatizing" human rights violations, the State Department obscures state responsibility and downplays the magnitude of abuses committed by government agents, thereby shading the facts so as to underscore a U.S. foreign policy bias toward foregoing human rights criticism in light of the Colombian authorities' anti-narcotics efforts.
The State Department also downplays human rights violations by failing to provide specific examples of abuse by the army and police in some sections and by failing to assign any responsibility to them in others. In the section on political and other extrajudicial killing, the report mentions only two cases from 1992 - the murder and robbery of Japanese business executive Tsuioshi Mokuda and the murder of Judge Myriam Rocio Velez de L6pez. Mr. Mokuda died on January 24 after two policemen stopped him while driving in his car, shot him four times, and stole his car. Judge Velez, who was assigned to Medellfn's Public Order Court, was killed in an ambush on September 17, presumably by hit men working for the drug mafia. Because both murders
68
Colombia
were among the more notorious crimes committed during 1992, they are appropriately mentioned by the State Department. However, neither case typifies the systematic patterns of extrajudicial execution by the Colombian army and security forces.
The report also presents an incomplete picture by failing to assign responsibility to the army and police. For example, in the section on worker rights, the report notes that "[organized labor suffers from a disproportionately high rate of violence from a variety of sources including guerrillas, illegal paramilitary groups and common criminals, and also as a result of internal union struggles." The failure to hold the army and police accountable amidst widespread reports of abuse is a glaring error in the report. The State Department should have mentioned the following cases:
• On June 4, members of the Army's intelligence unit of the Ayacucho Battalion in Manizales, department of Caldas, forcibly entered and searched the home of Samuel Fernando Rojas Motoa, a trade union leader. Mr. Rojas was blindfolded and taken to Anserma military base, where he was reportedly beaten, subjected to mock executions and threatened with death. Later he was transferred to the San Mateo Battalion in the department of Risaralda, where he was interrogated, threatened with death and deprived of sleep. Mr. Rojas belongs to the Municipal Workers' Union in Cartago and is a board member of the CUT trade union confederation in Valle del Cauca department.
•	On October 29, the body of Gustavo Chinchilla Jaimes, member of a trade union in Barrancabermeja, was found in Bogotá. Mr. Chinchilla had moved to the capital after receiving repeated death threats. On July 24 he filed an official complaint with the Colombian authorities along with the union president, Parmenio Ruiz Suarez, concerning threats made against both men, reportedly by state security agents. Mr. Ruiz was murdered on July 30 in Barrancabermeja.
•	On October 2, members of a military patrol from the army's Tarqui Battalion arrived in the Toquilla community in the department of Boyacá, with a list of 10 people who they intended to capture. The patrol went to the house of Héctor Audelo Chaparro where they beat him, accused him of being a guerrilla, and dragged him away. His body was found 100 meters away with his throat slit. Reynaldo Riveros Chaparro and Ismael Amaya were also beaten and accused of collaborating with the guerrillas. Their bodies were later found one kilometer away; both men had been shot in the head. All three victims were construction workers.
•	Joaquín María Caicedo Angulo, an engineer with the state-owned national telecommunications company TELECOM, disappeared on April 28 after participating in a week-long strike to protest privatization measures announced by the Gaviria Administration. Although he was not a union member, Mr. Caicedo was an active supporter of the TELECOM technicians union's activities. His
69
Colombia
body, which had been badly burned, was found on May 1 a few kilometers from Bogotá. According to local groups, the circumstances surrounding the "disappearance" and subsequent death of Mr. Caicedo suggest official involvement.
• On February 29, César Chaparro Nivia, a trade unionist and active member of the Unión Patriótica political party, was detained by 11 DAS agents. Within 24 hours of his detention, Mr. Chaparro was admitted to a hospital. He died on March 4 in Bogota, allegedly from injuries he received while in detention.
In addition, the report asserts that military links to paramilitary groups have declined, but fails to provide any supporting evidence. In fact, local groups reported that paramilitary activity continued throughout 1992.
The report properly calls attention to the plight of members of the judiciary who must preside over "serious narcotraf-ficking or paramilitary group cases," but it should have provided specific examples to illustrate the severity and magnitude of the problem. The State Department should have mentioned the well-publicized case of Carlos Edgar Torres Aparicio and Rodolfo Alvarez who were killed in their homes in Cali on January 8. Mr. Torres and Mr. Alvarez, both lawyers, had been conducting an independent inquiry into the 1991 massacre of El Paez indigenous peoples in Valle de Cauca department. An anthropologist who was assisting in the investigation disappeared from Cali on the same evening. On May 22, Oscar Elias López, legal adviser of the Regional
Indigenous Council of Cauca (Consejo Regional Indlgena del Cauca, CRIC) and counsel to the communities affected by El Paez massacre, was killed by heavily armed gunmen in the town of Santander de Quilichao, Cauca department.
With respect to the El Paez massacre itself, the report states that it presumably stemmed from a drug-related land dispute, and that the alleged paramilitary leader of the massacre -- who had links to drug traffickers -- was arrested and remains in custody. What the State Department fails to mention, however, is that an official investigation by the Colombian authorities revealed that members of the National Police were implicated in the massacre. A press release issued by the police later indicated that the investigation had led to several arrests. The State Department should not have omitted these facts from the report.
The report might also have noted here that civilian judges largely do not face problems associated with confronting the military for human rights abuses because military tribunals successfully assert jurisdiction over the vast majority of violent criminal acts by its members, whether or not the offenses were committed in the course of duty. Results in these tribunals, presided over by active duty military officers, are often "incredibly contradictory," according to one civilian government attorney, when compared with the findings of civilian investigators and administrative judges who have reviewed these cases.
One exception to the State Department's practice of failing to hold the army and police accountable is found in its
70
Colombia
account of the violence against the Regional Committee for the Defense of Human Rights (CREDHOS) which is based in Colombia's Magdalena Medio region. The report acknowledges that CREDHOS members were targets of violence by "illegal rightwing paramilitary groups or members of the police or military forces." It notes that on January 29, CREDHOS secretary Blanca Cecilia Valero de Durán was gunned down at point blank range as she left the office. On June 11, Dr. Jorge Gómez Lizarazo, former judge and founder of CREDHOS, was attacked by heavily armed gunmen in civilian clothing while riding in a taxi through Barrancaber-meja along with four others. Mr. Gómez' private bodyguard, José Humberto Hernández, had been murdered in 1991. On June 28, Julio César Berrío Villegas, investigator and head of CREDHOS' security team, was shot dead by two unidentified gunmen in an ice-cream parlor. The report might also have mentioned that on July 30, Ligia Patricia Cortez, a philosophy graduate who was working on an educational project with CREDHOS, Par-menio Ruiz Suarez, trade union leader (see above) and René Tavera, member of the peasant farmer's association ANUC, were killed in an ambush by unidentified gunmen.
The report also does a better job at assigning responsibility for "social cleanup" murders of street children, indigents, prostitutes and homosexuals in urban centers. As the report notes, CINEP recorded 420 killings through September 1992. It also correctly states that police officers allegedly hired by local merchants were implicated in many such killings and that in other cases murders were carried out by urban vigilante groups.
As in last year's report, little attention is devoted to the section on violations of humanitarian law. Although the State Department's instructions for preparing country reports instruct otherwise, all abuses committed by guerrilla forces should be discussed in this section. Because the State Department disperses violations of the rules of war throughout the text, the report is less coherent and tends to cast the government in a more favorable light by obscuring the state's exclusive responsibility under traditional conceptions of international human rights law. Human rights abuses are not "balanced out" by crimes committed by drug traffickers or by guerrilla forces, and the State Department should avoid the appearance of trying to achieve parity in the report.
Both guerrilla and government forces committed serious violations of the rules of war, which are virtually unreported in this section. Throughout 1992 the guerrillas sabotaged Colombia's principal oil pipelines, which cost the state-run oil company $4 million in repairs and cleanup. Under humanitarian law, the pipelines do not constitute a legitimate military target and attacks against them are therefore illegal acts of war. Workers, repairmen and other civilians were frequently attacked and killed by guerrillas and injured by mines they left. Guerrillas also committed summary executions, planted numerous bombs indiscriminately, and extorted "war taxes." As the State Department notes in another section, the guerrillas were also responsible for widespread kidnapping both for financial gain and political reasons. The Colombian government suspended peace negotiations when former minister Argelino
71
Colombia
Durán Sarmiento died in captivity after having been kidnapped by members of a dissident guerrilla faction.
Although the report asserts that "unlike previous years, there were no reports in 1992 that military aircraft or helicopter gunships had bombed and strafed villages," local authorities in La Uribe reported the bombardment and strafing of five separate villages. According to an inquiry by the Andean Commission of Jurists, in Putumayo department civilians were forced to act as guides, to wear army uniforms and to walk in front of soldiers in order to detonate mines planted by guerrillas in clear violation of humanitarian law. Abuses including torture and "disappearance" were reported during a February operation against guerrillas in Meta department by the Army's infamous Mobile Brigades. The State Department should have noted some of the more flagrant violations of the rules of war by both sides in a comprehensive section on compliance with the Geneva Conventions.
While the State Department generally distinguishes between rights guaranteed in theory and the observance of rights in practice, the report could have more effectively discussed President Gaviria's reliance on emergency powers to bypass Congress and issue decree laws that restricted civil liberties granted by Colombia's Constitution. For example, the State Department acknowledges that the Colombian government "imposes some restrictions on the coverage of terrorism" and that during a crisis "it reserves the right to prohibit broadcast media from covering certain news events." In its effort to summarize events, however, the
State Department understates the problem. Decree 1812 prohibited broadcast media from divulging information about "public order," disclosing communiques or interviews with guerrilla members, or broadcasting stories on guerrilla activity. The same decree provided penalties for television and radio stations that failed to comply. Decree 1811 gave the executive the power to sanction mayors and governors who made contact with the guerrillas. Experts pointed out that the decree would apply to authorities who communicated with guerrillas in an effort to mediate or contain local conflicts. According to the Colombian Constitution, neither human rights nor fundamental liberties may be suspended in times of emergency. The State Department should have pointed out this contradiction and described how restrictions on freedom of speech and the press were legally sanctioned during 1992.
Similarly, the State Department calls attention to Colombia's use of "regional jurisdiction" (commonly known as Public Order Courts), in which anonymous judges and prosecutors try cases involving narcotics, terrorism and public corruption. While the report acknowledges that due process concerns are raised by the procedural rules followed in the courts, it fails to mention a legal development that restricted the availability of habeas corpus. In July, President Gaviria issued a decree precluding defense attorneys from using habeas corpus petitions to obtain provisional liberty for their clients in regional jurisdiction courts. The decree was issued immediately after the president declared a state of exception in response to reports that alleged drug traffickers were being released pursuant
72
Colombia
to rules governing provisional liberty in Colombia's new Code of Criminal Procedure. Although the president ended the state of exception six days later, the decree remained in force for 90 days, raising questions about presidential lawmaking in areas properly reserved to Congress. Another decree law issued by President Gaviria in November authorized members of the Armed Forces to exercise investigatory functions normally reserved for the judicial police. The Colombian Army's human rights record makes its involvement in gathering evidence against civilians inherently suspect, and the State Department should have pointed out this setback.
Finally, the 1992 report fumbles on a few historical comments which should simply be omitted from the report. The report claims that "Colombia is historically one of the most violent societies in the world, with perhaps the world's highest per capita murder rate." While the latter statistic is probably true -- at least for the latter half of this century -- the State Department should just say so and refrain from stereotyping Colombians or their society as intrinsically violent. In another section the report states that "since independence in 1824" citizens have exercised the right to change their government through elections. In fact, Colombia declared independence from Spain on July 20, 1810.
The State Department appropriately credits the Gaviria administration for its efforts to curb human rights abuses, which include attempts to sever links between paramilitary groups and the army and police and the dismissal of officers implicated in some abuses. Unfortunate-
ly, little was accomplished by year's end. While the State Department candidly describes human rights practices in some sections of the report, it downplays army and police violations in others and misconstrues the very definition of human rights violations. Because Colombia is one of the leading recipients of U.S. military aid, the State Department is under an ever greater obligation to provide an accurate, balanced and objective report of human rights practices to comply with the intent of the law under which it has been prepared.
73
