Cuba
The 1992 Cuba report continues the trend towards improvement begun in 1989. The report presents a generally accurate account of human rights violations and provides numerous examples of abuse. Notwithstanding the welcome departure from the old standard of exaggeration and of undocumented conclusions generally evidenced in early reports, the report still suffers from some flaws in accuracy and balance. These shortcomings stem from the reluctance to antagonize influential U.S. domestic interest groups or to change longstanding U.S. policy towards Cuba.
On the other hand, in many respects the Cuba report might serve as a model for other country studies. The State Department, notwithstanding the difficulties in obtaining information, displays commendable skepticism concerning the formal legal structures, notes the de facto effects of government policy which chill free exercise of rights, and relies heavily on credible reports from non-governmental sources while stating significant conclusions in its own voice. Such efforts would constitute a welcome improvement to the Department's reporting on the rest of Latin America and the Caribbean.
Human rights violations in Castro's Cuba are serious and incontrovertible, and the report's description of the key problems is excellent. Its statement that the government "sharply restricts all basic human rights, including freedom of expression, association, assembly, and movement, as well as the right to privacy, the right of citizens to change their government, and worker rights" is accu-
rate. The report appropriately highlights the variety of means used to silence critics, including human rights activists, including the use of so-called "acts of repudiation" in which government-orga-nized mobs attack dissidents.
The report's analysis of the electoral reform laws accurately notes the sterility of these reforms, which are for the most part only formal changes designed to improve Cuba's image abroad. The government promised the people a greater voice at the polls, but the process is simply a ratification of existing Communist Party rule. While the reforms technically permit reformers and dissidents to take part in the elections, they have no chance in securing a nomination or playing a meaningful role. Next year's report should assess the degree to which the 1993 vote reflects the attitude of the electorate, which overwhelmingly resisted calls to destroy ballots or vote in blank. As Cuban officials have emphasized that this vote is only the beginning of a process of liberalization of electoral rights, the 1993 report will present a good opportunity to review further progress, if any.
The major shortcomings of the report are its failure to recognize fully the greater freedom to practice religion; a lack of supporting detail in some instances where ascribing responsibility for violations to the government; and a failure to put events and developments in Cuba during 1992 in a wider context, including the key role played by the U.S. government.
The report's coverage of discrimina-
78
Cuba
tion based on religion fails to recognize fully the incremental yet demonstrable improvements that have been made in this area. While the report notes key events -- the approval by the Fourth Party Congress of the admission of religious adherents into the Communist Party and the amendment of the Constitution by the Cuban National Assembly to prohibit discrimination based on religion and remove atheism as the basis of the Cuban state - it downplays these developments, stating that religious persecution remains unchanged.
Cases of discrimination and religious persecution in 1992 were not as common as the report argues. The general trend since the institution of legal reforms concerning religious freedom has been an increased openness on the part of the government, a change that has been noted by both government critics and journalists. Thus, while religious freedom remains limited, the report should have acknowledged the improvements.
For example, the cases cited in the report alluding to the religious processions broken up by security forces would have been stronger if the report had elaborated on the details of these events. In fact, the government's new openness towards religion has been manifested in massive religious events which before 1990 would have been only possible on a much smaller scale.
A June 1992 Miami Herald article pointed out that the Bible was Cuba's best selling book and cheaply available in bookstores. In an interview with a foreign correspondent, Cuba's Roman Catholic archbishop Jaime Ortega stated that
after the end of the official policy of discrimination against worshippers by the National Assembly in July, religion as a whole has experienced a resurgence. The archbishop noted that membership soared and the influence of the church expanded. He announced that 35,000 Catholics had been baptized in 1992 compared to 15,000 a decade ago. In the interview however, Ortega carefully avoided any reference to politics. While relations between Church and state have warmed, the parameters of Church influence are clearly defined: the Church must remain outside of the political arena or be subject to state repression.
The report's contention that Santeros -- those who practice the Afro-Cuban religion of Santería -- are among one of 18 different categories of people who are watched and harassed by the neighborhood watch groups or CDR's (Committees for the Defense of the Revolution) -is also subject to question. This group, like others, has benefitted greatly from the legal reforms concerning religious freedom. During 1992, major U.S. newspapers pointed to the increase in religious congregations and the widespread acceptance and growth of Santeria. In his book, Castro's Final Hour, Miami Herald correspondent Andres Oppenheimer noted that not only did Santeria grow in Cuba, it thrived. In trips to the island the preceding year, he had noticed a growing number of men and women conspicuously dressed in all white, a Santeria practice tied to initiation rites. He also observed Communist Party members wearing Santeria necklaces and wristbands. It is safe to conclude that the legal changes adopted by July 1992 reflected a generally improved attitude towards freedom of
79
Cuba
religion.
Certain cases described in the report lack important details which are available from UN studies or independent reports by human rights groups. For example, the case of policeman Juan Corrales Rego, discussed in the section on political or extrajudicial killings, notes that he killed a defenseless Jose Francisco Gonzalez Campo as the latter attempted to steal a bike; the report does not mention, however, that, according to the UN Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial, Summary or Arbitrary Executions, Corrales Rego was found guilty of using excessive force and sentenced to three years in prison. Other cases cited in this section - Jorge Guillen Linares, Maximo Fagundo Martinez and the boys shot at the plantations of Guira de Melena and Aranguito for stealing food - all would have benefitted from additional evidence to support the report's implication of government responsibility for the killings. None of these cases were cited in the report of the Special Rapporteur. While the Cuban government bears responsibility for investigating and prosecuting these killings, additional information should have been provided if the State Department intended to assign responsibility to the State for the killings themselves.
Another flaw in the report is its failure to present its criticisms with balance and in context, particularly where the impact of U.S. foreign policy on the human rights situation is apparent. Its account of the clear violations of human rights in Cuba needs no ideological justification. The report's introduction includes the gratuitous comment that although discredited as an ideology, Marxism serves as the
pretext to justify the continued denial of citizens' rights in Cuba. This politically loaded argument assumes that human rights abuses are rooted in a specific political ideology. The thousands of victims killed, tortured and imprisoned by states in defense of anti-communist values eloquently rejects such a notion. The report's function would be better served if, for example, it acknowledged that some of the critics of the government today are devoted socialists and not simply ideological enemies of a non-capitalist state.
Conspicuously absent from the report's discussion of recent economic difficulties is any recognition of Cuba's efforts to keep afloat despite an intensified U.S. trade embargo (resulting from the passage of the Cuban Democracy Act of 1992) that was overwhelmingly condemned by the United Nations General Assembly in a 59 to 3 vote in November. Ironically, the U.S. remains critical of Cuban economic efforts while it maintains a policy intent on dislocating Cuba's economy. The economic difficulties have prompted the Cuban government to adopt measures that contradict revolutionary dogma and reflect a departure from orthodox Marxist economic strictures. As Jorge Domínguez of Harvard University has pointed out, Cuba has begun a transition to freer markets which has helped the island to adjust to its new economic realities. In the 1960s, the government expropriated all foreign property. Today it welcomes foreign investment as can be observed in the tourist industry and to a lesser extent in agriculture, manufacturing and oil exploration.
In the view of some, including Eli-
80
Cuba
zardo Sanchez, president of the Cuban Commission for Human Rights and National Reconciliation, the stepped-up U.S. embargo resulting from the passage of the Cuban Democracy Act, may have contributed to an increase in repressive measures undertaken by the government. Indeed, during 1992, as documented in the report, there was an increase in such measures - stiffer sentences for thought crimes, the detachment of "rapid response brigades" and the so-called "acts of repudiation" and an increase of public denunciations and in citizen surveillance.
The report's treatment of freedom of movement should also have mentioned the role played by the U.S. government on this issue. According to a State Department spokesperson, a backlog resulting from a surge in applications had overwhelmed the U.S. Interest Section's limited resources. Thus, while the report blames the Cuban government for the rise in the number of ba/seros (those who cross the Florida Straits in home-made rafts headed to the United States), the State Department has done little to accelerate visa processing, which may have contributed to the problem.
Moreover, the ability of Cubans to immigrate to the U.S. may depend upon the degree to which an immigrant shares the views of a U.S.-based non-governmental organization. According to an article by John Newhouse published in the New Yorker, the U.S. government has contracted with the Cuban American National Foundation (CANF) to take responsibility for bringing Cuban exiles into the United States from third countries and, in some cases, from Cuba itself. Through the "Private Sector Initiative," as
this agreement is called, the conservative CANF has reportedly established immigration procedures that permit only those Cubans who share its political views to receive assistance in getting their immigration applications processed; those who disagree with the CANF are not sponsored for visas. This is significant because the CANF, performing an essentially governmental function, administers a number of admissions "slots" for refugees. Those who do not conform to the political criteria which it imposes have no chance for these openings. The official imprimatur and indeed, authority, that has been lent the CANF makes its actions a U.S. government responsibility. The appropriateness of this arrangement is subject to question.
While the report's discussion of freedom of speech accurately describes the restrictions in Cuba and key events during the year, it could also have mentioned that government tactics to oppose its critics included dismissal from jobs. The International Confederation of Free Trade Unions reported that a number of workers were dismissed from their jobs as a result of their belonging to opposition groups or signing of pro-democracy petitions, among them Manuel Zulueta Manrique and Lazaro Cuesta Collaza (for belonging to the Armonia movement) and Georgina de la Mercedes (for signing a call for democracy).
81
