Czechoslovakia
The State Department's 1992 report on the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic, which separated into independent Czech and Slovak republics at the end of 1992, is a generally accurate but often superficial examination of the human rights situation there. The report mentions most major human rights issues during the year and properly reflects the impressive political, legal and economic changes that have taken place since the 1 989 revolution. The detached tone of the report and its mechanical approach to the issues, however, tend to oversimplify and minimize important human rights problems and to obscure their full dimensions.
The public life of the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic (CSFR) in 1992 was dominated by debate over and implementation of the dissolution of the federal republic into two independent states on January 1, 1993. The report describes the peaceful and democratic manner in which the separation was accomplished. It also correctly notes the success of the CSFR in dismantling vestiges of the security apparatus that existed under the prior communist regime and in implementing economic reforms, including large-scale privatization. In addition, the attention given throughout the report to legal and institutional changes properly highlights the impressive movement toward successful democratic process in Czechoslovakia.
Nonetheless, 1992 witnessed a zealous reaction to all things communist and an attitude toward minority rights that was at best ambivalent. Moreover, there
was an alarming movement, particularly in Slovakia, toward government control of the media, developments that U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Thomas Niles described as "disquieting." Yet the State Department's treatment of several important matters in the report fails to capture the full human rights picture or the implications of last year's events for the future development of human rights in the independent Czech and Slovak republics.
The most typical example of the effort to decommunize the CSFR was the enactment of a "lustration" law in October 1991. Although the report identifies the lustration law as a human rights concern, its discussion is abbreviated and minimizes the significance of the law. The law on lustration (which is derived from the Latin word for purification) excludes from a wide array of positions in government, academia, the media and state-owned companies those who are believed to have collaborated with the communist regime's secret police or who were members of the Communist Party or of communist-affiliated institutions. The law requires the dismissal of individuals certified by a special screening commission of the Ministry of Internal Affairs as fitting one of the prohibited categories. The commission's findings may be contested before an independent commission, but the applicable procedures and extent of review is vague. Similar laws were instituted at the republic level, and government agencies and private entities were free to require employees to get lustration certificates indicating that they do not fall within a prohibited category. In fact, for a fee, private citizens can
82
Czechoslo vakia
check the lustration status of another individual.
The report conspicuously takes no position on the law, referring instead to a "controversy" surrounding the lustration law. It observes that the law was criticized because the records of the secret police regarding collaborators were incomplete, unreliable, or both. The report also correctly notes that the law was criticized as violating human rights principles prohibiting employment discrimination and collective guilt. This, however, is the full extent of the report's description of the failings of the lustration law.
The report's cursory acknowledgement of criticism of the lustration law is immediately followed by the explanation that "supporters of the screening process cited the political need to prevent those directly responsible for abuses of power and repression during the years of Communist rule from holding high public office during a 5-year transition period to a free society." The report's effort to appear balanced misses the real issues in the debate over the lustration law and creates an inappropriate neutral tone that diminishes the serious human rights implications of the law.
Critics of the lustration law generally recognize the legitimacy of the government interest in preventing those who abused government power and repressed freedom in the past from holding power during the formation of a new democratic order. Rather, the criticism of the lustration process is that it is not narrowly tailored to achieve the government's legitimate objective and that its broad scope is subject to abuse and arbitrary
and capricious application. Moreover, the law infringes on fundamental rights of privacy, employment and association. Thus, the report's contrast between criticism of the lustration law and the need to decommunize certain institutions grossly oversimplifies the issue.
In fact, the lustration law relies solely on prior status rather than conduct, imposes guilt collectively without regard to individual responsibility and does so retroactively. In addition, the law excludes individuals from a broad array of positions unlikely to impede the success of democracy, such as cab drivers and auctioneers. The report ignores these failings as well as the absence of reliable procedures under the lustration law. The law also seems to violate guarantees found in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights: due process, ex post facto laws, individual culpability, freedom of association and expression. Czechoslovakia has ratified the Covenant and the report should have discussed this.
Moreover, the report ignores the impact of the lustration law on specific human rights discussed elsewhere in the report. It does not discuss the law in the context of rights to privacy, association, expression or employment. By ignoring the law's impact in these areas, the report further minimizes its significance and renders incomplete its separate discussions of these categories of rights.
The lustration process has been characterized as a witch hunt without any protection for privacy. Secret police files and lists of alleged collaborators have been leaked to the press. Citizens have been defamed and discriminated against
83
Czechoslo vakia
on account of allegations that are frequently false or otherwise dated and misleading. President Vaclav Havel made this point by announcing that he was listed in secret police files as a potential collaborator, although a later report identified him as hostile to the state. Nonetheless, members of Parliament reportedly urged innocent government officials who had erroneously been subject to the lustration law to quietly step down rather than create public doubts about the validity of the lustration process.
The report's discussion of worker rights, including the right of association, is devoid of any reference to the lustration law. Yet the International Labor Organization issued an opinion calling for repeal of the lustration law and criticized it as employment discrimination on the grounds of an individual's "political opinion and not on account of any activities prejudicial to the security of the State. . . ." Nor does the report include the lustration law in its otherwise positive discussions on privacy and freedom of association.
Jan Urban, a former member of the leading political group Civic Forum, after receiving death threats for criticizing the lustration law, wrote: "We are all infected in some way by the instincts of the old regime. We need someone to hold a mirror up to us and show that human rights were not just a tactic to use against the Communists."
Beyond its limited discussion of the lustration law, the report completely ignores other aspects of the anti-communist reaction in Czechoslovakia. For example, the leader of the Communist
Party was physically attacked and threatened. In addition, the report's fairly comprehensive discussion of women's rights (including a discussion on the lack of attention to violence against women) fails to note that a woman's rights to maternity leave and welfare payments, accorded by the former communist government, were to have been taken away in an effort to dismantle all remnants of the prior regime, although they ultimately remain in place.
The report's analysis of protection of minorities and labor practices also is detached and limited, creating a misleading picture in these areas. The report's brief discussion of the Romany minority (commonly referred to as gypsies) accurately states that the Romanies disproportionately suffer from poverty, crime and disease. The report also notes correctly that "skinheads" have burned Romany homes and evicted Romany tenants in apartment buildings and that there have been "isolated clashes" between Czechs and Romanies. The report, however, expressly attributes the plight of the Romanies to "traditional conditions and a strong popular prejudice against them [rather] than from conscious government policies."
The report thus minimizes the issue not only by failing to convey the complexity of the situation of the Romanies, but also by implicitly absolving the government of any role or responsibility. On the one hand, the situation of the Romanies has improved in many ways since the 1989 revolution in that they are now a recognized minority, may freely use their language, and have been allowed to form several political and cultural organiza-
84
Czechoslo vakia
tions. On the other hand, the report fails to note that in many ways the Romanies are now subject to more discrimination and greater violence than under the Communist regime. As one Romany leader put it: "The devil was replaced by Satan." Contrary to the report, the government was criticized in 1992 by Helsinki Watch and others, such as University of Texas Professor Zoltan D. Barany, for its failure to take sufficient actions to protect Romanies.
The State Department report properly identifies neo-fascist violence against Romanies, but it ignores reports of police indifference and slow reactions to such violence. Moreover, Helsinki Watch reported that it had received reports that police were brutal in their contacts with Romanies. In one instance, witnesses in Lomnicka, Slovakia, reported that on May 5, 50 police officers attacked Romanies without provocation, pointing pistols at the heads of some and yelling that "all gypsies should be shot!"
Critics charge that government officials are simply indifferent to the Romanies' problems in the face of other priorities. Far worse, the right-wing Republican Party in its platform called for a solution to the "Gypsy Problem." And municipalities in the Czech Republic are enacting regulations limiting residency to individuals with no criminal record and fewer than four children as a way of excluding Romanies.
In addition, the report ignores entirely the situation of Romany women who were sterilized during the Communist era either against their will or by deception. Legal complaints by these women have
been dismissed by local and republic prosecutors, and investigations have been lax. Officials have shown little interest in bringing those responsible to justice, in stark contrast to other anti-Communist efforts. Viewed in its full light, the report's circumscribed treatment of the Romanies' plight and characterization of it as a social phenomenon distinct from government policies are serious and erroneous oversimplifications. The governments' treatment of the Romanies is regarded by many as a "make or break" issue for the development of democracy in the two republics. The report does not reflect the importance, complexity or extent of this issue.
The report also does not mention that Angolan students in Czechoslovakia were twice attacked and beaten by skinheads. Given the rise in neo-fascism and xenophobia in central and eastern Europe, these incidents clearly warrant mention.
By contrast, the report gives extensive, accurate and proper attention to the situation of Slovakia's large Hungarian minority. As the report notes, the Slovak government began eliminating bilingual place names on highway signs and banned the use of Hungarian place names for towns in Slovakia on Slovak and Hungarian language television. The discussion would have been still more complete, however, had it included a discussion of the role of Hungary in asserting the rights of the Hungarian minority in Slovakia, a complicating facet to the issue creating a potential for escalation. In addition, the report might have mentioned a parliamentary boycott by elected representatives of the Hungarian minority, calls for autonomy by the ethnic Hungarians, as well as
85
Czechoslo vakia
an altercation between Slovak police and Hungarian fans at a soccer match. These events appear to have contributed significantly to tension between the Slovaks and the Hungarians.
The report's treatment of labor rights is another area in which a superficially accurate, albeit mechanical, treatment belies more complicated issues. The report provides a detailed description of labor laws in Czechoslovakia, explaining the procedures for union organization, the standards for overtime, and the offices responsible for enforcement, for example. The report does not provide, however, any real information about actual labor practices. Given the fact that repressive Communist regimes typically had Utopian laws on the books, the report's attention to codified standards and procedures without an examination of practices seems oddly incomplete. Moreover, knowledgeable observers report that laws protecting employees are frequently ignored by Czech, Slovak and international businesses, and employees eager for a job and paycheck.
Another example of how the report's abbreviated and matter-of-fact tone oversimplifies issues involves restitution of Roman Catholic Church property. The report notes that Czechoslovakia enjoyed religious freedom and that it neither encouraged or discouraged a particular religion. It then observes, "(¡Issues relating to the restitution of church property remain to be resolved." The statement is indisputably accurate, but fails to convey the complexity of the issue or the issue's potential to cause future discord.
After two initial rounds of land resti-
tution in which more than 250 monasteries were returned to the Church, the federal parliament in 1992 refused to adopt new legislation that would return Church property confiscated after the Communist takeover in 1948. Federal officials argued that property restitution should be limited to individuals, that restitution to the Church would slow down the privatization process and that the Church should remain poor. And others urged that restitution should go beyond the Communist era and include other Christian churches and Jewish communities whose property was seized after the Munich Pact in 1938 which allowed Germany to occupy the Sudeten-land. The rejection of a restitution law for Catholic Church property was condemned by the Czechoslovak Bishops' Conference, which later called on parishioners to vote against anyone who opposed the Church property restitution law.
The issue of property restitution has also divided the Greek Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church. The Slovak parliament ordered the Orthodox Church to return property it had acquired after the Greek Catholic Church was outlawed in 1950, but disputes rage over dozens of properties, with Orthodox Church officials accusing Greek Catholics of using "psychological and physical violence" in seeking the return of property. Critics charge that the government's mishandling of the issue has increased religious tensions and impairs the development of solid relations between church and state.
A final example of the report's tendency to identify issues accurately without substantive analysis is its observation
86
Czechoslo vakia
that the "Slovak Constitution has been criticized as insufficiently protective of minority rights." The report never again refers to the constitutional protection of minorities. Although the report discusses the situation of Hungarians, for example, it never connects this discussion to the Slovak Constitution nor does it provide examples where the Constitution has failed to provide safeguards. The absence of a coordinated analysis or examples undermines criticism of the Slovak Constitution.
By contrast, the report's discussion on freedom of the media is notable for its general thoroughness. It observes that Slovakia has flirted with censorship in its refusal to privatize a printing operation, calls for "ethical self-regulation" by journalists, and use of technical regulations as a means of asserting editorial control of television. On the other hand, the report also notes that newspapers and magazines are flourishing, especially in the Czech Republic. Even here, however, the report's mechanical approach tends to obscure the full complexity of media freedom.
For example, the report notes in its discussion of minorities that the Czech tabloid Politika published a list of 168 people under the headline "Partial List of Jews and Half-breeds in the Current Culture of the Czech Republic." The report notes that the publisher voluntarily suspended publication pending an investigation into allegations that the publication was fanning fascism. This example, along with the publication of secret police files in the press, illustrates one of the central issues facing both republics: the difficult navigation in a democratic sys-
tem between the dangers of irresponsible journalism or extremist expression on the one side, and censorship on the other.
There is much reason for optimism in the Czech Republic given its strong progress on human rights concerns on so many fronts. In Slovakia progress has been more modest and the future for human rights is accordingly hopeful but less certain.
87
