Germany
The State Department's 1992 human rights report on Germany is, by and large, an accurate description of the current situation regarding human rights problems in the country. The report for 1992 is longer than its 1991 counterpart mainly because of the increasing incidents of violence and harassment directed at foreigners and asylum seekers. Its major deficiency is its failure to assess the human rights implications of a number of measures undertaken by the government in response to this violence.
As the report correctly notes, over 2,000 instances of right-wing extremist violence occurred during 1992, claiming the lives of 17 people, eight of whom were foreigners. One-third of those acts of violence were arson attacks against asylum shelters. Throughout the year, attacks on asylum shelters were reported almost every day. The violence peaked in several days of rioting and right-wing attacks on an asylum seekers' shelter in Rostock in late August and the fire-bombing of two Turkish apartment houses in Mölln by "skinheads" in November. A Turkish woman, her niece and her granddaughter died in the incident.
The report fails to criticize directly the Federal, State and local governments for their slow and partly inadequate response to the increasing violence during the year. Such criticism is warranted as rightist violence has surged since German unification, with 270 reported attacks against foreigners in 1990 and 1,483 attacks in 1991. It took more than two years of such violence before the German authorities began to take action. The Federal
Constitution Protection Office estimates that there are about 40,000 right-wing extremists in Germany. About 4,500 of these are so-called skinheads, including 3,500 in eastern Germany who are particularly dangerous and ready to commit more brutal acts of violence. The roots of the problem derive not only from xenophobia, but also a difficult economic situation and the existence of a large group of juveniles in eastern Germany who have been left on their own after the sudden collapse of an authoritarian state which had tightly controlled and structured their lives.
Prodded by domestic and international pressure to respond to such increasing violence, harassment and anti-foreigner sentiments, German authorities have belatedly begun taking action against rightist extremism. However, in some instances these measures raise problematic legal and human rights concerns, which should have been, but were not, discussed in the report.
In 1992, four neo-Nazi groups were banned, including the German Alternative, the National Front, National Offensive, and the German Comradeship League of Wilhelmhafen. Other neo-Nazi organizations are expected to be banned soon, but more than 70 allegedly neo-fascist groups continue to operate in Germany. While the State Department mentions the banning in the introduction to the report, it does not discuss the human rights implications of this action.
Banning such groups raises difficult legal problems. Article 9, paragraph 2, of
128
Germany
the German Constitution provides that a group can be outlawed if its goals or activities violate the criminal law or are aimed against the constitutional order of the state or the principles of international understanding. Therefore, an organization only critical of the Federal Republic cannot be simply outlawed; it must violate the country's sovereignty in some way. This can include, for instance, fighting against fundamental constitutional rules such as electoral rights, the responsibility of the government before parliament, or the independence of courts. Legal experts have argued that inciting violence against foreigners undermines international agreements and impairs international relations with other countries.
In addition, a group can be outlawed if its purposes and operations violate penal rules. The fact that, for example, the chairman of a particular group has participated in criminal activities is not sufficient evidence to ban the whole group. It must be specifically proven in court that the organization at least supported the crimes of its members, such as in the case of firebombing asylum seekers' shelters.
The far-right Republican Party, which has seats in the European Parliament and in several State parliaments in Germany, is being investigated by federal intelligence services for possible anti-constitutional activities, a fact noted in the report. The Republicans have been kept under close observation in the Social Democrat-run states of Hamburg and North Rhine-Westphalia for the past three years. Such an investigation under order of the Interior Ministry means that the
party will be subject to telephone taps, infiltration by undercover agents and document searches. Other than a bare mention of the fact of "observation," the report merely states that the Republican Party and the German People's Union (similarly under observation) "nonetheless enjoy all the freedoms of a political party." The restrictions on those freedoms necessarily resulting from the close government observation should have been noted in the report.
The police also began a sweeping crackdown on the right-wing rock music scene in Germany, raiding the homes, studios and record companies of producers and rock musicians suspected of stirring up racial hatred, violence and glorifying Nazism. About 30,000 records, cassettes and compact disks were seized, especially from Rock-O-Rama Records, which is suspected of being the world's leading producer and distributor of right-wing and neo-Nazi rock music. In Nuremberg and Erlangen in Bavaria, the police raided the homes of two members of a skinhead band called "Radikahl," who were suspected of having written the "Swastika Song," which glorifies the Nazi emblem and demands that Hitler be given a Nobel Prize for his actions.
Moreover, the German government decided to ask the Federal Constitutional Court to strip two proponents of right-wing views of their fundamental political rights. If the court approves the request, these two people will be deprived of their rights to vote, and will not be able to publicly disseminate their views, participate in public rallies or organize them. The plan to deprive them of their political rights met with skepticism on the part of
129
Germany
some lawyers because they believe that such a drastic measure is justified only as a last resort when the democratic system is threatened.
Finally, the Federal Government also plans to create a special task force to coordinate federal and state police efforts against rightist extremism. The Interior Minister of the federal states agreed that special police units will be separated and maintained in constant readiness to combat extreme right-wing disturbances. These units will be equipped with helicopters that can arrive quickly at the scene of potential incidents, and will be accompanied by prosecutors and judges. A separate group will handle the securing of evidence. Right-wing extremists and their supporters will be registered in the central police register.
These measures taken by the Federal Government to defeat neo-Nazism in Germany show that this issue has now been taken seriously, but there remains the question whether the already existing laws and their consequent enforcement are sufficient to combat the crimes committed by neo-Nazis. For instance, two weeks before the events in Mölln, a criminal court for the first time charged a firebombing attack against an asylum seekers' shelter as an attempted murder, although no one was hurt. Before that date, criminals engaging in such violent acts were only accused and/or convicted of committing arson attacks and sometimes even released on probation. The report fails to criticize the hesitance and ineffectiveness of the government's response to violence against immigrants and other foreigners. It also fails to criticize the insufficient protection of asylum
seekers' shelters by the police, although these shelters have long been known to be special targets of right-wing violence.
The report fails to address an event of great importance to the development of immigration and asylum law in Germany, and possibly in Europe. On December 6, the governing coalition and the opposition Social Democratic Party reached an agreement on several questions relating to the status of foreigners and asylum seekers in Germany. Although up to now this agreement has had no legal force, it has already become the basis for a new draft legislation that would amend, inter alia, the Constitution to restrict the right to asylum in Germany.
Under terms of the accord, the fundamental right to political asylum will be retained in Article 16 of the Constitution, but anyone who enters Germany from a European Community country, or from other nations deemed to be safe from political persecution, would not be granted the right to asylum. Since all countries bordering Germany can be considered "safe" under the new legislation, the vast majority of all asylum seekers would automatically be rejected, since they travel by necessity through these countries before arriving in Germany.
The proposed asylum law does not comply with the 1951 Convention on the Status of Refugees, which Germany has ratified. In particular, the draft legislation does not guarantee the right to an individual hearing for asylum seekers entering Germany from one of the so-called "safe" countries. The proposed constitutional change will not eliminate the sources of anti-foreigner sentiment in this country,
130
Germany
nor will it stop the problem of mass migration, notably from eastern Europe, towards the wealthier part of Europe. This measure will only shift the refugee problem to Germany's neighboring countries.
As the report correctly notes, the right to strike is guaranteed by law, except for civil servants (including teachers) and personnel in sensitive positions. Nevertheless, the International Labor Organization (ILO) has criticized the government's broad definition of "essential services" which, inter alia, prevents teachers from striking legally.
Surprisingly, the report does not mention other crucial worker rights issues concerning the public sector, especially the loyalty requirements for the civil service in general, and the new "de-com-munization" process in the former East Germany, which provides for a review of the political integrity of its civil servants.
According to an ILO Commission report, Germany's traditional loyalty requirements from its civil servants are not consistent with ILO Convention No. 111, which requires governments to pursue a policy of equal opportunity and treatment in employment and occupation, with a view to eliminating any discrimination on stated grounds, including political opinion. The Commission notably criticizes the so-called "Radicals Decree" and the concept thereafter developed by German authorities and courts, which provides that persons active in organizations with aims hostile to the Constitution could not guarantee their faithfulness to the Constitution and thus were not fit for public service, without taking into account the
functions of the employment and the consequences of potential actions based on beliefs deemed "hostile" to the Constitution.
Based on this legal background, especially in the 1970s and 1980s, thousands of civil servants or applicants for the civil service were reviewed for political loyalty, and in several cases individuals were fired or not hired because of their membership in a political party or organization that was considered hostile to the Constitution. Although in most German states, notably in those governed by the Social Democratic Party, a more liberal approach was adopted in recent years, there are still some cases which have not been resolved.
Furthermore, the question of who is fit for employment in the public service is a major issue, notably in the New Federal States, in which the successor party, the Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS), of the former Socialist Unity Party (SED), still finds widespread support and plays a significant role in the political life. As the ILO announced, several trade unions have already filed complaints with the ILO against the practice in the New Federal States in recruiting civil servants. Also, the increasing number of right-wing groups throughout the country renders this question of how to treat adherents or members of those groups an important issue for the future.
Temporary regulations enacted pursuant to the Unification Treaty provide that former East German civil servants can be fired or not rehired in the united German civil service if they worked for the former secret police, violated basic human rights
131
Germany
or legal norms, or are deemed to be un-suited for employment. In short, in the course of the de-communization process, all former East German civil servants, including mainly judges, prosecutors, police officers, teachers, railroad and postal workers, have been required to complete questionnaires regarding their professional and political backgrounds. Often, additional oral interviews were held with those persons who were not believed suitable for continued employment. Helsinki Watch has criticized the review process on due process grounds and has stated that the review commissions frequently appear to assume the employee's guilt and to place the burden of proof on the employee to prove otherwise.
Moreover, the standards used to determine whether former East German officials are too tainted by their socialist past to hold public office are often not made available to the examinees and vary considerably from place to place. As a result, lustration proceedings in some East German states have been much harsher than in others. While, for instance, 55% of all formerly socialist judges and prosecutors in Brandenburg were readmitted into the court system, only 16% of their East Berlin colleagues passed the vetting procedure. Moreover, in July, a Statute on the Re-examination of Admissions to the Bar extended lustration to East German private attorneys by allowing the revocation of bar admissions issued prior to reunification under East German law if previous violations of "rule-of-law principles" made an admittee appear "unworthy" to practice law under new, democratic conditions. The new statute runs counter to the Unification
Treaty's express sanctioning of pre-unifi-cation administrative decisions. More importantly, it is retroactive, denies equal protection to East German lawyers, violates their right to freely choose a profession guaranteed by Article 12, paragraph 2 of the German Constitution, and extends "loyalty requirements" from civil servants to private professionals.
The report is silent on this important issue, referring only to judges who "had to be disqualified for political or judicial reasons." Although the East German population has long been deprived of their basic rights by the former Communist Party and its members, and the demand for a quick and rigorous "cleansing" of the state administration might be understandable in this regard, the de-communization process in public employment should be carried out according to the conditions set forth by the ILO Commission. The principle of proportionality, which, inter alia, implies that the question whether a person is fit for employment or for continued employment in the public service must be judged, in each instance, by reference to the functions of the specific post and the implications of the individual's actual conduct on his or her ability to assume and exercise those functions, should be respected.
Finally, the report discusses the human rights situation of children, but it does not mention that the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child was ratified by Germany on April 5, 1992. Although ratification is a further step toward securing the rights of children, there is still a problem of discrimination against illegitimate children under German civil law. Whereas the Convention provides for an
132
absolute anti-discrimination rule regarding status of birth, German civil law continues to distinguish between legitimate and illegitimate children. Illegitimate fathers and/or those living separately are excluded from custody and have only a limited visiting right, whereas Article 9 of the Convention guarantees a child who is separated from one or both parents the right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis. Moreover, the German immigration law still allows deportation of children, although one of the Convention's aims is to secure appropriate protection and humanitarian assistance for children seeking refugee status.
1
