Dominican Republic
The 1992 report on human rights in the Dominican Republic is most successful in detailing police and military abuses and violations of the right of workers to organize. Yet even in these areas and in several others, the report overlooks or minimizes significant violations of human rights. The most misleading sections suffer from misstatements, incomplete reporting or omissions, the substitution of written laws or government statements for actual events, and comments that appear to excuse or minimize governmental misconduct.
The most accurate sections of the report come closest to meeting the State Department's reporting instructions. The discussion of the practice of torture cites specific incidents, follows up on judicial processes arising from incidents in prior years and considers the root causes of the problem. The report also follows up on an incident of extrajudicial killing that occurred in 1989 and properly discusses the ambiguity surrounding the existence of death squads made up of members of the National Police. The sections on arbitrary arrest and denial of fair public trial accurately highlight the divergence between written laws and governmental practice. Similarly, the discussion of violations of the right to organize incorporates provisions of the new Labor Code as well as examples of violations of the Code by Export Processing Zone companies, and the responses to those violations by the Secretary of Labor. The same section also analyzes the settlement of a 1990 labor dispute between the Dominican government and the electric company workers.
The problematic sections of the report are misleading due to incompleteness or miscategorizations of events. Particularly puzzling is the State Department's apparent conclusion in the section on extrajudicial executions that there were no political killings in 1992. Given the reporting instructions' admonition to "make a conscientious effort to report what the available evidence shows, and, where it is ambiguous to report that," the report's apparent conclusion that the October killing of human rights lawyer Rafael Efrain-Ortiz had no political motivation is troubling. Efrain-Ortiz's colleagues in the Collective of Popular Organizations had reported months of police surveillance prior to and following his death. The report notes the government's lack of cooperation with groups seeking to hold rallies and marches protesting the 500th anniversary celebration of Columbus' arrival, but fails to link this antagonism to Efrain-Ortiz' death, which occurred while he was participating in just such a march. The report also ignores witnesses' assertions that Efrain-Ortiz was singled out and assassinated while marching peacefully, and was not hit by "indiscriminate fire." The police chief's characterizations of the police officers involved in the death as possessing "brutal tendencies" and "primitive mentalities]" further call into question the report's conclusion that Efrain-Ortiz' death was non-political. If there had been no evidence suggesting that Efrain-Ortiz' death was a political assassination, the State Department should have reported that absence. In light of the evidence to the contrary, at a minimum the report should have included and assessed the alternative explanations for his death.
88
Dominican Republic
The failure to give adequate attention to the murder of Rafael Efrain-Ortiz is mirrored in the report's discussion of the ability of non-governmental groups to operate in the Dominican Republic. The report merely states that such organizations "operate freely without government interference." It fails to mention that Roberto Gastón Victor, the president of the Dominican Human Rights Committee (of which Efrain-Ortiz was a member), was attacked on September 4 in Santo Domingo by two unidentified men and left unconscious and in critical condition. He was not robbed and there was no apparent police investigation into the crime. This incident together with Efrain-Ortiz's murder render the report's discussion, at best, incomplete.
The report also misconstrues the Dominican government's actions in shutting down the radio station Radio Enri-quillo. The brief mention of this ongoing conflict describes only the Dominican government's legal justifications for its actions. In addition to incorrectly locating the station on the Haitian border (instead of Tamayo), the report fails to mention that President Balaguer publicly admitted that the law banning foreign-language broadcasts was inapplicable to the station, and that he was banning the broadcasts at the request of the de facto Haitian government. The report fails to fully describe the pattern of military intimidation of station employees at the radio station and at their homes, or to explore the ambiguous government reasoning for shutting it down. While the staff of Radio Enriquillo, their listeners and several prominent human rights groups have concluded that the government's actions clearly violate guarantees of freedom of
the press enshrined in Dominican law and in Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which the Dominican Republic has ratified, the State Department report merely echoes the Dominican government's perspective.
The report blatantly misrepresents the Dominican government's attitude towards refugees. Describing a Dominican "tradition of granting asylum," the report fails to acknowledge that until June 1992, the Dominican Republic had never granted a Haitian political asylum. Rather, the government has a long record of harassing and expelling Haitian asylum seekers, including a well-known incident in late 1 991 when 25 asylum seekers in Dajabon were detained by a military guard for over two months. While the Dominican government recognized 20 refugees who had been previously approved by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), these approvals do not reflect ample "cooperation" between the two bodies. In contrast, between September 1991 and May 1992, the United States found that over 9,000 Haitians had a "credible fear" of persecution if they were returned to Haiti. The UNHCR staff reported continuing difficulties with the Dominican government, and a notable reluctance on the part of their refugee decision-making body, CONARE, to even call meetings. The Dominican government does not respect the status of all refugees recognized by the UNHCR, and these refugees have reported significant restrictions on their freedom of movement.
The report's discussion of human rights violations against Haitian workers also suffers from misstatements and
89
Dominican Republic
incompleteness. Its forthright statement that in previous years the "Government and the State Sugar Council (CEA) forcibly recruited Haitian seasonal agricultural workers and then restricted them to work on specific sugar plantations" is welcome. Yet the report's summary statement highlights a "noticeable improvement in the situation of Haitian migrant workers." While there are significantly fewer cases of forcible recruitment of workers from within Haiti, the statement is misleading in that it wrongly suggests that the workers are treated significantly differently than in past years once they have been brought to state-owned sugar cane plantations, and it implies that the Dominican government acted to bring about this change. Further discussion of Haitian migrant workers builds on this error.
The report fails to point to the coup d'etat in Haiti as the most significant factor affecting Haitian sugar cane cutters in the Dominican Republic in 1992. Due to the coup d'etat and the large outflow of Haitians seeking security, Dominican sugar company employees did not need to use as many cross-border recruiters (buscones) as in recent years. The most reliable estimates indicate that as many as 40,000 Haitians fled to the Dominican Republic to escape the violence and repression in Haiti in 1992. Nonetheless, incidents of recruiters lying to prospective workers, failing to provide contracts, delivering individuals to armed Dominicans at the border, receiving cash payments per worker from government agents, and delivering and arranging for late-night transportation of Haitians in open trucks under armed military guard, were all reported in 1992. The significant
difference from previous years was that Haitian workers did not broadly report forcible recruiting within Haiti (although there have been several reports of forcible recruitment), and that the recruitment of children had decreased. Yet elements of forced labor continued to be reported, particularly the presence of armed guards in worker communities and at strategic points leading from plantations to major roads. New workers were reported to be singled out by guards, who confiscated their clothing, and in some state-owned plantations, locked the workers into their barracks at night.
The report mentions negotiations with the Haitian government for a sugar cane cutting contract that were dropped at the time of the coup d'etat, but does not point to contemporaneous actions that reflect poorly on the Dominican government's commitment to improving Haitian workers' living and working conditions. The report should also have noted that soon after the coup d'etat, the Dominican government discontinued efforts to replace the voucher payment system (that frequently leads to workers becoming indebted to the sugar company) with a cash system or vouchers that could be changed more frequently than every 1 5 days, and rescinded a proposed pay raise. Numerous international human rights organizations have criticized the use of vouchers and the Secretary of Labor had promised to discontinue their use. This reversal is a serious setback that the report should have underscored.
While the government did introduce a temporary work permit late in 1991, the report fails to assess the impact of this document on "freedom of movement
90
Dominican Republic
problems." Some workers have reported being told that the document is only good while they are on sugar company land, thereby effectively restricting their freedom of movement. Whether plantation guards have been informed that the bearers of the document should be granted free passage is unclear. Furthermore, during the fall of 1992, workers on at least one plantation were no longer receiving the document. In light of the egregious disregard of Haitians' documentation during the massive repatriations in 1991, and problems with an earlier program to "regularize" Haitians' immigration status (under Decree 417-90), the report's listing of the number of permits issued is an inadequate assessment of the actual impact of those documents. The report's emphasis on this government effort also serves to downplay the continuing problem of police searches on public transportation heading to and from the Haitian border. Those who "look" Haitian are routinely taken off buses and many are taken to the nearest cane plantation.
With regard to child labor, the report correctly asserts that the recruitment of children from Haiti to cut sugar cane has largely ceased. Yet, the report is incorrect in asserting that only children accompanying their fathers were cutting cane during 1992. The Lawyers Committee interviewed a number of children cutting cane during 1992 who explained that they were doing so because their fathers were absent and the family had no other way to earn income. The CEA has been quite successful in informing managers that children should not be employed in the sugar industry, yet it must still respond to continuing instances of child labor.
The strongest sections of the report not only explore human rights violations during 1992 but also discuss governmental actions during the year to resolve prior human rights conflicts (such as reporting the settlement to the 1990 electric workers' strike). Vet the 1992 report omits any mention of the absence of governmental efforts to offer reparation to those expelled or forcibly repatriated during the 1991 campaign. Due to the large number of Dominican citizens who were removed from their own country, and the number of legal Haitian residents who were expelled, as well as the quantity of physical abuse, theft and destruction of documents accompanying the expulsions, reparations are clearly in order. The report fails to address this crucial issue. Under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the American Convention on Human Rights, the Dominican government has an affirmative obligation to compensate all those whose human rights were violated by the illegal mass expulsions during the summer of 1991.
On a number of occasions, the report substitutes statements of law for more thorough discussions of that law in action. With regard to the new Labor Code, the report asserts that it "significantly strengthened the right of freedom of association." However, this assertion is not supported by anything more than excerpts from the text of the law itself. The report does not clarify that as of December 1992, the CEA had failed to make any change in the voucher payment system, despite the change of law in the new Labor Code. Similarly, the freedom of movement section declares that there are "no unusual restrictions on travel
91
Dominican Republic
within or outside the country for Dominican citizens." In light of the extreme treatment of Dominican citizens of Haitian origin during the 1991 repatriation campaign, this assertion merits critical examination.
In analyzing the difficulty for Dominican-born persons of Haitian origin to get Dominican documentation, the report suggests an interpretation of the law that is broadly encouraged by the Dominican government, but is in fact false. The report incorrectly points to the undocumented status of many children's Haitian parents as the barrier to the child's acquiring Dominican papers. In fact, under the Dominican Constitution and legal code, the legal status of a parent has no bearing on the right to citizenship of a person born in the Dominican Republic (except the child of a diplomat or person in brief transit through the country). While misconstruing the legal requirements for citizenship, the report also fails to point to the difficult reality that persons of Haitian descent, or Dominicans with dark skin, are repeatedly harassed and frequently refused when trying to declare their children (even when their documents are in perfect order). The report minimizes this grave and continuing problem which violates many provisions of another treaty ratified by the Dominican Republic, the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination.
In the same section, the report errs in the other direction by applauding gains made by women in government, where in fact the numbers reflect diminished power. When the office of provincial governor was first created, virtually all of the
29 seats were held by women. The present figure of only nine governorships held by women reflects a loss of leadership positions.
The report also misrepresents the human rights situation in the Dominican Republic by skirting concrete problems with misleading commentary. The discussion of discrimination against Haitians, "many of whom are illegal immigrants," refers to "deeply felt historical reasons" and "sharp cultural differences." By pointing to their "illegal" status in the country and the weight of "history" and "culture," this language tends to excuse or mitigate present discrimination against Haitians. The report absolves the far more likely culprit, the Dominican government, of responsibility. Clearly, the government's recent treatment of sugar cane cutters and 1991 expulsions of thousands of persons, based largely on the darkness of their skin, as well as a long history of government-endorsed discrimination dating back at least to the massacre of some 18,000 Haitians in 1937, merit recognition. President Balaguer's book, La Isla al Revés, openly endorses anti-Haitianism.
Similarly, the discussion of arbitrary interference is shaded by the description of those groups who have claimed interference by government agents. Strikes and protest activities of these groups are described as "sometimes violent." The phrasing suggests that it is these groups that cause the violence, and that therefore the government actions may be justified. Yet the experience of the Collective of Popular Organizations, of which the murdered Rafael Efrain-Ortiz was a member, would suggest that non-violent
92
Dominican Republic
groups are sometimes both targeted for surveillance and involved in legal demonstrations where violence is instigated by non-members.
Finally, the comment that the poor conditions in Haitian worker villages "are not suffered uniquely by Haitians" appears designed to minimize concern for their well-being, and is wrong. The comparison is not between Haitian migrant laborers present on Dominican government sugar plantations and Dominicans living and working freely in their own land. The CEA has different obligations to its Haitian laborers than the Dominican government does to its citizens. Conditions for Dominico-Haitian and Haitian cane cutters are materially worse than conditions faced by Dominican agricultural workers, who refuse to cut cane and occupy supervisory positions in cane plantations or who work in other sectors, such as tobacco, coffee or vegetables, where living and working conditions are far superior. Moreover, the report does not adequately address the issue of actual improvement in the extremely difficult living conditions of Haitian employees of the CEA. Rather, the report points to governmental agreements to make improvements. At the close of 1992, the living conditions in a broad range of worker villages had shown little or no improvement from the year before despite many government promises.
As in 1991, the 1992 report understates or minimizes a number of significant human rights concerns, in several cases with language identical to the prior year's report. The report has improved by tracking earlier human rights violations and updating the legal resolutions to
these situations, but it has failed to do so in some crucial instances. Still, the greatest weakness of this year's report is the repeated failure to correctly identify, fully discuss and assign responsibility for the continuing grave human rights violations in the Dominican Republic.
93
