 DOMINICA
 Independent since 1978, Dominica is a parliamentary democracy and a member
 of the Commonwealth of Nations. Prime Minister Eugenia Charles' Dominica Free-
 dom Party, in office since 1980, was reelected in 1985 and 1990 in free and fair elec-
 tions.
 The defense force was disbanded in 1981 following two violent coup attempts.
 Since then the Commonwealth of Dominica Police have been the only security force.
 The police, supervised by the Commissioner of Police, includes a Coast Guard Unit
 and a Special Services Unit (SSU-a small paramilitary unit which was established
 in 1983 as part of the Regional Security System of the Eastern Caribbean states.
 The police are controlled by and responsive to the democratically elected Govern-
 ment.
 Dominica's primarily agrarian economy is heavily dependent on earnings from ba-
 nana exports to the United Kingdom, although the Government is attempting to di-
 versify agricultural production and is promoting exports of raw fruit vegetables,
 and coconut products both within and outside the region. In addition, liominica has
 begun to develop its tourist industry by advertising its unique natural attractions.
 Several  small industrial   plants   are  operating, but   unemployment    and
 underemployment are high. Per capita gross domestic product at current prices was
 estimated at $2,492 in 1991.
 Citizens of Dominica enjoy a wide range of civil and political rights. However,
 there continued to be credible charges that police used harsh methods to extract
 confessions.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances or politically moti-
 vated abductions.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture or other forms or cruel inhuman or degrading
 treatment or punishment and there were no reports of such practices. However, in
 recent years there have been recurring credible allegations of harsh treatment by
 law enforcement officials during incarceration, often to extract confessions from de-
 tainees.
 Overcrowding and unsanitary conditions continue to be problems in Dominica's
 only prison facility.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Dominican law requires that persons ar-
 rested or detained be charged with a crime within 24 hours or be released from cus-
 tody, and this is normally honored in practice.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Dominican law provides for public trial before an
 independent, impartial court. Criminal defendants are presumed innocent until
 proven guilty, are allowed legal counsel, and have the right to appeal. Indigents are
 provided free legal counsel only in capital cases.
 There are no political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution prohibits arbitrary entry, search, and seizure. Search warrants are re-
 quired by law. There were no reports in 1992 of arbitrary government intrusions
 into the private lives of individuals.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The right of free expression is provided for by
 the Constitution and adhered to in practice. The political opposition openly criticizes
 the Government. Dominica's main radio station is state owned, and the other two
 stations confine their broadcasts to religious programming. However, Dominicans
 
 
 enjoy good access to independent news sources through cable television and radio
 reception from neighboring islands. The editorial stance of the sole newspaper re-
 mains progovernment, but other views are prominently reported. Political parties
 publish their own "journals," and the opposition United Workers' Party (UWP)
 prints a weekly newsletter. The opposition Dominica Labour Party (DLP) continued
 to complain that the discontinuance of live broadcasts of parliamentary sessions is
 a form of censorship.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Government respects the
 constitutionally mandated freedoms of association and assembly and does not hinder
 opposition groups from holding political meetings or public demonstrations. Such
 meetings and gatherings were held frequently throughout the year. In late 1991,
 during debate over the new Public Service Act, the Civil Service Association staged
 a demonstration outside government headquarters in Roseau, which disrupted a ses-
 sion of Parliament. No attempt was made to prevent or interrupt the demonstration,
 which remained peaceful.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion is not restricted. Roman Catholicism
 is the predominant faith in Dominica, and there are various Protestant denomina-
 tions. There are also small Muslim and Rastafarian communities. Outside religious
 groups are not restricted in their activities in Dominica.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-These rights are provided for by law and respected in practice. The
 Government may revoke passports if subversion is suspected but has not done so
 in recent times.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Dominica, independent since 1978, had a prior long historical tradition of democ-
 racy and home rule. Power is exercised by a Cabinet appointed by the Prime Min-
 ister. Elections are by secret ballot and held every 6 years or earlier, at the discre-
 tion of the Prime Minister. Elections in 1980, 1985, and 1990 were free and fair,
 and voter participation was high. The 1990 elections were contested by the incum-
 bent Dominica Freedom Party (DFP) and the opposition DLP and UWP. The DFP
 won 11 of the 21 parliamentary seats, the UWP 6, and the DLP 4.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no government restrictions on the formation of local human rights orga-
 nizations, although no such groups exist at present. There were no requests for in-
 vestigations of human rights abuses from international or regional human rights
 groups during 1992.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 There are constitutional provisions, respected in practice, against racial or sexual
 discrimination in Dominica. The Prime Minister is a woman. Religious practice is
 not restricted, nor is it the basis for discrimination. Labor laws specify equal pay
 for equal work.
 There is a significant Carib Indian population in Dominica, estimated at 3,000 out
 of a total of 71,000. Most live on a 3,700-acre reservation created in 1903. School,
 water, and health facilities available on the Carib reservation are similar to those
 available to other rural Dominicans. Caribs participate in national political life and
 enjoy the same civil rights accorded other Dominican nationals. Worrell Sanford, a
 Laour Member of Parliament, is a Carib, and Carib Chief O'Gustie is a nationally
 respected leader.
 According to officials of the Government's Ministry of Community Development,
 general assault against women is not widespread. Both the police and the courts
 prosecute cases of rape and sexual assault. There are no specific laws dealing with
 domestic violence, but the Government is investigating the effect of this problem on
 society. The Ministry of Community Development began a series of seminars on do-
 mestic violence in 1990, and in 1991 the Government conducted a survey on the sta-
 tus of women in Dominica. The results of the survey have not been released yet.
 Public awareness has been heightened concerning violence against women and chil-
 dren.
 Under the law, victims may report sexual and other violent abuse to the Welfare
 Department or to the police. While there is no shelter for battered women, the Wel-
 fare Department often provides assistance to victims of abuse by finding them tem-
 porary shelter, providing counseling to both parties, or recommending police action.
 The Welfare Department reports all cases of abuse to the police, although the police
 are often reluctant to interfere in domestic quarrels.
 
 
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers have the legal right to organize, to choose
 their representatives, and to strike. Only slightly over 10 percent of the work force
 is organized. There were few strikes in 1992, one of which was a 3-day work stop-
 page by port workers. The Civil Service Association continues to press for changes
 in the Public Service Act of 1991. Among other provisions, the law sets a limit on
 the period for wage negotiations. In the past, civil servants traditionally received
 large back pay awards after marathon negotiations. There is no restriction on form-
 ing a nationallabor federation. Several of the major trade unions form an umbrella
 grouping called the Joint Unions Steering Committee. All unions are independent
 of the Government and political parties and are affiliated with various international
 labor organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Unions have legally defined
 rights to organize workers and to bargain with employers. Collective bargaining is
 widespread in the nonagricultural sectors of the economy, including the government
 service, and there is also recourse to mediation and arbitration by the Government.
 Antiunion discrimination by employers isprohibited by law, and union rights are
 enforced by judicial and police authority. Enforcement mechanisms are the respon-
 sibility of the Department of Labour, whose inspectors operate under the super-
 vision of the Labour Commissioner. However, the small Labour Inspection Office
 lacks qualified personnel to carry out its duties under existing labor legislation.
 Labor regulations and practice governing Dominica's industrial estates and its other
 export firms located outside the estates do not differ from that prevailing in the rest
 of the economy. It is legally compulsory for employers to recognize unions as bar-
 gaining agents once both parties have followed appropriate procedures.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced or compulsory labor is pro-
 hibited and does not exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum legal age for em-
 ployment is 15 years. Employers generally observe this law without government en-
 forcement.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Minimum wages for various categories of work-
 ers are set by statute and were last revised in November 1989. The minimum wage
 for most categories of workers is not sufficient to provide a decent standard of living
 for a household, but most workers earn more than the legislated minimum wage.
 The legal workweek is 40 hours in 5 days. The law provides for a minimum of 2
 weeks' paid vacation.
 Although the Employment Safety Act, an occupational health and safety law, es-
 tablished an Advisory Committee on Safety and Health, it has never met. The en-
 forcement mechanism consists of inspections by the Department of Labour, which
 can and does prescribe specific compliance measures, impose fines, and prosecute of-
 fenders. In practice, however, inspections are rarely made because of insufficient re-
 sources and personnel.
