Algeria
The 1992 report is in many ways a significant improvement over last year's report, stating categorically that the cancellation of the National Assembly elections in January "effectively denied citizens the right to change their government." However, this year's report grossly understates, and thus fails to provide, a reliably accurate picture of the routine practice of torture by the Algerian government against its citizens. It also under-reports the "disappearance" of detainees. This defect, which may be an investigative one, a political result of the State Department's tolerance of the anti-democratic regime in Algeria, or both, detracts from the credibility of the whole report.
The report simply states that" [security forces resorted on occasion to excessively harsh treatment of prisoners and detainees. This has included mental and physical harassment and, in isolated cases, torture." Elsewhere, it asserts that "disappearances" resulted from arrests conducted in the months of January and February only. But during that period covered by the report, security forces were already rounding up members of the opposition, both male and female, in droves. According to Amnesty International (Al), torture was "routinely applied" and included such practices as burning victims with cigarettes, pulling out nails, insertion of foreign objects in bodily cavities, near-suffocation by cloths soaked in chemicals and other inhuman methods. Al also reported that instances of "disappearance" did not stop during the year.
In fact, during a U.S. congressional hearing held in June 1992, a statement
signed by a representative of the parliamentary delegation of The Islamic Front for Salvation (FIS), the major opposition group which won the first round of the aborted elections, was distributed. The statement complained even then of "torture facilities," and demanded that they be closed at once. This should have alerted the State Department to the possibility of such routine abuses. Yet the State Department does not acknowledge their existence. This raises serious questions about the range and diversity of sources that the Department is willing to consult in its search for such information on a timely basis.
Regarding the imposition of the state of emergency by the regime and the laws promulgated thereunder, the report presents fairly, though uncritically and somewhat briefly, these matters and the causal chain of events which led to the present unrest in Algeria. It also draws attention to the significant loss of rights resulting from the imposition of such repressive laws.
Yet the report continues to suffer from significant factual inaccuracies as well an additional subtle bias which is reflected in selective presentation of facts and an uncritical attitude which suggests toleration of the Algerian government's anti-democratic behavior.
An example of such inaccuracies can be found in the report's statement that "there were no known instances of politically motivated extrajudicial killings by the government in 1992." The report then notes that two deaths resulted from
16
Algeria
dehydration, after detainees escaped from a government camp into the desert.
Yet, FIS has complained about the death of a number of its members in detention camps from thirst, disease and torture. The problem here again may be one of inadequate information-gathering. If that is not the case, however, then one would question the wisdom of not subsuming such deaths within the scope of "politically motivated extrajudicial killings." Excluding such killings from the definition creates a distorted depiction of the gravity of the problem, especially when the report states elsewhere that "the majority of detainees were arrested exclusively for participating in demonstrations or expressing their views."
A more subtle example of factual inaccuracies, which favor the anti-demo-cratic regime, is based on a misleading juxtaposition of facts. The particular passage under discussion concerns the government's suspension of certain publications. The first sentence refers to "[a] rash of assassinations and terrorist bombings." The next sentence ties the suspension of nine publications to the government's need to "protect security and public order." Such juxtaposition leads to an erroneous conclusion which induces the reader to be more tolerant of the violation.
While the passage properly reflects the government's justification for suspending these publications and for violating many other liberties, the preceding sentence suggests approval of the government's suspension of rights. Yet, an examination of the charges against these newspapers, many of which incidentally
are not associated with FIS, shows a pattern of suppressing freedom of the press to silence all types of criticism of the status quo.
A third problem resulting in factual inaccuracies is that of emphasis. In discussing political and other judicial killings, the relevant part of the report focuses almost entirely on "frequent armed attacks" on government forces. The discussion of killings resulting from use of live ammunition by the police to disperse crowds, while briefly noted, is discussed later in the report. The effect is to suggest that most of the killings were nongovernmental. This effect would have been properly avoided had the reference to later discussion of governmental killings been phrased in different terms. As it stands, the report appears to condone and rationalize government killings. Al reported that in the 12 month-period after the imposition of the state of emergency on February 9, 1992, more than 270 members of the security forces and 20 civilians were killed by armed opposition groups. In the same period, security forces were responsible for killing up to 300 suspected opponents, mostly in the context of armed clashes.
It would have been helpful if the report had discussed in more detail the attitude of the opposition toward political violence, preferably in its discussion of these killings. Some FIS leaders called for calm and compromise even as its top leaders were being arrested. Other political parties, such as the Socialist Forces Front and its leader Hocine Ait Ahmed, as well as unaffiliated private citizens, were also angered by excessive governmental violence.
17
Algeria
Following its cancellation of the elections, the regime engaged in an immediate show of brute power by sending its forces mostly to working class sections of Algiers and other urban centers to surround mosques, arrest leaders of FIS and to arrest, detain and replace religious imams (prayer leaders in mosques) whose speeches were critical of the government.
The only reference to imams in the report simply states that they are governmental employees and as such were replaced by the government, in some cases, for their unsympathetic views. This description significantly underplays governmental intrusion in the free exercise of religion by Algerian Muslims, ignores their close personal relationship to their imams, and relegates this repressive governmental behavior to a mere administrative matter.
On a more positive note, this year's report avoided some terminology used last year which we found prejudicial. An additional improvement, however, would have been to refer to the Islamic law used in Algeria as the official Algerian interpretation of the Maliki school of Islamic law. As it stands, the discussion of Algerian Islamic law seems to suggest that all Islamic law, Maliki and otherwise, properly or improperly applied, shares certain oppressive characteristics of Algerian law. This is not correct. A quick counter example can be offered by Tunisian law which is Maliki but which departs from the Maliki tradition on several significant points.
It would also be more accurate not to refer to the agreement relating to the settlement terms between husband and
wife in case of divorce as "prenuptial." In fact, that agreement is part of the marriage contract and no marriage contract would be valid without it. The amount is agreed upon by negotiations between the two parties (but more frequently, by their families on their behalf) prior to the official signing of the marriage contract. Thus, the problem lies not in the absence of such agreement, but rather in an unequal balance of negotiating powers under existing conditions; a substantial settlement figure at that early date may scare a potential husband away in search of a potentially less costly marriage.
The report should have included information about the torture and possible rape of Algerian women detained by authorities. This would seem more important then a speculative discussion on why they may choose to wear traditional Algerian Islamic garb.
Finally, the report persists in exhibiting cultural bias by continuing to voice exclusively the concerns of secularist women who "regard themselves as increasingly under attack from proponents of the implementation of Islamic law" in a country where such proponents, male and female, are being terrorized and tortured by their own undemocratic government. Surely, the report should focus on the all too plentiful evidence of actual abuse suffered by Islamists, rather than speculate on the possible negative consequences for women's rights of a FIS assumption of power. The Algerian government will take comfort from the State Department's endorsement of its justification for its abuses of human rights in Algeria.
18
