Egypt
The State Department report for the most part accurately documents the deteriorating human rights situation in Egypt. It correctly notes that most human rights violations take place under the Emergency Law in force since 1981. The primary violations remain the systematic use of torture by security forces and arbitrary arrests and detentions without charge or trial.
The language of the report is at times assertive in portraying the dim conditions of human rights in Egypt. Nonetheless, as with the reports of past years, it continues to suffer from ambiguity of method and purpose. While applying an apparently demanding evidentiary standard to governmental abuses, it applies a less exacting standard to allegations against the opposition. Consequently, many governmental abuses are understated, meanwhile violence by what the report calls "Islamic extremists" is emphasized. This continues a trend, apparent in past reports, of implying that the government's violence is primarily a response to "extremist" violence. As we noted in last year's critique, it is imperative that the Egyptian government not be left with the impression that the violence of opposition groups justifies the pervasive violations of human rights committed by government forces.
Egypt has been governed under a repressive regime of exceptional or emergency laws for most of the past 50 years. The systematic violence perpetuated by the Egyptian government under these laws has greatly contributed to the radi-calization of Egyptian politics. For exam-
ple, while in the 1970s a total of 50 people were killed in armed violence between the government and its foes, the number jumped to 96 in the 1980s. In the first two years of the 1990s, the number of casualties increased to 394, while in the first three months of 1993, 109 have been killed.
Islamic militants have claimed that the government's use of torture and summary executions is the primary cause behind the escalation in violence. Whether one chooses to believe this justification or not, the end result, to paraphrase the Egyptian Organization For Human Rights (EOHR), has become one of an armed conflict between the government and its Islamic militant opponents with neither showing any respect for the rule of law.
Considering that Egypt seems locked into a cycle of violence that is bound to further compromise human rights, there is no room for ambiguity. In a rather clear example of such ambiguity, the report states that the Egyptian Constitution provides for various human rights. These rights include "a multiparty political system, regular elections, rule of law and an independent judiciary, freedom of opinion and the right to peaceable private assembly." The report asserts that "[m]any of these rights are freely practiced." But the very next sentence contradicts this assessment by noting that the pattern of human rights violations prevalent in Egypt in the past remained essentially unchanged in 1992, and that "many basic rights continue to be significantly restricted." Additionally, the facts reviewed later in the report leaves one wondering
94
Egypt
which of the enumerated rights is "freely practiced"?
In another example of equivocation, in discussing extrajudicial killings the report is reluctant to report violations in its own voice. It starts out by asserting that "according to the E.O.H.R. there was one apparently extrajudicial killing in 1992, a detainee who died in December due to police torture." Then it goes on to note that more than 80 people were killed in "civil disturbances," and that local and international human rights observers maintain that security forces have become accustomed to using lethal force quickly, and usually do not give the warning prescribed by law. The report only states in its own voice that "[m]ost violence was instigated by Islamic extremists," and that "the number of innocent bystanders killed by security forces indicates an excessive use of lethal force."
Consequently, one is left with the impression that the report is unable to ascribe fault. If the police are at fault at all, they are at fault for negligently killing bystanders or for defending themselves too zealously. Moreover, the report consistently refers to the victims of government violence as "Islamic extremists." The loose adoption of this terminology, not making a clear distinction between those Islamists engaged in violent activities and those who merely oppose the government, betrays prejudice. The report notes, for example, that on August 23 police in Asyut killed seven "Islamic extremists." It states in a non-committal tone that the police claimed it was in self defense while the opposition papers claimed that the victims were not given sufficient opportunity to surrender. In
fact, the opposition press claimed that the seven were executed.
In contrast to its tone when discussing governmental killings, the report is unequivocal when describing violence by Islamic militants. It states in a clear assertive voice that Islamic "extremists" killed security officers and Coptic Christians. The fact that leaders of Islamic militant groups claim self defense or deny responsibility for killing Copts is not presented in the report, but these claims have as much validity (or invalidity) as those of the government and should have been mentioned and assessed.
Perhaps because of its hostility towards "Islamic extremists," the report ignores several incidents of probable extrajudicial killings. The EOHR has noted that 28 out of 48 victims killed by police in 1992 were most probably extrajudicially executed. These include three men killed in Bassarta Village, Damietta who were shot in the back of the head. One of them was shot in the back and front. Since the State Department did not cover this incident in its report last year, it should have been included especially since news of the incident only surfaced in 1992. In July 1992 a Muslim clergyman and Islamic group leader, Shaykh Arafat Darwish, was killed in the pulpit of a Sanabu mosque. In July, the body of an Islamic group member was found shot in a field near Dayrut.
The State Department, however, should be commended for taking a much more decisive stand on the issue of torture. In a marked improvement over last year, the report clearly identifies torture as a pervasive problem in Egypt. Further-
95
Egypt
more, as the report notes, the government consistently fails to investigate or prosecute those incriminated in torture allegations. Nonetheless, there are several omissions that undermine the power of the report on this issue. It correctly notes that nearly all torture victims are allegedly implicated with Islamic groups in some fashion. But it fails to mention that torture victims include those detained for non-violent speech or activity. Furthermore, the report briefly describes the methods of torture used against suspects, but the brevity of the description does not justly reflect the savagery inflicted by the security forces. Victims are hung from a variety of complex positions with the weight being placed on the wrists or shoulders. They are beaten with whips or sticks, and electric shocks are applied through sensitive parts of the body which includes the ear pinna, lips, nipples and genitals. Sometimes a room is filled with water which is connected to an electric current. The victim is forced to jump up and down to avoid shocks until the victim collapses from exhaustion. Frequently, victims are burned with cigarettes.
Aside from omitting these particulars, the report in a somewhat detached fashion states that the insertion of solid objects into the anus has been reported. In fact, this is a common method of torture. The report also notes that female detainees have been threatened with rape and, at times, raped. In reality, male detainees are frequently threatened with rape as well. In one case, a male university student was hung over fire, in the position of a sheep being grilled, and raped. In another case, a man was forced to perform "an indecent act" on two officers.
In a particularly serious omission, the report does not call attention to the fact that security forces detain and torture minors ranging from 15 to 17 years of age. The report does mention that security officers detain female family members as hostages in an attempt to secure arrests. In a 1991 case, the police even detained a two-month old baby. While in custody, these relatives are often abused or beaten.
In last year's report, the State Department made a passing reference to the inhuman conditions prevailing in Egyptian prisons. Surprisingly, this reference was omitted in this year's report. After visiting Egyptian prisons. Middle East Watch (MEW) issued a report in 1992 documenting widescale abuses including intentional overcrowding, denial of food, water, toilet facilities and medical treatment as well as beatings. The State Department only reports that MEW visited prisons and interviewed detainees without interference from the Egyptian government; it does not refer to MEW's findings. Additionally, the preface of the MEW report describes in detail some of the resistance and obstructions placed on MEW's visit by the Egyptian government. The report fails to mention that Egyptian lawyers were not permitted to accompany the MEW delegation, certain areas where suspected torture takes place were declared off limits and the guards tried to influence the testimony of prisoners.
Although the Egyptian government received MEW and Amnesty International delegations during the year, it has consistently refused to take responsibility for the human rights abuses occurring in Egypt. The Egyptian Interior Minister
96
Egypt
Muhammad Abd al-Halim Musa, in a clear misrepresentation, claimed that when MEW visited Egyptian prisons they "praised the treatment inmates are getting in Egypt, the preservation of human rights and the commitment to regulations within jails," and that the delegation "received no complaints of a single case of torture in jails." The same official claimed that when Amnesty International visited alleged places of torture "they found nothing worth writing about." These statements are particularly egregious examples of the Egyptian government's attitude to human rights. The State Department report's statement that MEW and Amnesty International were not interfered with, without further elaboration, will only encourage this defiant attitude.
Importantly, the report makes no reference to the fact that in an attempt to arrest activists, security forces surround and subject whole villages to collective punishment. In the Fayyum and Dairout area, security forces stormed houses and destroyed or burned furniture. Villagers, not suspected of any offense, were made to lie face down on the ground with their hands tied behind their back and were, at times, beaten. Furthermore, the sanctity of mosques was regularly violated. On November 19, five houses of suspected Islamists were razed by bulldozers in Hujayrat.
Human rights violations in Egypt are facilitated because of the absence of the rule of law and democratic guarantees. The report succeeds in recording the exercise of arbitrary power by security forces, however its apparent preoccupation with Islamic militants undermines its
effectiveness. The report, for example, recognizes that under the Emergency Law arbitrary arrest and detention are widely practiced. A person can be detained incommunicado for 90 days without being indicted or charged. Nonetheless, the report does not make clear the vulnerability of the general population, beyond the so-called extremists, to this abuse. Militant Islamists constitute a small portion of the total Islamic movement, but the Egyptian government accuses most detainees of being Islamic extremists. There is no independent means of ascertaining whether those detained are in fact Islamic extremists or nonviolent governmental opponents. The scale of arrests, however, would seem to belie any claim that arrests are limited to extremists. Mass arrests often precede major political events such as elections to the People's Assembly or the Consultative Assembly, suggesting a motive beyond the preservation of public order for carrying them out. When investigating acts of terrorism, security forces indiscriminately arrest large numbers of people. Following an attack on German tourists, according to the Interior Ministry, 7,000 suspects were detained. In a separate occasion, 650 suspects were detained in Imbabah alone in one day. The report should have made the point that the removal of the civil rights of part of the population also has deleterious consequences for the population as a whole. In the case of Egypt, these consequences would appear to outweigh any benefits claimed for the policy. There is no doubt about its adverse consequences on respect for human rights principles by the government.
In another surprising statement, the report claims that the government "some-
97
Egypt
times" rearrests detainees who have been ordered released by a court. Nevertheless, all evidence'indicates that in state security cases dealt with under emergency legislation this practice is the norm. Typically, after obtaining a release order, a suspect will be removed from prison to a police station or to state security offices where the person is tortured. New detention orders are then prepared, and the person is detained again. In most cases, suspects will obtain several release orders, and will be redetained each time. In one case, a suspect obtained eight release orders and was never released. This problem is extensively reported on in the opposition press. The State Security Investigations releases a person only when it is done with her or him, regardless of court orders.
The arbitrary powers the state enjoys under the Emergency Law have been greatly augmented by the anti-terrorism amendments to the Penal Code. The report draws attention to these amendments but indicates that they were passed in response to the outbreak of Islamic extremist violence. The report provides an incomplete review of these draconian laws. The amendments impose the death sentence on any one convicted of an act of terrorism. Anyone who financially supports a terrorist organization will receive hard labor for life, and a member of such an organization will be imprisoned for five years. It is a crime to "call, by any method, for the suspension of the provisions of the Constitution. ..." or to "propagate, by word of mouth . . . or any other method, the principles or objectives of a terrorist organization" or to possess "directly or indirectly any written or recorded material that appears
to condone terrorist activity." Obviously, these laws are broad enough to outlaw regular speech and endow the government with limitless discretionary powers.
Importantly, under these laws, the police may arrest a person for 24 hours without notifying judicial authorities. A suspect may be held for 11 days for questioning without access to a lawyer or judicial supervision, a clear violation of international law as codified in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Detainees may also be held up to six months in preventive detention without judicial review.
The report's brief reference to and incomplete analysis of the antiterrorism amendments is inexplicable especially because these laws have been condemned by several human rights organizations, as well as Egyptian opposition parties, professional associations and university staff unions. As MEW argues, these laws "legalize the continued use of past abusive practices." Adel Hussein, editor in chief oiAI-Sha'ab, an opposition newspaper, was charged in December under the new anti-terrorism law for a report he wrote on the killing of tourists in Egypt.
Despite the report's tendency to understate the abusive nature of the Egyptian regime, it does discuss fairly and accurately the restrictions on speech and the press. The report describes a variety of ways in which freedom of speech is violated in Egypt and notes that the "new antiterrorism laws may inhibit freedom of expression. . . ." Although criticism of government is tolerated in Egypt, the government does retain the power to
98
Egypt
confiscate, ban or censor books or works of art. The report also states correctly that opposition journalists are harassed or arrested.
The report asserts that opposition newspapers frequently publish tough criticism of the government, and give greater prominence to human rights abuses in Egypt than do state-run newspapers. But in a curious addition this year, the report claims that the Islamist press tends to cover only abuses of Islamists. The report never clarifies what it means by Islamists or Islamist press. The newspaper Al-Sha'ab is identified as Islamist. However, Al-Sha'ab has carried extensive coverage of MEW's, Amnesty International's and the State Department's reports on Egypt as well as reports of torture and violence against Copts. In its enthusiasm for criticizing the government, Al-Sha'ab does not limit itself to the travails of the Islamists. By adopting a hostile position towards what the report calls the Islamists or Islamist extremists, the report, perhaps unwittingly, helps the Egyptian government feel justified in disregarding the human rights of its Islamic opposition, thus contributing to the general decline in respect for human rights in Egypt noted elsewhere in the report.
Although the report's discussion on freedom of speech is generally admirable, the report could have added that the Penal Code includes a special chapter containing 31 articles on "crimes of the Press." There are a variety of exceptional laws that enable the government to control the terms of the discourse in Egypt. Among these exceptional laws are the following: Law for Protecting the Internal Front and Preserving Social Peace (Law
No.33 of 1978); Law for Protecting Values from Immorality (Law No. 95 of 1980); Law on State Security Courts (Law No. 105 of 1980); Law of Press Authority (Law No. 148 of 1980); Law on Political Parties (Law No. 40 of 1977). These laws allow the government to prosecute or punish those who endanger social peace or state interests or those who encourage hatred towards the ruling regime or insult the authorities or armed forces or parliament or spread provocative propaganda aimed at influencing public opinion. The end result of all of the extrajudicial discretionary powers the government retains is that whatever freedom of speech is enjoyed by Egyptians is due to the generosity, tolerance or whim of the government, and this policy could be curtailed or reversed altogether whenever the government deems it appropriate.
Fundamentally, Egyptians do not enjoy basic political rights. The report recognizes this fact when it frankly, and commendably, states, "[a]s a practical matter, Egyptians do not have a meaningful ability to change the national government." The report argues that election laws, which favor the ruling party, prevent fair competition. However, the problem goes beyond unfair laws. In connection with local elections in November, newspaper reports indicated that government thugs positioned themselves at polling stations where they assaulted opposition candidates. At times, they fired their guns in the air. Forging of ballots, removing opposition candidates from election lists and marking the ballots on behalf of illiterate voters was also reported. Consequently, it is not surprising that due to the lack of confidence in the integrity of the elections process,
99
Egypt
Reuters reported a voter turnout as low as five percent of the registered voters at some polling stations. In major urban centers an eight percent turnout was reported. This despite the government's practice of busing factory workers to polling stations.
The report's discussions of the independence of the judiciary and the right to a fair and public hearing are largely comprehensive and accurate. Cases under the Emergency Law are tried before the Emergency State Security Court. There is no right of appeal from the judgment of such a court. Nonetheless, the President retains the right to cancel an acquittal and order a defendant retried. The report asserts that the Prime Minister, acting on delegated powers, has sometimes refused to ratify acquittals from the Emergency State Security Courts and ordered defendants retried. "Typically," the report states, "these retrials never take place, and the defendants are released." Under the Emergency Law, however, state security investigators may detain the defendant after release on the same charges.
Furthermore, the report should have noted that in political cases there is frequent interference with the right to an attorney. The public prosecutor may inspect the files of clients in a lawyer's office. Access to records of an investigation may be denied to a lawyer under the pretext of confidentiality. Additionally, lawyers do not have the right to meet privately with political detainees since a security officer must always be present, and it is common for detainees not to have access to a lawyer until the court hearing. Furthermore, political detainees
are frequently held in illegal detention centers by State Security Investigations. These centers are considered military zones and are not subject to judicial supervision. Consequently, lawyers have no access to them, and detainees are often held in these centers until the visible effects of torture disappear.
Moreover, there is a growing problem with the harassment and arrest of lawyers. For example, on March 3, Amal Watani was verbally abused and attacked when she went to a police station to examine the records of a client. Lawyers in Alexandria went on strike to protest her treatment. On April 16, about 1,700 lawyers organized a sit-in at the Criminal Court of Bani Suwaif to protest the harassment of a fellow lawyer. In Giza, on March 3, state security officers broke into the house and office of defense lawyer Ali Ismail Hussein and stole documents and files of cases.
The Egyptian government's interference with the right to peaceful assembly and association, rights of workers and right to asylum are referred to. The report calls attention to the fact that the Egyptian government continues to refuse to license human rights organizations, and continues to harass EOHR lawyers. There is no discussion, however, of the practical implications of this lack of legal status on EOHR's work. For instance, one effect is financial - it cannot open a bank account or solicit funds from potential donors in Egypt. Lack of legal status also discourages potential members from joining. These and other effects are significant and deserve fuller discussion in future reports.
100
Egypt
In a particularly commendable improvement over last year's report, the State Department calls attention to the plight of approximately 100 Palestinians who continue to be imprisoned and, at times, tortured in Egypt. Many entered illegally from the Israeli-occupied territories. Others were arrested for protesting Operation Desert Storm.
In conclusion, the State Department report is frank, accurate and comprehensive on several issues. Nonetheless, one is left with the impression that it consistently understates human rights violations in Egypt. It frequently implies that the government's violence is primarily a response to Islamist violence. By doing so the report, perhaps inadvertently, will have given an undeserved degree of comfort to the Egyptian government.
101
