Morocco and the Western Sahara
The 1992 State Department report on Morocco gives a generally fair account of the Moroccan government's continuing violations of human rights. However, it fails to substantiate its general descriptions of abuses such as torture with discussions of the factors which facilitate the continuation of abuse, thus missing an important opportunity to put the weight of the U.S. government behind measures which could contribute to a lasting improvement in the human rights situation in Morocco. The report may also be faulted for its perfunctory treatment of the disappearances issue, and for a lack of candor when discussing abuses in the Western Sahara. In contrast, the report's discussion of such important issues as legal guarantees of procedural due process and freedom of speech are appropriately critical. The report is com-mendably blunt in pointing out the disappointing lack of achievements in the human rights field emanating from the Royal Consultative Council on Human Rights (CCDH), established in 1990 to make reform recommendations, but, as the report correctly notes, "increasingly manipulated by the government for propaganda purposes."
On December 30, 1991, King Hassan II announced reforms to the Criminal Procedure Code, ostensibly to bring into effect recommendations made by the CCDH. The report should have spent some time discussing why these reforms have been ineffective as the safeguard against arbitrary arrest and torture which they were apparently intended to be, especially in view of the fact that Moroccan officials lauded these reforms as
marking significant progress in respect for human rights in Morocco.
The reforms reduced the maximum period for garde d vue detention in cases related to State Security to eight days, instituted a procedure whereby prosecutors or Juges d'lnstruction were empowered to order medical examinations if marks of alleged torture were visible on a prisoner's body, and provided the right for detainees to have a lawyer present at their first interrogation by a prosecutor, the interrogatoire primaire.
A combination of factors have contributed to the ineffectiveness of these reforms. Firstly, lawyers continued to be denied access to their clients during the first days of detention when torture is most likely to take place. Secondly, in many cases lawyers were not informed of the date of the interrogatoire primaire so detainees were routinely denied access to lawyers beyond the eight day garde d vue limit. Thirdly, Amnesty International reports that it is not aware of any case where a prosecutor or a Juge d'lnstruction has exercised their powers to order a medical examination on the basis of a complaint of torture. Additionally, in the Western Sahara region, garde d vue detention procedures continued to be disregarded by police.
The failure of judicial officials to order investigations into allegations of torture is part of a broader culture of impunity which the report refers to only in passing. The report should have mentioned that no visible action was taken by the authorities to investigate four deaths in custody
258
Morocco
which took place in 1991 in circumstances which suggest that torture or ill-treatment may have been the cause of death. It does mention, although out of context, the investigation into the fifth death, where the trial of police officers implicated in the death has been postponed indefinitely. If torture in Morocco is to be brought under control, the authorities need to make it clear to police officers that torturers will not escape punishment. In this regard, the report should have remarked on Morocco's failure to ratify the UN Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and on the government's entering of a reservation under Article 28 in signing (but not ratifying) the Convention preventing the Committee against Torture from investigating reports that torture is systematically practiced.
The most glaring example of official impunity, which is glossed over in the report, is the government's refusal to account for the 33 out of 63 former prisoners of the notorious Tazmamert secret detention center who died from inadequate nutrition and hygiene, lack of medical care and neglect while held indefinitely in solitary confinement in dark cells with no access to the outside world in the prison fortress in the foothills of the Atlas Mountains. Many of the dead had finished serving their allotted prison terms but were not released. For years, the Moroccan authorities denied the existence of Tazmamert until announcing its closure and the release of its 30 surviving inmates in 1991. With the release of the prisoners the story of Tazmamert, a place where prisoners were intended to die slowly and never to be heard from again, has come to be known, but the official
view of the matter as expressed by King Hassan in 1992 was: "The Chapter is closed. It existed. It no longer does. That's all." Such gross abuse cannot be allowed to go unpunished, and the State Department should have taken the opportunity to state categorically that those responsible for the horrors of Tazmamert should be brought to justice.
Despite the release of 270 of the "disappeared" in 1991, hundreds more of the government's political opponents who are believed to be held or to have died in secret detention, remain unaccounted for. Prior to their release the government denied the existence of the 270 released "disappeared," so its protestations that it holds no more secret detainees should be called into question. The report fails to do this, mentioning only that "Moroccan Human Rights groups" continued to assert that not all of the "disappeared" have been accounted for. The State Department should have made its own assessment of this assertion, which international human rights groups, including Amnesty International, believe to be credible.
Instead of becoming the watchdog for human rights abuses that was its mandate, the Royal Consultative Council on Human Rights (CCDH) has become more of a rubber stamp for the kingdom's various denials and refusals to cooperate with human rights organizations both inside and outside Morocco. The CCDH showed deference to the official line that the government holds no political prisoners after several Moroccan human rights groups submitted lists of names compiled in June and August. Because Moroccan law criminalizes the expression of certain political views, prisoners who have, for
259
Morocco
example, doubted Moroccan sovereignty over the Western Sahara or criticized governmental institutions are categorized as criminals.
The CCDH offered no explanation for its failure to follow up on abuses after the Fez riots in 1990. The report notes that the inquiry into the riots got bogged down in inter-organizational bickering and the lack of cooperation from officials involved. Clearly, the Council is denied the authority to carry out independent review of human rights abuse claims. While the King has publicly endorsed many of the group's recommendations on improving prison conditions and procedural due process, the report points out the inconsistent adherence to and the evident lack of enforcement of the new rules. One wishes only that the report would condemn such abuses in bolder terms.
The Western Sahara
Restraint is apparent in the report's handling of alleged abuses in the Western Sahara. Morocco's documented mistreatment of advocates of Western Saharan independence is treated gingerly in the report, as if the State Department were reluctant to identify and condemn cases of abuse. The kingdom has invested disproportionately heavily in the Western Sahara and has succeeded in linking the latter's economy to its own. It has offered financial incentives to Moroccans to relocate to the region in an effort to buttress the region's support for the King and guarantee the outcome of a referendum on the region's sovereignty to which Morocco has grudgingly agreed. But efforts to enhance the region's economic viability and Morocco's status as an
important U.S. ally should not blind the State Department to the human rights abuses reported there in past and present. At its harshest, the report considers Morocco's denials of abuse "questionable."
The report notes the accusations of human rights abuses levelled by both sides to the conflict and points out the difficulty of verifying alleged offenses, but its account of the numerous arrests, incommunicado detentions, "disappearances" or secret trials documented by reputable international human rights organizations, notably Amnesty International, is far too brief. Only brief mention is made of those Sahrawis arrested and detained after demonstrations in Assa and Smara in the fall of 1992. Amnesty International has reported that hundreds of other Sahrawis continue to be held while many of those released in June 1991 suffer from deteriorated health due to their incarceration. No recompense has been offered to those who have been freed without charge or trial.
The State Department should have given examples of the many individuals suspected of sympathizing with the Sah-rawi cause subjected to arbitrary detention. Amnesty International reported the case of a Sahrawi bank clerk, Bella Ma' El Ainain, detained at his bank in Agadir in September 1991 after he had allowed a Swiss journalist to use the bank's fax machine to file his copy. He was released in January 1992 after more than four months of incommunicado detention without charge or trial.
Despite the above criticism of the report, there is much that is accurate and
260
Morocco
comprehensive. Particularly informative is its treatment of Noubir Amaoui, the labor leader arrested in November when an interview he had given eight months before was deemed defamatory of the government and automatically criminal. His arrest, trial, the subsequent attacks on journalists covering the case, the harassment and arrest of opposition newspaper editors for their advocacy on behalf of Mr. Amaoui and the mistreatment of the lawyers representing him, are all given comprehensive attention in the report.
Just as in 1990 when human rights advocates had great expectations at the appointment of the CCDH, 1992 saw hopes raised because of the referendum on constitutional reform and Parliamentary and local elections. Unfortunately, the effects of the referendum, like the CCDH before it, were superficial. To its credit, the report recognizes at the outset that, although in theory the reform granted more power to the Prime Minister, "ultimate authority remains with the King, who appoints and dismisses the Prime Minister and who may dissolve Parliament and rule by decree." King Hassan has proven to be a master at diversionary tactics in the Western Sahara conflict. It would appear that he employs his talents well here by presenting an illusion of political participation while maintaining complete control over the political process. In the referendum and elections, he was deftly assisted by the Interior Ministry, which managed to get a 97.27% turnout for the vote with 99.96% in favor of the King's recommendations. The report mentions too politely that the "result [was] widely challenged by opposition and other observers."
While meaningful amendments to the Constitution would be welcome if they lead to greater democratic freedoms, to date they have been mainly for propaganda purposes. The State Department report, while aware of the perversion of political rights in Morocco, is unfortunately too timid in reprimanding them.
261
