Estonia
The State Department's 1992 report continues its comprehensive coverage of Estonia's progress toward full independence and democratic reform, after a previous year of dramatic change bringing full renewed independence, followed by Estonia's entry into the United Nations and the 51-country Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE). The year 1992 brought a referendum on the new Constitution on June 28; elections of a new parliament, the Riigikogu or State Assembly on September 20; and the election of President Lennart Meri upon its first meeting in 52 years, October 5.
The report covers the rapid and impressive, if in places uneven, constitutional, judicial and legal reforms. They promise, if fully implemented, greatly enhanced protection of human rights to freedom and due process in Estonia. The scope of the report this year, no less than last year, is particularly commendable in light of the difficulty of monitoring human rights violations due to the breakup of the former Soviet Union.
At the same time, the report makes light of economic difficulties. It ignores their implications for human rights and inter-communal tensions. Second, the report once again avoids a direct assessment of the citizenship and language laws' conformity with international human rights standards. Third, perhaps because of its mandated format, it omits conclusions as to promising ways to increase protection of minority rights and resolve conflicts over those rights. Fourth, it pays insufficient attention to
the question of Russian troop withdrawals.
On the economic side, the report does not point out that increased poverty hampers progress in remedying deficiencies in both the general protection of human rights and in the realization and reform of the citizenship law. The report mentions Estonia's successful currency reforms introducing the convertible kroon, and a reorientation of trade patterns increasingly from the East toward the West. This rosy economic picture understates the governmental deficits and general deterioration in living standards associated with the difficulties of conversion from the Soviet planned economy to a market economy, inflation and the disruption of supplies of fuel and other essentials brought about by the sundering of old intra-Soviet trade ties centered on Moscow.
"There has been rising unemployment," the report says, "although the level remained manageable." In theory, perhaps. In practice, the rising unemployment and its location make resolution of issues such as rights to citizenship all the more urgent a part of a needed rapprochement between the government and its resident non-citizen minority. Much of the industry Moscow planted in Estonia forms an obsolete rust belt, bringing especially high unemployment among the Russian-speaking, immigrant 38.5% of the population of 1.566 million. Russians make up 30%; other groups including Ukrainians, Belarussians, Finns, Jews, etc., make up the other eight or so percent of the population, according to the
113
Estonia
1989 census. This may be compared with eight percent Russians and about a 15% non-Estonian minority before the 1940 Soviet occupation. Russian-speakers are concentrated in the capital Tallinn (half the city's population) and the northeast (80% of the population and over 90% in the Russian-speaking cities of Narva, Sillamae and Khotla-Jarve). Unemployment hits the Russian speakers especially hard because of their employment mainly in plants facing layoffs, as well as possible bankruptcies and shutdowns.
The CSCE mission invited to Estonia investigated there from December 2-5, 1992 and found "no substantiated complaints" of discrimination in violation of the laws. Complaints abound, though, about the laws themselves, especially about the citizenship law. It reflects a compromise between the aims of assuring Estonian national survival in the wake of a politically and demographically traumatic occupation complete with deportations, and the aim of providing access to citizenship and equality in economic, social and cultural life so as to meet standards of human rights and promote the integration of Russian-speakers into Estonian society.
Many Russian-speakers, especially recent immigrants, formed a separate community within Estonia, with their own schools (which did not teach Estonian). They enjoyed favored access to housing, concentrated in the industrial sector implanted by Moscow. The separation is far from complete, however. Forty percent of Russian-speakers voted for independence in the March 1991 referendum. Wives of Estonians may become citizens
automatically. An estimated 100,000 ethnic Russians automatically became Russian nationals. For the rest, Soviet citizenship disappeared, and for most of them, the republic citizenship as well.
This was bad news for Russian-speakers. Many of them failed to qualify for automatic citizenship under the restored and amended 1938 citizenship law. According to the law, persons acquire Estonian citizenship automatically who 1) held citizenship of Estonia on June 16, 1940 (the date of Soviet occupation), 2) their descendants, 3) females married to an Estonian citizen and their children (but not males married to female Estonian citizens, discrimination in violation of Article 2 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)), 4) illegitimate children of non-citizen mothers if the father is a citizen and recognizes them, 5) children who are adopted by Estonian citizens, and 6) children born of stateless (and not formerly Soviet) persons in Estonia.
For the rest of the population, there is the path of naturalization. Naturalization requirements include two years of residence before applying and one more year's residence in a waiting period before citizenship is granted, knowledge of the Estonian language (a difficult hurdle for many Russian-speakers), and then swearing an oath of allegiance to the Republic of Estonia and the Constitutional State Order.
Persons are exempted from the naturalization requirements who have been found to have performed exceptional services to Estonia or enjoy wide fame, or stateless persons (not formerly Soviet
114
Estonia
citizens, in the Estonian meaning) who have permanently resided in Estonia for 10 years, beginning March 30, 1990. Persons are exempted from the two-year residence and one-year waiting period who applied for citizenship prior to the elections to the Estonian Congress in 1990.
The starting date for residency was March 30, 1990. Hence the earliest that aliens might apply for citizenship was April 1, 1992, and the earliest they might receive it, April 1, 1993. Not counting children and non-ethnic Estonians already citizens, this left about 30% of the population, 440,000 adult persons, legally disenfranchised in the elections of September 20, 1992 to the new parliament, the Riigikogu (State Assembly) when it met on October 5 for the first time in 52 years. Also, Russian-speakers were unrepresented among its 101 deputies. According to Estonian laws, only citizens may vote in national elections.
By the end of 1992, 25,000 persons had applied for and received Russian citizenship. Many fewer, 7,571 persons, had filed applications for Estonian citizenship. Estonian citizenship had been granted automatically, without application conditions, to 5,417 persons: 3,989 ethnic Estonians; 465 ethnic non-Estonians for providing services of particular value to Estonia; and 963 ethnic non-Estonians exempted from the two-year residency provision because they applied for citizenship prior to the 1990 elections to the Congress of Estonia (the body made up of and elected by pre-occupation citizens and their descendants).
The number of citizenship applica-
tions has been reduced by the stiff language requirement for citizenship. That requirement has yet to be clearly spelled out, widely disseminated, and provided for by adequate language training courses. Conceding this, representatives of the Estonian government have cited lack of funds as one reason for an admittedly inadequate program of Estonian language training.
The Russian parliament, in its resolution of July 17 on infringements of human rights in Estonia, and the Russian government, in its complaints to Estonia and the United Nations, have claimed that the citizenship law violates the human rights of the Russian-speaking minority. The Estonian government has maintained that departures from principles of virtually automatic citizenship for all residents are essential for the survival of Estonian language, ethnicity and statehood. It maintains that the citizenship requirements are liberal by international standards. This would be true if the non-Estonians affected were new immigrants. But they are not.
According to Article 24-3 of the ICCPR, "every child has the right to acquire a nationality." That means, the CSCE mission points out, the right not to be left stateless at birth by the country in which it resides. Estonian law does not yet live up to this standard.
Human rights groups have not pinpointed other outright violations of specific international human rights standards. They have, however, criticized the exclusionary nature for minorities of the citizenship laws' residence requirements, and of their difficult language requirements.
115
Estonia
Laws should live up to the spirit, as well as the letter, of international standards by adjusting to special circumstances such as the settlement of most immigrants in Estonia before it regained independence, and the importance of reasonable adjustments in the law for the sake of social peace in a renewed, but not entirely continuous Estonia.
In this regard, the CSCE mission draft report notes the special circumstances created by the sudden statelessness of the immigrant minority: "It appears that what could be considered as liberal under conditions of continued statehood," says the draft, "does not fully meet the requirements of a society whose ethnic composition has dramatically changed during 50 years of Soviet rule." The report draft expresses concern at the expectation of "Estonian officials that a considerable share of the Russian-speaking population in their country would remain stateless for a long time -- unless they become resident foreign citizens. At the same time, it was equally concerned about the attitude of some Russian-speaking local authorities who had apparently done very little to prepare their populations for the changes brought about by the restoration of Estonian independence and to prepare them for citizenship." The mission came away with an overall impression "of uncertainty, of 'ample grey zones' still to be filled with more detailed legislation, and of a poor level of information on both sides."
Citizenship law denies citizenship to foreign military personnel on active service, a reasonable break with the Soviet era. It denies citizenship also to 1) persons who have been in the employ of the
security and intelligence organizations of the USSR, 2) persons who have been convicted of serious criminal offenses against persons or who have a criminal record of repeated convictions for felonies, and 3) persons lacking a steady legal income. Exclusions (1) and (2) have been criticized as violations, respectively, of human rights to due process and to be spared double jeopardy. The exclusion of persons lacking a steady income leaves non-Russian-speakers in special jeopardy; they form the largest group among the newly unemployed and the 50,000 persons on involuntary furlough without pay.
The Constitution, Articles 8-55, and laws of Estonia guarantee equal rights to all residents regardless of ethnicity or citizenship in the enjoyment of their civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, in conformity, the CSCE mission found, with the two international UN covenants of 1966 and "modern human rights standards in general." Non-citizens have equal rights to participate in privatization of housing and commercial and agricultural property, except for the ownership of certain categories of property specified. Only citizens may own land. Non-citizen residents' Soviet passports were ruled valid for foreign travel until September 1, 1993, after which the non-citizens will require new identification cards and aliens' passports if they are to retain freedom of movement abroad. Unusually, non-citizens may vote in local elections, though what offices they may hold other than positions now barred to non-citizens is not clear.
Language legislation meets international standards of human rights insofar as it protects the right of ethnic minorities
116
Estonia
to their native language and cultures. So far, this is the case in education where proportional funding for Russian schools has continued.
At the same time, the language law of February 1, 1989, together with the enabling act of June 14, 1989, makes the passage of a test in the Estonian language by 1993 a condition for holding the wide range of jobs requiring communication with other individuals in both public and private organizations. As an exception, where more than half the local population speak a language other than Estonian, inhabitants may receive official information in that language, and local government may be conducted in that language. In the context of scarce resources for expanding Estonian language training, the law conflicts with the right to equality in the enjoyment of economic and social rights regardless of language, as specified in Article 2 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
Estonia does not deny that an issue exists. It has discussed the issue with human rights advocates including representatives of the Lawyers Committee. On September 28, 1992 it invited the CSCE mission from the Office of Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, whose report is cited here. International observers monitored the September elections. There have been visits by various human rights organizations and a delegation from the Council of Europe. On December 10, President Meri established a Human Rights Institute to follow up on the state of individual and collective rights in Estonia and to provide information to the international community.
Among the policies to resolve human rights issues just covered, should be the funding, with foreign assistance, of the expansion of intensified Estonian language training in schools and in adult training courses. An observers' committee from the Council of Europe unanimously found the 1992 elections to be fair and free. If a large part of the population is not to be excluded from the accelerated elections of 1995, as Council of Europe observers urge they not be, then language requirements for citizenship should be made clearer and less severe, with due attention also to the age and status of applicants.
Men married to Estonian citizens should be exempted from the three-year wait and language requirement for citizenship, as are women so married to male citizens. The government should follow through on its stated intention to allow 40,000 Russians who applied for citizenship before February 1990 to receive it without a language test. Children who were born in Estonia and schooled there should be allowed to apply without the one-year waiting period after the application. The government was considering granting citizenship to all those born in Estonia. This it should do. It would affect 172,000 non-citizens. To live up to international human rights standards, stateless children born and resident in Estonia should acquire Estonian citizenship from birth.
Language requirements for private jobs should be eliminated, even while the availability of Estonian instruction is significantly increased. The government should see to it that non-citizen residents receive legal confirmation of their resident
117
Estonia
status and alien travel passports upon expiration of their Soviet passports. Government and civic leaders should keep their constituencies better informed on issues of minority rights and continue their efforts at increasing inter-communal cooperation.
As the CSCE mission admonishes, "the majority population in Estonia will have to adjust to the continuing presence of a Russian-language minority in the country, while the minority must adjust to the requirements of living as a loyal national minority in independent Estonia." Foreign Minister Velliste said that "(t]he safer Estonians feel about their independence, the more convinced they are that no one will enslave them again, the more likelihood they will be more generous." Conversely, the more generous they are, within reasonable bounds, the safer Estonians will be able to feel alongside their large but as yet unabsorbed immigrant minority.
The citizenship laws prompted expressions of concern from groups such as Freedom House and Helsinki Watch. The past year did not see the country succeed fully as yet in reconciling the goal of equal rights for all with the goal of reasserting and protecting Estonian nationhood. One promising initiative was the new dialogue between the government and Russian-speaking leaders of the economically troubled and disaffected northeast.
As tensions abated, Russian troop withdrawals and fruitful talks about them continued, despite President Yeltsin's statement of October 29 about halting the withdrawals. There were 9,000
troops left at year's end compared with 50,000 after the attempted coup of August 1991. Barring a reactionary swing in Russian government, withdrawals could continue into 1993. The previous government took steps to curb attacks on Russian troops by Kaitseliit, the Estonian armed militia defense force. International assistance could reduce tensions in the country by speeding the construction of housing for repatriated Russian troops and their families.
To sum up, the State Department's report describes the rights situation in helpful detail. On the other hand, it falls short on analysis of some disturbing implications, for human rights, national unity and social peace, of the direction being taken in language and citizenship laws. The potential for infringements of the rights of the non-indigenous population of Estonia results from the struggle of a well-intentioned democratic government to shake off the trappings of occupation and to protect Estonian ethnicity and statehood from extinction.
118
