Ethiopia
The State Department report adequately describes general human rights conditions and identifies most major reported incidents of human rights violations in Ethiopia during 1992. The country remained unstable as the coalition of ethnic-based insurgencies that took power in 1991 nominally struggled to define shared power bases, establish an effective police system and hold general elections. Each of these efforts suffered major setbacks, and the State Department report provides many of the details of those setbacks. In general, the report is fair, balanced and complete. In some cases, however, it fails to look beyond the reported facts to assess their meaning and implications for the overall human rights situation in Ethiopia. The report also occasionally recounts the government's stated intentions and goals without critically examining whether progress has been made toward achieving those goals.
Since the overthrow of the Mengistu regime in 1991, Ethiopia has been ruled by a transitional government (TG) dominated by the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF). One of the most significant events to occur in Ethiopia during 1992 was the effort by EPRDF and other factions to hold local and regional elections in June.
The report appropriately concludes that these elections were "flawed by numerous irregularities, including fraud, harassment, intimidation, and political assassination." Abuses reached such a level that several political parties abandoned their participation in the elections,
including one of the principal participants, the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF). But the report makes no effort to show how, or even whether, the TG plans to cure these fundamental defects. In fact, published reports suggest that the TG will neither fully acknowledge nor rectify the sweeping election irregularities.
The EPRDF originally dismissed criticism of the June elections, and TG President Meles Zenawi claimed the elections had been a great success and had given him new moral authority. While the EPRDF eventually set up an Election Review Board in response to international criticism, it later announced that elected regional legislative committees would take office and begin work in all regions, regardless of any findings of fraud or irregularity by the Review Board.
This suggests a lack of sensitivity to the grave problems that surfaced during the June election, and casts doubt on the TG's commitment to the changes that must take place if Ethiopia's human rights conditions are to improve. But the report fails to assess the TG's attitude toward the election abuses, and fails to report on what measures, if any, the TG will take to correct past abuses and guard against future problems. Serious violations of freedom of expression, association and assembly occurred during the campaign and future observance of these internationally guaranteed rights is questionable. Vet the report provides no insight into the TG's commitment to reversing the oppression and violence that was associated with the election and assuring full and fair public participation in fundamental deci-
119
Ethiopia
sions facing the nation.
The report also fails to explore the TG's attitude toward other accounts of human rights violations, including widely reported incidents of political and ethnic violence unconnected with the election. EPRDF officials have either denied or dismissed the significance of violations reported by independent organizations, even in the face of substantial evidence.
For example, in interviews during September 1992, President Zenawi did not deny shutting down the political offices of the OLF, in effect banning their political and social activity. Zenawi offered no explanation except that the OLF had "miscalculated" by withdrawing from the TG. He also reportedly denied that Tigreans (the predominant ethnic group in the EPRDF) had persecuted Oromos or other ethnic groups, and claimed that the arrest of 12,000 OLF members was justified because they were armed and "acting like policemen and terrorizing people." In January 1993, the British Broadcasting Corporation reported that the Ethiopian Foreign Minister claimed that reports of human rights abuses are "false and without foundation. On the contrary, human rights are now being respected in Ethiopia. Real peace and democracy have arrived in Ethiopia."
The fact that Ethiopia's TG denies the existence or diminishes the significance of the violations described in the report is important because it speaks to the prospect for change in the future. But the report fails to describe this official attitude, instead emphasizing the TG's "intention" to "institute the rule of law," and to create a "democratic multiparty sys-
tem."
The report also fails to examine other TG actions that have been criticized as human rights violations, but that the TG claims are benign or even justified. The report describes the detention without charge of approximately 19,000 persons, including hundreds of women and children, identified in the report simply as "OLF fighters." The report states that the TG was "still conducting reeducation classes" for these prisoners at the detention centers. While unconfirmed reports in 1993 claim that the majority of these detainees have been released, the report did not explain what these so-called "reeducation" classes were, nor reveal the authority under which the TG claimed to act.
The report also categorically states that "[pjeople spoke freely in 1992," but provides no support for that claim. In fact, published accounts from numerous sources, including portions of the report itself, indicate that political and ethnic pressures constrained speech in Ethiopia in 1992. In a country where political assassination was practiced, where arrest and detention was usually based on ethnicity and party affiliation, where armed factions of the governing party roamed the streets and answered to no judicial authority, and where extrajudicial killings were rampant, it is difficult to imagine that the people spoke freely.
The report also fails to explore the apparent ethnic basis for much of the violence and abuse that occurred in Ethiopia in 1992. The report details numerous instances where persons associated with the OLF, one of the major political fac-
120
Ethiopia
tions representing the interests of Oromo people, suffered at the hands of the TG, but the report does not connect that treatment to ethnic prejudices. Instead, the report merely states that "some ethnic groups, such as the Oromos . . . claim that they have been dominated for hundreds of years. . . The report then recites without analysis or evaluation a government policy statement asserting that "the declared aim of the TG is to promote the interests of all ethnic groups through a federal system of government."
The ruling EPRDF is not alone in having been accused of ethnic and political abuses, and to some extent Oromo and other factions share responsibility for the violence. But the EPRDF, at least for now, controls the apparatus of government and thus bears primary responsibility for assuring peace and observance of human rights. Yet the TG has not taken meaningful steps to create an inclusive federal government. To the contrary, the evidence suggests that the TG has been exclusionary and even intolerant of ethnicities that are not represented in the TG. The report itself details numerous instances of violence and other human rights violations against Oromos, but does not examine whether underlying prejudice may account for the incidents. According to broadcasts by the Voice of Oromo, the violence against Oromo people is aimed at them at least in part because of their ethnicity. In addition, members of the Amhara tribe have also suffered violent attacks. In one incident, more than 150 Amharans, including 50 women and children who had escaped to a church, were reportedly massacred by EPRDF agents on June 3, 1992.
Because political lines in Ethiopia are often drawn along ethnic lines, it is not always clear whether the motive for oppression is political or ethnic. Nonetheless, because of the potential existence and corresponding dangers of ethnically-based violence, the report could have explored the issue in more detail. Regardless of motivation, the acts described in the report are clear violations of international human rights standards and the charges of ethnic violence should not be ignored.
121
