United Kingdom
This year's report on the United Kingdom contains some isolated improvements, but on the whole it is superficial and, in certain important respects, misleading. In summarizing citizens' rights, the State Department has maintained its practice of emphasizing the formal legal guarantees under law without reflecting the scope or extent of the violations which are known to take place in practice. Where areas of concern are undeniable, the report has a tendency to offer uncritical endorsement of government claims that adequate measures are being taken to rectify the position.
Once again the report suffers from not devoting a separate section to the jurisdiction of Northern Ireland. Instead, its comments are interspersed among the paragraphs covering the whole of the United Kingdom, thereby diluting the discussion of Northern Ireland and giving less than full attention to human rights problems in Britain. The separate status of the Scottish legal system is ignored completely.
Great Britain
The overwhelming human rights issue in the United Kingdom during 1992 was the deepening crisis of confidence in the criminal justice system. While this issue is mentioned in certain passages of the report, it does not occupy the prominent position it deserves. In the wake of a series of major miscarriages of justice, the field of concern includes structural corruption in the police force, the apparent inability of the criminal courts to convict the guilty and acquit the inno-
cent, and the failure of the appeals system to rectify mistakes. The penal system too has become a major human rights embarrassment to the United Kingdom government. With the publication in June of a Helsinki Watch report on prison conditions in the United Kingdom (which the report fails to mention), international concern has been focused on the extreme overcrowding and lack of sanitation in most British prisons. The State Department report simply fails to reflect the importance of these issues.
In its review of extrajudicial killings, the report concentrates exclusively on the use of lethal force by the security services in Northern Ireland, which it places firmly in the context of terrorist violence. No mention is made of the use of lethal force by civilian police forces in England and Wales. In 1992, there were three reported fatal shootings by police officers in the course of their duty and 48 reported deaths in police custody. While these deaths may have resulted from a variety of causes not necessarily related to police misconduct, this information should have been reported and assessed.
The report confidently asserts that British laws forbid torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment of prisoners, and that "prison facilities in the UK are generally good." As events during 1992 clearly demonstrated, this is a wholly misleading statement of the present state of the British penal system. There are three types of penal establishments in England and Wales: Adult Prisons; Special Hospitals for offenders suffering from the most serious forms of
405
United Kingdom
mental disorder; and Young Offender Institutions for those under 21. By the middle of 1992, conditions in each type of establishment had become a cause for very serious concern.
No serious review of prison conditions in the United Kingdom could omit reference to the 1990 prison riots, the worst prison disturbances in British history, the effects of which continue to the present. Yet the State Department inexplicably continues to fail to discuss this key event, as it did in the 1990 and 1991 reports. The 1990 unrest spread quickly and resulted in major structural damage and the closure of several prisons. An inquiry set up under the chairmanship of Lord Justice Woolf found substantial grounds for complaint by prisoners about the conditions under which they were held. The report, published in January 1991, referred to overcrowding and lack of sanitation as "uncivilized symptoms of an archaic system," and pointed out that the Prison Service failed to treat prisoners "with humanity and fairness." The Woolf report made a wide range of recommendations, many of which have been rejected or delayed by the government on cost grounds.
The State Department does not repeat the claim made in its 1990 report that the United Kingdom government is effecting "an extensive long term program to improve overall prison conditions." Despite the government's expressed commitment to a reduction in overcrowding, the total prison population in the United Kingdom continued to rise during 1992, standing at 52,879 in July. A survey conducted by the National Association for the Care and Resettlement of
Offenders showed that in July, 32 prisons were currently holding prisoners in excess of their "certified accommodation," and 31 of them had more than 41% overcrowding.
The poverty of resources in the prison system was emphasized in the Helsinki Watch report. It condemned the United Kingdom for having "very poor conditions at all local prisons" and described the 1990 riots as "an urgent appeal to government leaders for fundamental reform." The regime in all but one of the prisons visited by the delegation involved overcrowding, lack of in-cell plumbing, with prisoners being locked up in their cells for most of the day. Helsinki Watch concluded that even if implemented, government proposals for reform were inadequate, and commented that "large scale uprisings and loss of life have been necessary to bring about even limited improvements in prison conditions in the United Kingdom." Recommendations in the report included the urgent improvement of sanitary conditions, the elimination of insect infestation and the implementation of immediate measures to ease overcrowding.
Following a similar report by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) (also not mentioned in the report), a prisoner has made an application under the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms which is presently being examined by the European Commission of Human Rights. The application was introduced in April and alleges that conditions of overcrowding and poor sanitation at three British pris-
406
United Kingdom
ons constitute a violation of the European Convention. The conditions in the prisons in question were described as "inhuman and degrading" in the CPT report and as "degrading, humiliating and deadening" by the United Kingdom government's own Prisons Inspectorate.
Such serious criticism has not been restricted to ordinary prisons. Similar concerns have now been officially recognized in relation to offenders sentenced to be detained in one the United Kingdom's three Special Hospitals for mentally disordered offenders. Following a year-long inquiry, a government-appointed committee under the chairmanship of Sir Louis Blom-Cooper QC reported on August 5 that patients at Ashworth Special Hospital had been routinely subjected to "inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment." The committee investigated allegations of physical ill-treatment and neglect, of racial victimization of black patients, and of the dissemination by prison officers of literature supporting the far-right British National Party. The Committee's report described the Ashworth Hospital regime as "brutalizing, stagnant and oppressive" and suggested that the Hospital should be visited by the CPT. The report emphasized that there was a need for a wider review of Special Hospital Service.
The report's section on arbitrary arrest, detention and exile correctly states the principles of law governing the exercise by police officers of their powers of arrest without warrant. However, it fails to point out that there is now widespread recognition in the United Kingdom that these powers are routinely abused.
A survey commissioned by the current Royal Commission on Criminal Justice reported that in an average of 400 cases per year, police malpractice was considered by judges to be serious enough to warrant exclusion of evidence. Public confidence in the integrity of the police has been badly damaged by a series of cases of systemic abuse. A major investigation into corruption in the West Midlands Serious Crime Squad resulted in the disbanding of the squad in 1990. Investigations into perjury and fabrication of evidence by police officers continued, and by the end of 1992 a total of 14 convictions for serious offenses had been quashed as "unsafe and unsatisfactory" by the Court of Appeal. The corruption investigation was supervised by the Police Complaints Authority (PCA), a statutory body established under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act of 1984. However, the mechanics of the investigation, as with all police complaints, were carried out by another police force (the West Yorkshire Constabulary). In all, over 100 complaints were investigated and the PCA has, for the first time, used its powers to alert the Home Secretary to the possibility of miscarriages of justice in order that cases could be referred directly to the Court of Appeal. This is an executive procedure whereby the Home Office can bring a suspected miscarriage before the Court when all other avenues of appeal have been exhausted. By the middle of 1992, eight more cases had been referred to the Court of Appeal in this way.
Against that background, there was considerable public disquiet when, on May 5, the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) announced that none of the
407
United Kingdom
officers involved would face criminal charges, despite the fact that all 14 convictions had been quashed on the basis that police officers had conspired to fabricate evidence. The decision was widely criticized, not only by civil liberties groups, but by senior police officers including Geoffrey Dear, the former Chief Constable of West Midlands. The controversy which followed did little to reassure public concern. The decision prompted the civilian supervisor of the PCA investigation to publicly question the Director's judgment in failing to bring criminal charges and led to the spectacle of the Director defending her decision by writing letters to national newspapers. Following the failure to prosecute, the PCA preferred disciplinary charges against the officers. Twenty-eight officers faced charges of falsehood under police discipline code; a further 20 charges could not be pursued because officers had left the force voluntarily. An indication of the scale of the problem can be gauged from the fact that 102 officers were given "formal warnings" for breaches and irregularities arising out of the investigation.
A similar corruption inquiry has since begun at a central London police station. In November, following "Operation Jackpot," described by the Metropolitan Police as "the most wide-ranging corruption inquiry in the Met for 20 years," a Scotland Yard internal investigation team sent a report to the DPP naming 25 officers in connection with allegations of drug dealing, fabrication of evidence, perjury and conspiracy to pervert the course of justice. Seven major criminal convictions were overturned on appeal because police officers involved in the investigation of the cases had been discredited. Several
police officers were charged with criminal offenses.
Nevertheless, during 1992 concern continued to mount over effectiveness and independence of the PCA in dealing with this type of malpractice. Though nominally independent, the civilian PCA supervises only a proportion of complaints and often works closely in conjunction with the police force under investigation. Despite a steady rise in the volume of official complaints against the police, the number of cases in which action was taken against officers remained extremely low; out of a total of 19,289 complaints made during 1992, disciplinary charges were preferred in only 262 cases (1.3%).
In the absence of an effective and fully independent complaints procedure, most citizens are advised by lawyers to pursue grievances by issuing a civil suit for compensation. According to figures released by the Home Office in November, the Metropolitan police (London area) alone paid almost half a million pounds in compensation for police misconduct claims during the first nine months of 1992. Three examples are: £50,000 (US$74,750) awarded by Croydon County Court in February 1992 to Marie Burke, a 73-year-old black woman who was assaulted, racially abused, unlawfully arrested and maliciously prosecuted; £70,000 (US$104,650) paid in settlement to Frank Critchlow, a black community leader from the Notting Hill area of London whose community center was a target of a campaign of harassment culminating in the planting of heroin on him during a police raid; and £55,000 (US-$82,225) paid out to two New Zealand
408
United Kingdom
tourists violently assaulted by police officers in the Earls Court area of London, one of whom suffered a broken leg and severe testicular injuries. The same pattern is repeated for other police forces.
The report also fails to note that in January 1992 the results of an inquiry into the internment of 90 Arab civilians resident in the United Kingdom at the beginning of the Gulf War confirmed that the detentions were unjustified but recommended no disciplinary action against immigration officials, special branch officers and intelligence service officers involved.
The State Department report focuses inadequate attention on the frequency with which defendants are remanded in custody while awaiting trial, stating that "generally persons charged with what British law defines as 'non-serious' offenses may be released on bail." This bland assertion masks a growing problem. Between 1990 and 1992, the jail population rose by nine percent, the largest growth area being people remanded in custody awaiting trial. According to research published in April by the highly respected non-governmental organization the Howard League for Penal Reform, six out of 10 people jailed on remand awaiting trial are acquitted or given non-custodial sentences. The continuance of the practice of detaining very large numbers of unconvicted persons for periods of up to 18 months was condemned by the Howard League as a "gross violation of human rights." In February 1992, figures released by Home Office revealed that in the previous 12-month period 11 males under 25 years of age had committed suicide while on remand awaiting trial.
Moreover, the report makes no reference to the fact that due to an overflow of prisoners within the prison system, a significant number of those detained on remand are held in police stations. As previous critiques have noted, these cells are designed to be used for detention for hours rather than days or weeks. The facilities are generally worse than in the most overcrowded prison. They provide no opportunity for adequate exercise or for the provision of a nutritious diet, lack bedding and washing facilities and often lack natural light. Above all, they are usually very cramped. Long-term detention in police cells has been described by the Court of Appeal as "intolerable" (Mid-dleweek v. Metropolitan Police Commissioner). The figure for prisoners detained at police stations is 20 times higher than it was in 1982, with a daily average in August 1992 of over 1,000 prisoners.
The report also does not mention that a right not to be subjected to arbitrary strip searches (even where no physical force was used) was recognized for the first time in June when a court awarded damages to two people ordered by prison officers to remove their clothes for a full search before being permitted to enter a prison to visit a relative. The Liverpool County Court recognized a new damages claim for "unlawfully inducing a person to remove his/her clothes," citing the principle that a person's body is inviolate. The United Kingdom government, which had opposed the claim, has not sought to appeal the ruling.
In its fair trial discussion, the report refers to the cases of the Birmingham Six, the Guildford Four, the Maguire Seven and Judith Ward -- all imprisoned for
409
United Kingdom
terrorist offenses on unsound evidence involving coerced or fabricated confessions, unreliable forensic evidence and the withholding from the defense of material evidence which could have established the defendant's innocence at trial. In each case, the defendants had served many years in prison for crimes they did not commit. The report correctly states that the case of the Birmingham Six was the immediate impetus behind the creation of the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice, but fails to point out the significance of the appointment of a Royal Commission. The fact that this is the first such commission to be appointed for more than 10 years is an indication of the gravity of the problem confronting the criminal justice system in the United Kingdom.
During 1992 further significant miscarriages came to light. For example, in February the Court of Appeal freed Stephan Kizko, a man of borderline intelligence who had spent 15 years in prison for the murder of an 11-year-old child. Evidence which could have proved that he was innocent had not been disclosed to the defense. In December, the convictions of three men for the murder of a Cardiff prostitute were quashed after it was revealed that a confession had been obtained following the intimidation of a vulnerable suspect during 19 interviews over five days. The confession was contradicted by forensic and alibi evidence.
Despite the clear rulings of the Court of Appeal, the report refers to these cases as "apparent" miscarriages of justice and attributes to "critics in the UK and abroad" doubts as to whether the
British system of justice meets international standards of fairness. Moreover, the report wrongly states that "twenty additional convictions have been quashed in non-terrorist cases since 1989." This is a mere fraction of the number of convictions which have been quashed during that period. The gross underestimate has the effect of marginalizing an issue which affects the criminal justice system as a whole. Figures available for 1991 indicate that compensation totalling £2,024,000 (about US$3,026,000) was paid to victims of miscarriages of justice. The number of such cases has become so high that existing procedures for dealing with miscarriages of justice are unable to cope with the volume of work involved.
Where ordinary avenues of appeal have been exhausted, cases involving potential miscarriages of justice may be referred to the Court of Appeal by the Home Secretary. The Home Office department which discharges this function (known as C3 Division) is badly understaffed, with only eight full-time members. During the first nine months of 1992, C3 Division received 510 allegations of wrongful convictions. A survey conducted by the National Association of Probation Officers (NAPO) in January 1992 suggested that there were as many as 700 serving prisoners who were innocent of the crimes for which they had been convicted. The government has not made available the necessary resources to investigate these cases and the performance of C3 Division has been consistently criticized. Because of the extent of the problem, there has been growing support for the creation of an independent statutory body to review potential miscarriages, with the power to refer
410
United Kingdom
appropriate cases directly to the Court of Appeal. In December 1992, the Home Secretary himself indicated that the creation of an agency independent of the government had Home Office support. NAPO sponsored a private members bill in the House of Commons for the establishment of a Miscarriages of Justice Commission.
The concept of a fair trial also involves equality of treatment before the law. Research conducted for the Royal Commission by Dr. Paul Robertshaw of the University of Wales has found that in different parts of the United Kingdom there is a wide disparity (consistent over time) in conviction rates and sentencing. Racial discrimination at all stages of the criminal justice system has now been officially recognized (see below).
The report's commentary on arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home or correspondence is generalized and incomplete. The statement that "the right to privacy is generally respected in both law and custom" is highly questionable. 1992 saw a series of instances in which the domestic law offered no protection against violations of privacy.
In January the existence of a central police index of prostitutes was revealed which stores data on all persons cautioned, charged or convicted of prostitution offenses. In addition, a complaint was made by the National Council for Civil Liberties to the European Commission following disclosure that police forces were compiling a national database of DNA samples from material supplied during the course of criminal investigations, even where the suspect had been
eliminated from police inquiries.
Telephone tapping and the retention of information on individuals by the security forces is usually without legal remedy. Evidence has emerged concerning the routine interception of telephone calls made by a trade unionist, some charities and other individuals not a risk to national security. An application has been introduced to the European Commission for an order for the destruction of information held on two women because of their membership of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament.
In relation to arbitrary interference with correspondence, in March the U.K. government was held by the European Court of Human Rights to be in breach of its obligations under the European Convention in relation to routine screening of prisoners' mail and an unjustified intrusion into a confidential letter passing between a prisoner and his lawyer (Campbell v. U.K.).
The only restrictions on freedom of speech and the press that are referred to in the report arise in the context of support for paramilitary activity in Northern Ireland. Otherwise the report asserts that these freedoms are secured by a strong tradition, an independent press and a democratic political system. The report does not adequately reflect the erosions that have been made into freedom of speech.
With regard to freedom of the press, the report accurately refers to the case of a journalist ordered by the High Court under the Prevention of Terrorism Act to reveal the source of a program about
41 1
United Kingdom
paramilitary activities. No reference is made, however, to the inhibiting effect of libel laws or to the growing government lobby in favor of statutory curbs on press freedom generally. During 1992, the government commissioned a report under the chairmanship of Sir David Calcutt on reform of press regulation. The Calcutt Committee had as its terms of reference an inquiry into the conduct of the press in reporting on private misconduct of public figures, including members of the royal family. Its object was to consider the adequacy of self-regulation and the need for the imposition of external restraints.
The one positive development in this field (also not mentioned by the report) has been brought about by the courts rather than the government. Successive U.K. governments have declined to incorporate the European Convention on Human Rights (which guarantees freedom of expression) into U.K. law. This is despite support for the move from sections of the higher judiciary. However, during 1992 U.K. courts tentatively began to give effect to the Convention on this issue by using its provisions as a guide to the development of the common law. In February, the Court of Appeal recognized that the United Kingdom's extensive libel laws represent a serious potential breach of the right to free speech and an effective obstacle to the publication of critical comment. The court refused to extend the law to enable a local government authority to maintain a civil suit for libel, since any further extension of the existing libel laws would be contrary to the interests of free speech and therefore potentially in violation of the United Kingdom's obligations under the European Convention (Derbyshire County Council v. Times
Newspapers Ltd.).
The government on the other hand remains committed to enforcing restrictions on the disclosure of official information which may generate criticism of the state or state agencies. The best known restriction is contained in the Official Secrets Act of 1990. This measure constitutes an absolute prohibition on the disclosure of protected information even if it discloses misconduct or crime by government agencies. As such, it gives effect to a presumption of secrecy in relation to four categories of information: information which the government considers to be damaging to defense; information entrusted in confidence to other states or international organizations; information concerning the activities of the security and intelligence services; and international relations. The communication of such information is a serious criminal offense and it is no defense for the person concerned to prove that the disclosure was in the public interest or that the information was already in the public domain.
The government interprets the "interests of the State" as being coextensive with the interests of the particular administration in office. This has led the present Conservative Party administration into protracted litigation in various parts of the world in an effort to prevent the publication of the memoirs of a former intelligence service employee, Peter Wright. In the book Spycatcher, Wright claimed that in the course of his work he had participated in a conspiracy within the security services to destabilize the elected Labour Party government of the day. In a parliamentary answer on January 20, 1992,
412
United Kingdom
the government estimated that the cost to the UK taxpayer of the Spycatcher litigation was £2,221,503 (about US-$3,321,000).
Government sponsored restrictions on free speech are not limited to information which is potentially damaging to the nation. In April 1992, the Secretary of State for Health sanctioned the use of "gagging clauses" in employment contracts for health service employees. These clauses make it a dismissable offense to reveal malpractice to the press, however justified the cause for concern may be. Moreover, other state agencies also act within this tradition. In April, a patient at Broadmoor Special Hospital was obliged to bring a claim in the High Court to challenge a hospital ban preventing him from speaking to the press about allegations of abuse of patients and poor conditions at the hospital.
While the report makes reference to the continuing prohibition on the broadcast of direct speech of those who are thought to "solicit, support or invite support" for proscribed terrorist organizations, it does not explain the application of this rule in practice. The ban has not prevented broadcasters from reporting what is said, but merely from broadcasting the voice which says it. This has produced the absurd result that all national television broadcasting companies show pictures of the speaker, with the voice dubbed by an actor. But the application of the ban is capable of working serious injustice. In one instance, it resulted in state broadcasting organizations (BBC TV) replacing the spoken words of a former Ulster MP with subtitles. This attracted censure from a variety of quar-
ters, including former Northern Ireland MP Bernadette McAliskey, since it not only misrepresented her position but it exposed her to very real risk from paramilitary groups (see Northern Ireland discussion below).
The report's review of freedom of assembly and association is uneven. On the question of freedom of association, it correctly states that with the exception of proscribed organizations, this right is generally well recognized. However, there are notable exceptions, particularly for government employees. Certain government employees are not permitted to join trade unions or to take industrial action. In December, following the imposition of a central government ban preventing local government officers from being members of political parties, the National Association of Local Government Officers mounted an unsuccessful legal challenge.
The report's discussion of freedom of assembly is poor, stating only that "(e]x-cept in cases of extreme civil disorder in which public safety is judged to be at risk, the authorities do not exercise their statutory right to limit the freedom of public assembly." Under Section 11 of the Public Order Act of 1986, organizers of any demonstration or procession are required to give notice to the police and will commit a criminal offense if they hold the demonstration without having done so. The police then have a power to impose conditions on the demonstration if they reasonably believe that it well result in "serious disruption to the life of the community" or if its object is "to compel others to do an act they have a right not to do" or vice versa. If these powers are considered insufficient, then
413
United Kingdom
the chief officer of police may apply for a ban. It is not correct to say that the authorities do not exercise these powers. Conditions and bans are frequently imposed on political demonstrations and pickets. It is common practice for the police to require marchers to take a route away from focal areas such as the Houses of Parliament. The Wiltshire police force imposes a blanket ban on all gatherings in the vicinity of the Stonehenge monument every summer in an effort to deter travellers from attending the summer solstice celebrations. Similarly, in August, the Department of Environment and the Foreign Office unveiled proposals to extend noise pollution provisions to prevent political demonstrations from taking place outside foreign embassies in London.
The report's review of freedom of movement lacks detail and is unduly sympathetic to the position of the government. During 1992, the government introduced the Asylum Bill which is aimed at effecting a drastic reduction in the numbers of persons granted political asylum in the United Kingdom. In the face of this legislation, the report's assertion that "the Government makes generous provision for political refugees" is highly misleading. The report seeks to argue, echoing the U.K. government, that the legislation was introduced because the government "was faced with an exponential rise in asylum applications." This is wrong. On average, approximately 1,600 asylum applications were made in the first half of 1992, a considerable drop from the previous year. Even before the new legislation was introduced, less than five percent of applicants were granted asylum.
The report attributes criticism of the Asylum Bill to "human rights groups" which "claim the legislation would undermine Britain's commitment to provide haven for legitimate refugees." But the new law unquestionably places significant obstacles in the path of those seeking asylum, however genuine. Not only does the Act abolish the right of appeal for certain categories of asylum seekers, but those who retain rights of appeal have only two days within which to exercise them. For a person who is newly arrived and is being detained in custody, perhaps unable to speak English and certainly ignorant of English law, the right of appeal will often be illusory. The absence of free legal advice compounds the problem.
In M v. Home Office (1992), the Divisional Court made legal history when it found the Home Secretary guilty of contempt of court for ordering the repatriation of a Zairian asylum seeker in knowing defiance of an interim court order permitting him to remain.
In its discussion of respect for political rights, the assertion that "participation in the political process is open to all parties" again states the formal position without reference to the limitations which operate the franchise. Voting in the United Kingdom relies on a system of registration which is in turn dependent on a citizen having a stable home address. The numbers of homeless and of those living in temporary accommodation effectively disenfranchises a growing proportion of the electorate. In addition, there is compelling evidence that many of those with the very lowest incomes did not register to vote so as to escape liability to
414
United Kingdom
pay the "poll tax." This was a flat rate tax of several hundred pounds annually imposed on all citizens regardless of their ability to pay, and enforceable with up to three months' imprisonment in default of payment. The widespread unpopularity of the tax, which caused urban riots, ultimately resulted in its modification, but not before many potential voters had "disappeared" from official records, including the electoral register. In September 1992, results of the 1991 census (prepared by the Office of Population Census and Surveys) confirmed that 1.8 million voters had vanished from the electoral register. In the year of a General Election such as 1992, the unprecedented scale of this change may have had a significant impact on the election, which produced a victory for the present administration by a narrow majority.
In its discussion of discrimination based on race, sex, religion, language or social status, the report correctly acknowledges that "persons of African and South Asian origin face substantial unofficial discrimination," but should have provided more detail. 1992 saw the first official government recognition of the existence of racial discrimination at all stages of the criminal justice system. A study commissioned by the government and published in May concluded that there was clear evidence of "differential treatment" of Afro-caribbean defendants. Even allowing for age, economic and other social differences, Afro-caribbeans were more likely to be victims of crime, were "significantly more likely than whites to be stopped by the police" and were proportionately more likely to be arrested and charged.
Supplementary research carried out for the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice found that Afro-caribbeans were more likely than whites to be remanded in custody rather than on bail pending trial, despite the fact that a higher proportion of Afro-caribbeans were subsequently found not guilty. And at the sentencing stage, the pattern is repeated. A report published in December by the government sponsored Commission on Racial Equality found that Afro-caribbeans were 17% more likely to receive a prison term than white defendants sentenced for the same offense.
In consequence, Afro-caribbeans are "heavily over represented" in the prison system. Ethnic minority prisoners are 50% more likely to serve their sentences in closed conditions. A Home Office commissioned study of race relations in prison found ethnic differences "suggestive of discrimination" in disciplinary treatment within the prison system, in assessment reports and in the allocation of work and accommodation to ethnic minority prisoners.
By contrast, a survey published in November by the National Association for the Care and Resettlement of Offenders found that ethnic minorities were significantly under represented in all criminal justice agencies, making up just one percent of police officers and prison officers, two percent of solicitors and two percent of magistrates. During 1992, there were no ethnic minority magistrates clerks and only three ethnic minority judges in the whole judicial system.
In regard to worker rights, the government continues to oppose the incorpo-
415
United Kingdom
ration of European minimum standards for employee rights on the ground that such measures inhibit a free market. New legislation to restrict the operation of free trade unions was framed during 1992. The government proposed the introduction of a new legal right for any citizen to take legal action against a trade union engaged in industrial action, and began the abolition of the Wages Councils, which set minimum wages in the lowest paid industries.
Northern Ireland
While the references to Northern Ireland in this year's report display a greater realism and bluntness than in previous reports, there is still scope for considerably more trenchant remarks about the human rights abuses which continue to occur there.
In particular, much greater attention needs to be focused on the extrajudicial killings committed by on-duty security forces during 1992. There were six such killings, not seven as the report alleges; the report is probably including one death caused by an off-duty member of the Royal Irish Rangers when he fired in self-defense at someone shooting at him. This is just three fewer fatalities than the security forces themselves suffered. Four of the six fatalities (Peter Clancy, Kevin Barry O'Donnell, Sean O'Farrell and Patrick Vincent) were acknowledged members of the Provisional Irish Republican Army, killed on February 16 while "on active service" as the PIRA phrases it. They were shot by soldiers in Coalisland while driving away in a truck from a police station which they had just attacked with mortars. The exact circum-
stances of the killings, and in particular why the men were shot rather than arrested, are still being investigated by the police more than a year later. At the very least, this delay suggests a certain lack of cooperation between the investigating police officers and the security force personnel involved in the killings. Because of the ongoing investigation, no inquest has yet taken place.
The death of Peter McBride on September 4 did lead to two British soldiers being charged with murder within 48 hours of the incident. The unarmed 18-year-old was running away from a routine army patrol at the time he was shot. On November 25, 20-year-old Pearse Jordan was shot dead by a police officer after the stolen car he was driving was chased and brought to a halt by undercover police officers; no arms were recovered from the scene. Again a police investigation has still to be concluded.
The Chief Constable of the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) continues to refuse to appoint an officer from another police force to conduct investigations into alleged misconduct by members of his force. The fact that lengthy investigations into deaths at the hands of the security forces are themselves conducted by the security forces in Northern Ireland is a clear breach of the United Nations Principles on the Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extra-Legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions, which require that investigations should be "thorough, prompt and impartial." The fact that more than minimum force is used on occasion and that sometimes no warnings are given even when it is practicable to do so, are acts inconsistent with the
416
United Kingdom
standards laid down by the United Nations Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials. The report is silent on these failures to adhere to international standards.
In 1992, more security force personnel were charged in connection with fatal shootings than in any year of the current troubles. A total of 12 men now face trial, six of them soldiers charged in connection with the deaths of two joy-riding teenagers in September 1990. It was only after considerable pressure from civil liberties groups that two Royal Marine Commandos were finally charged in February 1992 with the 1990 murder of Fergal Carraher and the attempted murder of his brother. In other cases decisions not to press criminal charges have been confirmed, notably in relation to the killing by police officers of joy-rider Gerard Mag-inn in November 1991 and the killing of three men by undercover soldiers outside a betting shop in Belfast in January 1990, a case which has now been taken to the European Commission of Human Rights in Strasbourg. To date, it has proved impossible in Northern Ireland to obtain judicial review of decisions by the Director of Public Prosecutions not to press charges against members of the security forces.
The procedures governing inquests in Northern Ireland are still weighted against the interests of families of victims of security force violence. As highlighted in a report issued in January 1992 by the Belfast-based Committee on the Administration of Justice, inquests are too limited in their scope and too circumscribed in their powers to satisfy legitimate public concern about disputed killings. Never-
theless, a coroner's jury did find in April 1992 that in September 1989 a soldier had fired two shots from close range at a man, Brian Robinson, while he lay unarmed on the ground, and his family have launched a civil suit against the Ministry of Defence as a result. In January 1993 a jury found that Seamus McElwaine, killed by undercover soldiers in 1986, had not been given a chance to surrender and had been shot as he lay injured some five minutes after the initial shooting. The jurors' finding that McElwaine could have been arrested was struck out by the coroner on the basis that it was a matter of opinion and inquest juries can issue findings only on matters of fact, but the case has been referred back to the Director of Public Prosecutions so that he can decide whether criminal charges should be pressed against the soldiers involved. An important inquest into the deaths of three robbers at a West Belfast betting shop in January 1990 began in May 1993, but was adjourned after the Ministry of Defence challenged the coroner's ruling that the Secretary of State's Public Interest Immunity Certificate (preventing the disclosure of security information) was invalid.
The activities of undercover agents were further highlighted in the case of Brian Nelson, a member of the now outlawed Ulster Defence Association (UDA) who also operated as an agent for an intelligence unit of the British army. At his trial for a variety of serious offenses in January 1992, the prosecution, "in the interests and demands of justice," dropped charges of aiding and abetting murder and conspiracy to murder. This meant that the sentence he received for other crimes was just 10 years' imprison-
417
United Kingdom
ment. Many observers were left with the distinct impression that the murder charges were dropped as a "reward" for Nelson's information about UDA activities.
The State Department report glosses over the operation in Northern Ireland of the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act and of the Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act 1991. Although all the figures for 1992 are not yet available, it is clear that in many respects these Acts are seriously infringing human rights and deserve detailed analysis and criticism. Only about one-quarter of the persons arrested under them are charged with an offense and over the last 10 years only 55% of the people eventually tried in the juryless Diplock Courts were first arrested under the emergency laws. It would thus appear that the emergency arrest powers are not as indispensable in the fight against terrorism as the British government would have the electorate (and Parliament) believe. Nor is any convincing justification for continuing to eliminate juries from the Diplock Courts forthcoming from the government: juries are used both in civil suits and in inquests arising out of Northern Ireland's civil unrest, yet there is no evidence of jurors being intimidated while exercising these functions or of them delivering biased decisions.
Only slightly over half of the people tried in Diplock Courts receive immediate custodial sentences, and about the same proportion of defendants will have been in custody immediately before the trial. Contrary to the State Department's assertion that "the conviction rate for defendants pleading not guilty [in Diplock Courts] is virtually identical to the rate in
regular courts," the British government's own figures show that in 1991 (a typical year) 54% of "regular" defendants were acquitted while only 36% of Diplock defendants were acquitted. The overall rate of acquittal for all defendants in Diplock Courts during the past 10 years is as low as 7.5%, and of the 2,410 persons found guilty of terrorist-related crime in the past five years only 17 have had their convictions quashed on appeal.
The State Department rightly highlights the overturning in July of the convictions of three former soldiers for the murder of a Catholic in 1983. Civil liberties organizations remain very concerned about the safety of the conviction of a fourth ex-soldier, Neil Latimer. In the wake of the successful appeals, other convicted prisoners are requesting that the police notes of their interrogation sessions be subjected to scientific analysis to see whether they are an unbroken and contemporaneous record. Observers have welcomed the RUC's announcement that loose-leaf interview sheets are being replaced with electronically dated and time-stamped booklets. In December, six of the seven men accused of involvement in the ill-treatment of two British army corporals in 1988 were acquitted; the seventh was given a suspended sentence. Three other men, Patrick Kane, Sean Kelly and Michael Timmons, are continuing to serve life sentences imposed in 1990 for peripheral involvement in the same incident, and appeals have been made by, among others, Kevin McNamara, the Labour Party's Shadow Spokesperson on Northern Ireland, to the Secretary of State to refer their convictions back to the courts for reconsideration.
418
United Kingdom
There continue to be serious concerns over how persons arrested in Northern Ireland under the emergency laws are treated before any trial occurs. In the past five years there have been 1,724 cases of complaints lodged against the police by the 8,000 or so persons arrested; these have included 1,258 allegations of assault during interview and 111 of assault prior to arrival at the police station. In all, the complaints have made 2,187 allegations. Not a single one of these has been substantiated, even though the government has announced that in 1989-92 it paid compensation amounting to £206,374 (US$315,340 at current exchange rates) in 123 cases to persons making allegations relating to detention in the holding centers. It is reasonable to assume that this is partly because the complaints are investigated by members of the same force which is the object of the complaint. In addition, there is a reluctance on the part of complainants to cooperate with police investigations of complaints because the police practice to date has been to use the evidence collected during such investigation whenever they are dealing with any subsequent civil or criminal proceedings instituted by or against the complainant, yet while not at the same time releasing this information to the complainant. It is to be hoped that an English High Court decision in December 1992 (/? v. Chief Constable of the West Midlands, ex parte Wiley) will be viewed as rendering such a practice illegal in Northern Ireland.
In December, the Lord Chief Justice of Northern Ireland, Sir Brian Hutton, acquitted Patrick Nash of all 22 charges laid against him, including those of conspiring to murder four judges and an MP,
on the ground that he could not be sure that the accused had not been assaulted while in custody: the procedures at the Castlereagh holding center could not establish that there had been no ill-treat-ment. Some of the officers concerned were involved in previous cases of alleged ill-treatment where the accused were nevertheless convicted. During 1992, civil liberties groups in Northern Ireland continued to receive allegations by persons arrested under the emergency laws that they were being subjected to psychological torture through, for example, persistent oral badgering.
The British government's continuing refusal to introduce either audio recording or videotaping of interrogation sessions in Northern Ireland's three holding centers for alleged terrorists needs to be more roundly condemned in the State Department report. On this point, the government is ignoring the advice even of its own special reporter on the emergency laws, Viscount Colville QC. In December, Sir Louis Blom-Cooper QC was appointed as the Independent Commissioner for the Holding Centers, with powers to enter and speak to detainees at any time. But there are doubts over how effective such an individual can be: will detainees choose to confide in so obviously English a person and, given the security arrangements required for Sir Louis, will the police not be quite aware of the imminence of a visit by him and therefore be in a position to desist from ill-treatment in good time? There already exist lay visitors to "ordinary" police stations in Northern Ireland, yet these individuals were not entrusted with the power to investigate the holding centers despite their own express willingness, supported by the
419
United Kingdom
government-appointed Police Authority for Northern Ireland, to exercise such power.
Even though he has been under a statutory duty since August 1991 to issue a code of practice on the detention, treatment, questioning and identification of persons detained under the emergency laws, the Secretary of State had not published a final version by mid-May 1993. A draft had been circulated but this is less protective of detainees' rights than the code which applies to persons detained under ordinary criminal law. Even this latter code was shown to be inadequate in 1992 when the so-called "Cardiff 3" had their convictions for murder quashed by the Court of Appeal in London after audio tapes of the interrogations revealed a shocking degree of oppressive questioning by the police. The draft code leaves unchanged the rule that in most cases a person arrested under the emergency laws can easily be denied access to a solicitor for 48 hours (and then for subsequent 48-hour periods after each access has been granted). In the past four years, requests for access have been delayed in 58% of the cases. Attempts by solicitors to challenge denial of access have been largely rejected by the courts even when the solicitors have promised to give solemn undertakings that they will not pass to outsiders any information received from the detainee. The anomaly persists whereby persons arrested under the emergency laws in Northern Ireland, unlike their counterparts in England and Wales, cannot have their solicitor present during the course of police interrogation.
The rights of detainees are further
undermined by threats against their solicitors, which are typically communicated by police to the lawyers through the detainee. This form of harassment interferes with the attorney-client relationship and the right to counsel of choice. It also serves to keep the number of solicitors willing to handle politically sensitive cases small, particularly after the 1989 murder of Belfast solicitor Patrick Finucane, in the case of which there is credible evidence suggesting collusion between elements within the security forces and loyalist paramilitaries in the murder.
Moreover, the conditions in the holding centers in Northern Ireland are acknowledged by all concerned to be much less sanitary and humane than those in "ordinary" police stations: for the State Department simply to describe them as "substandard" is a considerable and unwarranted understatement.
In 1992, the restrictions on the right to silence in Northern Ireland continued to add to the unjust position of all detainees, not just those arrested under the emergency laws. Judges have shown themselves willing to draw the inferences concerning guilt which the legislation permits them to draw from a person's silence. In the United States this legislation would directly contravene the constitutional guarantee of the right not to incriminate oneself; it is also hard to reconcile with provisions on the presumption of innocence in both the European Convention on the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. In February 1993, Amnesty International published a report calling for the relevant legislation in Nor-
420
United Kingdom
thern Ireland (the Criminal Evidence (Nl) Order 1988) to be repealed. The report should also have pointed out the restrictions' dubious legality under international law.
While silence is condemned in one context, it is compelled in another. The British government has directed all broadcasting media not to broadcast interviews with, or remarks by, supporters of violence in connection with the affairs of Northern Ireland. In September, the British Broadcasting Corporation applied this ban to comments made by Berna-dette McAliskey, a former Member of the United Kingdom Parliament, during a recorded studio discussion. Even though she does not support violence, she was thus effectively branded as someone from whom society at large requires protection, and even a former British Minister said that her physical security had thereby been put at risk. In British law she has no legal redress for this violation of her right to free speech. In March 1992 the government did, however, lift its ban on the funding of an Irish language group, Gldr na nGael. The ban had been imposed 20 months earlier but no reasons had been given other than very vague allegations that the group was "improving the standing and furthering the aims of a paramilitary organisation." Again, the government's reversal was achieved only after a sustained campaign by a variety of individuals and pressure groups; in the interim the work of the language group suffered greatly.
The State Department report devotes just 10 lines to the situation of prisoners in Northern Ireland. It fails altogether to comment on the issue of transfer of
prisoners within the United Kingdom. In 1992, more than 40 Northern Irish prisoners held in English jails applied to be transferred to a prison in their "home" territory. It is a welcome development that three prisoners who had served more than 18 years in prison were transferred to Belfast in November 1992 and that later that month the government finally accepted, after an inter-departmental review, that prisoners in general could be transferred, though it opted for a system of "temporary" transfer so that prisoners returned to Northern Ireland could not benefit from more favorable parole regulations applying there to persons sentenced prior to 1989. By mid-May 1993, however, no prisoner had yet been transferred under these new arrangements. The report does mention the forced strip-search of 21 female prisoners in March 1992, but not that a subsequent court challenge to the search was unsuccessful. The refusal of the authorities to segregate Republican and Loyalist prisoners in the Crumlin Road prison, even those who are on remand, continues to meet with criticism from a wide range of politicians and prisoner welfare organizations.
In the past year, there has been an improvement in the British government's preparedness to engage with international and non-governmental investigations of alleged violations of human rights. The government has taken seriously the allegations of human rights abuses in Northern Ireland made at meetings of United Nations bodies and has met with a variety of delegations from concerned human rights organizations. For the first time in its 19-year existence, the government-appointed Standing Advisory Commission
421
United Kingdom
on Human Rights had the pleasure of seeing its annual report debated in Parliament, albeit by just a handful of peers in the House of Lords. The RUC has shown signs of becoming more forthcoming in this respect, although the Chief Constable has refused to meet with the locally-based non-political and non-sectarian Committee on the Administration of Justice (CAJ), as well as international human rights groups. The RUC, the Police Authority and the Northern Ireland Office declined to be interviewed for a program about allegations of ill-treatment at Cas-tlereagh holding center made by the CAJ and broadcast nationwide on British television in April 1992.
In the field of discrimination law, there are the same inadequacies in the Northern Irish gender equality laws as there are in Britain's. The abolition of wages councils, to be achieved under legislation equivalent to the Trade Union Reform and Employment Rights Act 1993, will in particular adversely affect women, since 61% of the employees currently benefiting from wages council protection in Northern Ireland are female. The annual report of the Equal Opportunities Commission revealed that women in employment in Northern Ireland earned about 25% less than their male counterparts in comparable positions. As regards the British government's 1992 consultation paper on legislation to combat racial discrimination in Northern Ireland, the strong preference of ethnic groups within the area is for laws unconnected with the anti-sectarian legislation.
There continue to be some difficulties in the operation of the Fair Employment (Nl) Acts 1976-89, especially concerning
the extent to which employers can be forced to reveal information about their employees during investigations into a complaint of discrimination. The absence of a law protecting privacy, and of a Freedom of Information Act, inevitably means that the line between secrecy and disclosure is often inappropriately drawn in practice. The Northern Ireland civil service revealed in November that of the persons occupying senior grades, only 5.9% were women and 17.1% were Catholics. The Fair Employment Commission also reported in 1992 that while Catholics represent 39.4% of public sector employees in Northern Ireland, the proportion in higher-paid positions is just 24.3%. Of Northern Ireland Electricity's 5,668 employees, less than 20% are Catholics. Less than seven percent of RUC officers are Catholics, though this is due to factors other than religious discrimination -- threats faced by Catholic members of the RUC from Republican paramilitaries and a more widespread reluctance on the part of the Catholic population to be seen "collaborating" with the British presence in Northern Ireland.
Hong Kong
The State Department's 1992 report on Hong Kong perpetrates the shortcomings of prior reports in recent years: a reluctance to provide its own analysis of the human rights issues presented and, in particular, a failure to assess the effect on human rights of the increasing disputes between the United Kingdom and China over Hong Kong.
The report identifies the principal human rights problem in Hong Kong as the inability of citizens to change their
422
United Kingdom
government. This is a reference to Hong Kong's present status as a British colony, led by a Governor appointed by the Crown, and with less than a third of the members of the local Legislative Council being elected by popular vote. The report describes the October 1992 proposals by Governor Chris Patten to make the Hong Kong legislature more democratic, and notes briefly that China has denounced the proposals.
The report, however, offers no assessment of the British proposals or their effect, if implemented for the next Legislative Council election, on the state of democracy in Hong Kong. Even if the plan were adopted in its entirety, the Council would still be significantly unrepresentative, and Hong Kong's government would still be headed by an executive appointed by London or, after 1997, Beijing. It is also worth noting, although the report does not, that the people of Hong Kong themselves have not been given the right to express their views on the proposals, and neither the United Kingdom nor China appears concerned about that deficiency.
Perhaps more importantly, the report neither describes the vehement Chinese reaction to the Patten proposals nor analyzes its implications on Hong Kong's present and future. China has waged a diplomatic and propaganda war against the proposals that continues to rage into 1993 without resolution. China's uncompromising opposition to even modest steps toward increasing representative government and democratic reforms in Hong Kong's internal affairs calls into question whether the guarantees for Hong Kong's autonomy and continued
"way of life" after 1997 will be honored. China's tactics have included threats to dishonor contracts entered into by the current Hong Kong government, to set up its own pre-1997 shadow government for Hong Kong and to dismantle completely the present system and replace it with one entirely of Beijing's design in 1997. None of this bodes well for the future exercise of political rights in Hong Kong, but it is ignored in the State Department report.
The report also fails to mention another report with disturbing implications for Hong Kong's future autonomy. In February 1992, before the debate began over Governor Patten's proposals, Beijing refused to rule out a plan to place a People's Liberation Army officer on Hong Kong's Executive Council.
The report overlooks other concerns raised by China's current activities in the territory in light of its pending assumption of sovereignty. It does not mention Beijing's admission that its Ministry of Public Security has been gathering information and creating dossiers on residents of Hong Kong who are "against the Chinese Government." The chilling effect of this disclosure was hardly mitigated by the reassurance that no action will be taken against someone who "loves the country and loves Hong Kong."
The report does note a concern that "self-censorship" may be on the rise among Hong Kong's media anxious to avoid criticism by China. Although one subject of Chinese attacks, Radio Television Hong Kong (RTHK) proclaimed its editorial independence, its status as a government-owned broadcaster is particu-
423
United Kingdom
larly sensitive. The report states that China's objection to a plan to privatize RTHK has raised concerns that China may want it as a "propaganda organ" after 1997. The report, however, should have offered a perspective on China's objection that is slightly different, but perhaps more significant since there is already no shortage of pro-Beijing media: that China's opposition evidences a hostility to a strong independent press in the post-1997 period plus a desire to neutralize a significant contributor to a free press.
Apart from the role of China as Hong Kong's ruler-in-waiting, the conduct of the U.K.-installed government deserves review, of course, and the State Department report notes many, but not all, of the high and low points. The report notes that implementation of the June 1991 Bill of Rights progressed with the expiration of the one-year exemption for six ordinances. The report also notes that the government rejected proposals for a human rights commission, but it fails to acknowledge that application of the Bill of Rights remains haphazard, a problem the proposed commission was intended to address. The report should have noted the need for, but the government's failure to conduct, a comprehensive review of all laws for conformity with the Bill of Rights. The report fails to note, for example, the government's refusal to repeal legislation contravening guarantees of press freedom, including strict controls on television programming.
The report does note that various court decisions in criminal prosecutions have invalidated several presumption of guilt provisions, but it fails to observe that such case-by-case adjudications
should be unnecessary and serve to delay full implementation of the 1991 Law. On the civil side, the costs of bringing challenges to laws in violation of the Bill of Rights have deterred the pursuit of many such cases. The report also fails to note criticisms of the widespread use of private, in chambers proceedings in civil cases, undermining the claim that the right to public trials is respected in practice.
The 1992 report repeats a number of failings that were discussed in prior critiques. The report claims, for example, that the right of privacy is generally protected, but again fails to address the continued existence of the Telecommunication Ordinance, which gives the Governor discretion to authorize interceptions of any telecommunication. The government has refused to act to reconcile this law with the 1991 Bill of Rights.
The 1991 report completely failed to discuss the Societies Ordinance and its chilling impact on the freedom of association. This year's report mentions the ordinance, stating only that authorities must be notified of the formation of a society. This description omits reference to the provisions, described in the 1991 critique, that give the Registrar of Societies -- also the Police Commissioner - discretion to refuse to register an organization that may be "incompatible with peace, welfare or good order" or is affiliated with a political organization abroad. This law is particularly difficult to square with the report's claim that there are no official barriers to the formation of local human rights groups.
Likewise, this year's report again fails
424
United Kingdom
to acknowledge the stringent restrictions on political fundraising, despite the 1991 critique's detailed description of this
issue.
The report cites the application to Hong Kong of the 1989 revision of the British Official Secrets Act, calling it "less restrictive" than the 1911 version it replaced. The report noted one criticism of the change -- that application of British law, rather than a local ordinance, will have no effect after 1997 -- yet it failed to acknowledge other problems with the new law. First, stronger enforcement measures with regard to the more sensitive material still covered by the new law may indeed make the newer law more restrictive. Second, the law's application by an Order-in-Council means it is not subject to the Bill of Rights.
The report notes the government's refusal to consider a freedom of information law, but fails to mention, or analyze, the stated rationale. RTHK and human rights groups attacked the government's objections -- that such laws do not improve government accountability or access to information -- as unsupported by actual experience in Hong Kong and elsewhere. It should be noted that Governor Patten undertook in his October policy address to review this issue as well as other restraints on press freedom.
The report's discussion of the issues raised by the Vietnamese boat people in Hong Kong is, like last year's, deficient in many respects. It does not mention Hong Kong's policy of "Humane Deterrence," which uses Vietnamese asylum seekers as, in effect, hostages to deter their fellow citizens from attempting to flee
from Vietnam. This policy of detaining 40,000 Vietnamese - over 65% of whom are women and children ~ in brutal, prison-like conditions, is a particularly cruel form of arbitrary detention in violation of international law. The report cites the voluntary repatriation to Vietnam of 12,-000 persons during 1992, but it offers not a hint of skepticism about the genuineness of such "voluntary" actions in the face of the limited alternatives. Indeed, Hong Kong officials have boasted that the voluntary program's "success" is due to the migrants' realization that their only option is "wasting their lives in a camp here." The report makes no mention whatsoever of the fact that forcible repatriations of Vietnamese continued alongside the voluntary ones in 1992, nor does it refer to the opposition of U.S. policy to forcible repatriation. This year's report fails to offer any assessment of the adequacy of screening procedures in practice during 1992, despite the fact that the Lawyers Committee and others such as Asia Watch continued to view the procedures as flawed and biased.
This year's report virtually ignores conditions in the detention centers, other than to mention the February 1992 riot and fire that killed 24 Vietnamese. Last year's critique noted that the 1991 report's description of the centers as crowded and prison-like understated the severity of the conditions. This year's report, however, significantly offers no description at all of conditions existing either before or after the February tragedy. Most notably, the report does not address the effect of these conditions on women and children, who are not only the largest percentage of the population, but also the most vulnerable. Women are often raped,
425
United Kingdom
and protection from gang violence is nonexistent. Studies by noted authorities have shown that-children suffer severe emotional problems particularly from seeing physical violence. None of these or other serious problems are considered by the report.
Criticisms have also been voiced by Amnesty International and the World Organization Against Torture with regard to procedures applied to asylum seekers from China. In particular, the failure to give reasons for denial of asylum hinders the preparation of effective appeals. The State Department report makes no mention of this problem.
426
