Georgia
The State Department's 1992 report on human rights in Georgia touches upon almost all of the critical events affecting human rights in the last year, from brutal ethnic conflicts in the former autonomous regions to ongoing violent struggle between the Georgian central government and supporters of the ousted former president, Zviad Gamsakhurdia. As the first State Department report dedicated solely to issues of human rights in Georgia, it represents a significant effort to come to grips with transgressions of human rights occurring in the country during the past year.
Nevertheless, the report is missing crucial details about the relative seriousness of human rights violations that occurred in 1992, particularly details of military action against civilians in areas of high concentration of ethnic minorities. By understating the severity of conflict in Western Georgia and former autonomous regions, the report overstates the importance and fairness of the elections that occurred in October. Descriptions of the elections tend to ignore the background of warfare against which they took place, and only mention in passing that, due to violent conflict, large portions of the population in Western Georgia and the former autonomous regions could not participate. The flaws in the report are not ones of omission, but of emphasis, which tends to disguise the true extent of human rights violations in Georgia.
The report (particularly in the two-page introduction) unquestioningly accepts the position of the Georgian government that the presence of military forces
loyal to the central government in Meng-relia, Abkhazia and South Ossetia was a mere reaction against armed insurrection by extremist supporters of the ousted former president ("Zviadists"). These regions, however, are subject to violent ethnic conflict reaching far deeper than loyalty to either of the two regimes. Violence was present in this region even under the Soviet authorities who preceded Gamsakhurdia and Shevardnadze.
Moreover, there are widespread and credible allegations that the Georgian military authorities responded to isolated acts of violence by Zviadists with excessive force, using Zviadist activity as a pretext to rob, waste and destroy entire towns and villages. Summary executions of Abkhazian, Armenian, Mengrel and Ossetian civilians have been widely reported. Such grave violations of human rights can never be justified as a response to "violent insurgent groups." The Caucasian Research Centre (Centre for Ethnical and Political Studies of the Trans-Caucasus and the North Caucasus) reports that Shevardnadze himself, in a December 7 television address, acknowledged that his government preferred a military solution to ethnic conflict and repeated attempts by various regions to achieve some political autonomy. One of his subordinates, General Karkarashvili, declared in a televised speech on September 13 that he was "prepared to give the lives of 100,000 Georgians to destroy all the 92,000 Abkhazians."
By giving some of the details of events informer autonomous regions, but failing to list all incidents of violence or
122
Georgia
adequately convey the extent of violations, or, alternatively, to draw conclusions about the overall situation in such areas, the State Department's report disguises the seriousness of problems in Georgia. The report, while acknowledging accusations of criminal conduct in regions with large populations of ethnic minorities, fails to provide information supporting the truth of such allegations and fails to state its own conclusions (particularly where the Georgian central government may be the transgressor).
For example, in its opening passage, the report states that "[t]he country was wracked by separatist conflicts," and goes on to describe conflict in Mengrelia between Georgian military forces and Zviadists. The report continues, "[e]ach side accused the other of engaging in criminal activity." While technically correct, this statement creates the impression that there are only two forces in conflict in the various troubled regions within the Georgian nation: the Georgian military and the Zviadist rebels. In fact, many civilians of all ethnic backgrounds were victimized in 1992 on the basis of their ethnicity, regardless of their participation in armed conflict with any side. However, in the two-page introduction, and even in subsequent, more detailed sections regarding ethnic conflict, the report gives little indication of the relative severity of transgressions by any party to the conflict.
The absence of critical details or appropriate conclusions regarding the serious transgressions against human rights is particularly misleading with respect to events in Abkhazia. The report accepts without question the Georgian
central government's position that Zviadist activity and a resolution passed by the Abkhazian regional parliament in July regarding Abkhazian independence forced the central government to introduce troops to this territory. Independent sources have indicated both grounds are simply a pretext for excessive retaliatory measures by the military in this area. It is undisputed, for example, that Georgian troops were introduced to Abkhazia in August, following the kidnapping of Roman Gventsadze, Georgian Internal Affairs Minister, and 11 other officials by Zviadists. However, the kidnapping took place in the town of Zugdidi, outside of Abkhazia, making the need to advance troops and heavy military hardware up the Abkhazian coast as far as Gagra somewhat suspect.
Even where the presence of the Georgian military was required to defend roads and bridges from attack, there are many instances in which the army used force which was disproportionate to the accomplishment of military objectives. For example, an international human rights observer, present in Abkhazia during the month of August, reported that in Gagra, a city under the control of the Georgian National Guard during parts of the months of August and September, virtually all businesses were destroyed. Most ethnic Abkhazians were forced from their homes and into hiding. Troops from the National Guard armed with submachine guns were reported to have pillaged repeatedly the same Abkhazian residences and businesses, and in certain instances, those who resisted were summarily executed. Georgians who committed crimes against Abkhazian citizens went unpunished.
123
Georgia
In other communities in southeastern Abkhazia, Georgian military forces are reported to have responded to rebel attacks on roads and bridges by raiding Armenian and Abkhazian villages, then levelling them with tanks. The same human rights observer witnessed a National Guard helicopter attack a Mengrel village in this area. Unlike the Armenians and Abkhazis, the Mengrelis were unprepared for a strike by Georgian troops, and many of the villagers waved to the helicopter as it approached, rather than abandon the streets. The helicopter fired on the village, killing several civilians. The report fails to convey in adequate detail the violations of rules of war by Georgian armed forces.
Thus, despite the Georgian government's attempts to characterize the military's role in Abkhazia as suppression of Zviadist insurrection, in many instances the government's activities there can be characterized as retaliatory actions against the entire Abkhazian, Armenian and Mengrel community.
There were also human rights violations by Abkhazian regional authorities and in Abkhazian-controlled towns. The report discusses these in slightly more detail, but additional observations are warranted. As the report points out, and as was noted by the same international human rights observer, the most serious transgressions in towns under the control of Abkhazian regional authorities were committed by North Caucasian military units who pillaged houses and robbed Georgian civilians. Nevertheless, most buildings in these towns remained standing and businesses running. Persons of all ethnicities reportedly lived openly in
such communities.
The observer reported that in the cities of Tkvarcheli and Gudauta, where the traditional control of Abkhazian leaders was maintained, relative calm prevailed. The observer reports that there were some instances of robbery and rape of Georgian civilians by persons under the control of Abkhazian authorities, but that these authorities attempted to imprison the perpetrators and bring them to justice. A tour of the prisons in these areas showed that prisoners of all ethnic backgrounds were detained for crimes of violence against civilians.
The violence in Gagra and other areas of Abkhazia has continued long after September attempts at negotiating a cease-fire. After October 1, Abkhazian forces retook the city of Gagra as the National Guard withdrew from the ravaged area. It appears that the Abkhazian forces carried out (or did nothing to stop) massive retaliatory attacks on Georgian citizens who remained in Gagra. The State Department report describes the October events in Gagra and points out that reports of the massacre of Georgians in Gagra may be exaggerated. However, the report fails to discuss any of the events that led to the violence that occurred in the fall of 1992, including the repeated pillaging of Abkhazian homes and businesses and summary execution of ethnic Abkhazians by the Georgian military during its occupation of Gagra. The conflict in Abkhazia had not ended by the close of the year.
Similarly, in focusing on South Osse-tia, while the State Department report accurately states that conflicts in this
124
Georgia
region diminished considerably after the introduction of peacekeeping forces, it omits details concerning the severity of breaches of human rights on all sides of the conflict until such forces were introduced, and continued difficulties in resolving conflicts in this area.
The report says little about the fighting which raged in South Ossetia during the first half of the year. Its account of the killing of refugees near the village of Kekhvi in the Tskhinvali region appears to be accurate; however, there was much more violence than even this incident suggests. Reports of the shelling of the Ossetian-controlled city of Tskhinvali by Georgian military forces, answered by Ossetian fire on surrounding Georgian towns, were received almost daily until July. According to the Georgian Commission for Ethnic Relations and Human Rights (as reported to Interfax on June 17), the months from January through June, 1992, were the last six months of a two-year conflict that resulted in the deaths of over 400 Ossetian and 200 Georgian civilians, the destruction of approximately 1,000 Ossetian and 4,000 Georgian homes, and displacement of approximately 25,000 Ossetian and 1-5,000 Georgian residents of that territory. According to Ossetian sources, the number of Ossetian casualties and refugees is much higher, reaching (in the case of refugees) over 100,000. By any account, however, such conflict and the resulting loss of life and liberty deserve more attention and discussion than they received in the State Department report. It is also worth noting that by all accounts, the Ossetian population suffered greater losses than the Georgian population in the region.
Finally, in the report's discussion of ethnic conflict, a word or two should be included about cultural autonomy. The report states that educational and cultural autonomy has been accorded to all Georgians, and that the government provides funding for ethnic schools. However, the Caucasian Research Centre reports that the central government ceased to finance schools teaching in the Abkhazian language over a year ago, and that the budget of South Ossetia, including funds for teaching of the Ossetian language, was not financed by the central government for over three years. Violence in Tskhinvali, largely the result of shelling by the Georgian military, destroyed local theaters and schools, and attacks on Sukhumi brought the destruction of the theater, the State University, and the state archives. These are also consequences of violence in the former autonomous regions affecting human rights. These consequences again are underemphasized or neglected by the report.
The present regime in Georgia was brought to power in January 1992 by the overthrow of Zviad Gamsakhurdia, head of the first freely elected government in Georgia. Eduard Shevardnadze led the central government in an unofficial capacity from May until elections could be held in October of the past year. The report acknowledges that it was Gamsak-hurdia's ouster that brought Shevardnadze to power; however, it places little emphasis on the military's role in the overthrow of Gamsakhurdia and on Shevardnadze's reliance on the support of the military to remain in power through the time of the election. Most commentators agree that Shevardnadze's government had no legitimacy before the October
125
Georgia
elections, and that Shevardnadze needed the support of the Georgian National Guard and the Mkhedrioni (a paramilitary unit) to maintain control.
The State Department report, on the other hand, tends to separate the actions of the military from the authority of the central government, implying that the government was not responsible for the troops' actions. The report points out that the government was unable to unify the National Guard and other factional military forces during this time of turmoil in Georgia. This analysis again reflects the position of the central government. Between March and May, Shevardnadze was repeatedly asked by the press to comment on reported atrocities by Georgian troops toward Ossetian civilians. His response was that the National Guard was not subject to his control or that of the State Council. Nevertheless, while the human rights violations committed by the Georgian military may demonstrate the failure of the Georgian State Council under the leadership of Shevardnadze to unify the Georgian army, this cannot excuse violations c." human rights in Georgian territories nor can it exonerate Shevardnadze's government from responsibility for such violations. The report tends to ignore the fact that the National Guard and the Mkhedrioni were the military branch of the Georgian central government, fighting to further the central government's purposes. Replacing Tengiz Kitovani with Anatolii Kamkamidze as Minister of Defense (reported to have occurred on November 27) may be a move toward unifying the government's control of the military in 1993.
The report's own discussion of the
events of October and the elections held that month proves only in a technical sense its conclusion that the State Council "successfully" conducted nationwide elections. Likewise, when the report informs the reader that international observers characterized the elections as a valid exercise of free choice outside of the nonvoting areas, it ignores certain issues of the fundamental fairness of the election - primarily the exclusion of South Ossetia, Abkhazia, Mengrelia and other areas of Western Georgia due to a virtual state of civil war in these areas. The excluded areas amount to approximately one-third of the territory of Georgia and around 20% of its population (a total of 850,000 non-voters).
Additionally, although the report states that "no one stepped forward to challenge" Shevardnadze in his bid for Chairman of the Parliament, it should also be mentioned that this position was created six weeks before the election to be filled by a candidate meeting certain criteria that only Shevardnadze and few others could fill (including requirements that the candidate must not be a member of any political party and must receive one-third of all votes cast). Such election-law maneuvering was virtually guaranteed to concentrate political power in a position held by Shevardnadze. Moreover, although many parties participated in the election, the ballot clearly was not open to the ousted Gamsakhurdia or his supporters.
Finally, as the State Department report very candidly asserts, freedom of the press and assembly were severely restricted in Georgia both before, during and after the elections. The possibility of
126
Georgia
free and fair elections without the availability of these rights is questionable at best. Thus, the report's own discussion belies its conclusions regarding the elections. Based upon the information contained in the report, it might be appropriate to conclude that while no regime holds a superior claim to power in Georgia to that of the government headed by Shevardnadze, the warfare in various regions of the country during 1992 made the elections irrelevant to the assessment of human rights in that nation.
The remainder of the report should be credited for relative accuracy and thoroughness in responding to the specific requirements of the Foreign Assistance Act. The report's assessments i) that instances of physical abuse of prisoners appear to be routine, ii) that there may be a significant number of political prisoners in Georgia and iii) that political safeguards are often ignored, point to specific failures of the Georgian government to protect human rights in the past year. To the specific names of those executed, abducted or imprisoned in the past year for political reasons might be added those of: Gia Khachirashvili and Vitaly Glad-kikh, executed in November for alleged acts of treason; Zaza Tsiklauri, physicist and university professor, arrested August 7, who was reportedly being held and tortured for non-violent opposition to the government; Taif Adzhba, poet, abducted by armed men on October 9, and Sarion Tarkil, editor-in-chief of Amtsabz, who reportedly disappeared in August. This list is by no means exhaustive. The report's summary statements that there are many political prisoners and executions in Georgia accurately reflect the extent of human rights violations in 1992.
The most significant problem with these latter sections is that the additional detailed information they contain conflicts with the impression created by introductory pages that a freely and fairly elected government controls Georgia and used its armed forces only to respond to the political insurrection of Zviadist extremists. The report occasionally attempts to reconcile these two views by characterizing failures of the government to adhere to protections theoretically provided in the law as the inevitable result of the "internal strife" described earlier in the report. The central government's method of dealing with dissent, however, should be the focus of the report, and existence of dissent is not an excuse for deviation from protections laid out in the law. The report would benefit from a more accurate reconciliation of the introductory remarks and the detailed descriptions of breaches of human rights which appear later.
127
