Greece
Overall the State Department's 1992 report on human rights in Greece is accurate and comprehensive. However, in addition to a number of factual errors, there are areas of human rights violations which the report understates. The report's flaws stem largely, but not wholly, from a lack of awareness of a disturbing trend in Greece of increasing human rights violations apparent as early as 1991. This is particularly the case with rights such as freedom of expression, which had not been violated since the establishment of democracy in 1975.
The Greek government believes that as a consequence of the strife in ex-Yugoslavia, Greece is beleaguered, in particular by Macedonia's declaration of independence. Its response to perceived external threats has been to restrict freedom of expression by activating particular constitutional provisions and clauses in the penal code, hitherto dormant, to legitimate restrictions on freedom of speech. The report accurately notes that in 1992 there were five cases of individuals or groups who were charged by the authorities with distributing leaflets or publishing material in opposition to official government policy on Macedonia. The report however treats the instances as isolated cases stemming from legal prohibitions against
exposing the friendly relations of the Greek state with foreign states to danger of disturbance (Art. 141, Penal Code), spreading false information and rumors liable to create concern and fear among citizens and cause distur-
bance in the country's international relations and inciting citizens to rivalry and division, leading to disturbance of the peace" (Art. 191, Penal Code).
Yet the report fails to evaluate the pernicious effect on freedom of expression such a broad and vague statute inevitably encourages. These articles allow the Greek government to criminalize dissent and opposition to official policy. The State Department should not have remained silent on such a core issue.
Furthermore, several constitutional provisions buttress these articles in the penal code. Article 25 of the 1975 Constitution provides that "the state shall have the right to claim that all citizens shall fulfill the duty of social and national solidarity" and in Article 25, Section 3, states that "abusive exercise of rights is not permitted." To date, these provisions have not been used, but they nevertheless provide the government with the constitutional basis for further restrictions on the exercise of individual rights. Moreover, the report correctly mentions an additional constitutional provision which can restrict freedom of speech and press, namely the provision which forbids "insulting authority," the use of which is apparently on the increase. The report cites two instances under this provision both involving criticism of the judiciary yet fails to take a position on whether the government's actions violate international human rights guarantees.
The report ignores the climate of intimidation that has emerged. One inci-
134
Greece
dent not mentioned in the report indicative of this climate occurred in January 1992 when loannis Alafouzos, owner of Sky FM radio station, was alleged to have been beaten and other journalists ill-treated after armed police raided his office. He, his legal advisor and some of the technical staff were arrested and subsequently released. Allegedly, the radio program had been critical of the Greek government's foreign policy.
The report is partly inaccurate in stating that "private television and radio flourish in the absence of regulatory media legislation." The Constitution says the press is free and censorship is prohibited, except in accordance with the law. Numerous laws enacted during the Metaxas dictatorship, however, are still nn the books. Furthermore, Article 15, Section 2 of the 1975 Constitution provides that the state exercises "immediate control" over radio and television. This general provision was specified in implementing legislation in Law 1730 in 1987 and Law 1866 in 1989 which set forth in detail the rules governing the media and created an independent authority, appointed by the government, to exercise control. While it would be accurate to state that in 1992 this authority did not exercise its power, the report should have mentioned the potential for state control based on existing legislation. The prosecutor's restrictions on publication of statements by terrorist groups has resulted in the arrest of six publishers and editors for violating this restriction on press freedom and imposing censorship. The State Department's treatment of this is cursory, and ignores the issue of press freedom and the "intervention" by the government in the judicial process.
Evidence is emerging that instances of violations of the right to privacy are increasing. Subsequent to the rescinding of the indictment of the former Prime Minister and his national intelligence service director for wiretapping, which the State Department report dismisses in one sentence, there is mounting evidence of widespread wiretapping of opposition politicians. Recent press reports accuse an ex-general of wiretapping political opponents on behalf of the government. The charges are reportedly being investigated by the prosecutor, but the process is confidential. Furthermore, the Greek security forces have been reactivated to monitor opponents to Greek national policy. One specific case involves a woman academic who resides in the United States and has written on Slavo-Macedonians in northern Greece. Her family, who live in northern Greece, has been interrogated by the security forces.
Contrary to the report, the anti-terrorism law was enacted in 1990, not in 1991. Moreover, the law, in addition to terrorist activities, covers murder, kidnapping and assorted other crimes. It foreshortens trial procedures and provides for mandatory life imprisonment for these crimes. The law allows a public prosecutor on his or her own to ban the publication of all statements issued by groups identified in the law.
The report errs when it states that the Constitution provides for freedom of religion. The Constitution does provide for freedom of religious conscience but not for religious practice. While Greek Orthodoxy constitutionally is the "prevailing" religion, in reality it is an institutionalized state religion under the direction of
135
Greece
the Ministry of Education and Religion. The absence of separation of church and state in Greece has resulted in restrictions on religious freedom and at times legal discrimination for all religious minorities, not just of Jehovah's Witnesses, as is implied in the State Department report.
Religious minorities in Greece are not two percent of the population as the report states. They are a minimum of five percent, and, if the Paleoimerologites are included -- Old Calendrists who do not recognize or accept the authority of the official Greek Orthodox Church - the percentage is a minimum of 10%. There is no accurate data on religious minorities. Minority religions include the Jehovah's Witnesses, Evangelicals and other Protestant sects, Catholics, Jews and Muslims.
While the report mentions the constitutional provision guaranteeing religious freedom for "known religions," it neglects to point out the implications and ramifications of this provision in restricting religious freedom. There is no authoritative list of "known religions." Such a status is contingent on administrative and judicial action, and decisions in 1 992 continued to be arbitrary and contradictory. No decision by a high court is binding on another court nor is precedent used by the judiciary. In addition, minority religions must apply and obtain permission from the Ministry of Education and Religion in order to establish a "house of worship." In its determination of whether to approve such applications, as the report states, the Ministry consults and obtains the permission of the local Orthodox bishop. These conditions constrain the exercise of religious freedom. No accurate data exists on the number of
applications for permits to establish "houses of worship" which were refused in 1992, although the number is higher than those cited in the report. It should be stated that the holding of religious services, despite failure to obtain a permit, is done under the guise of establishing a "cultural center" and does not reflect tolerance on the part of the authorities.
The report ignores legal and/or informal discrimination against non-Orthodox. It is not only the Muslims, as the report states, who are excluded from higher rank positions in the public sector, but all non-Orthodox. Those not of the Orthodox faith cannot teach in primary school, while the upper echelons of the military and the judiciary informally exclude religious minorities. It should also be noted that the Old Calendrists, in particular the priests, can and have been subject to persecution because although "Orthodox" they refuse to accept the authority of the Greek Orthodox Church.
As the State Department report correctly states, Greece does not provide for alternative non-military service as a way of fulfilling the military draft. All Greek men are subject to military draft and since 1977 Greece permits noncombatant alternative military service. However, the report neglects to state that the 1977 law mandates that the duration of non-combatant service be twice the length of time of the military draft. The number of conscientious objectors serving prison terms is approximately 380 and the number generally fluctuates between 350 and 450 at any given time. It should be noted that the prison terms for conscientious objectors in most cases are twice the length of military service, while some are
136
Greece
retried by military courts after their release from prison. They spend an average of three years in prison and after their release they are often called again for military service, tried again by a military court and sentenced. Although the report accurately states that the overwhelming majority are Jehovah's Witnesses, it should also be stated that non-religious conscientious objectors are on the increase. In 1993, two complaints on Greece's policy towards conscientious objectors are being adjudicated in the European Commission of Human Rights.
The difficulty in obtaining data on religious minorities is even greater when it comes to ethnic minorities. Officially, as the report states, the government denies that there are any, except for the Turkish Muslims in western Thrace. The census has not compiled such statistics on either religious or ethnic minorities since 1960. In addition to Turkish Muslims, other ethnic minorities include the Pomacks, Romas (gypsies), Slavo-Mace-donians or Macedonians, Vlachs and Arvanites (Albanian descent). Although they all speak Greek, they also speak their own language or dialect. Of these, the Slavo-Macedonians were the most politically active in 1992. While the report is correct in stating that the court in Thessaloniki banned the establishment of a "Macedonian Cultural Center" in Fiorina, it ignores the fact that this is part of a broader pattern of Greece's denial of ethnic rights for minorities. Demands for the teaching of their Slavic tongue in school have been rejected by the Ministry of Education. In 1992 there were numerous credible reports by individuals of fear and intimidation by the authorities. On April 1, 1993, Christos Sideropoulos and
Anastasios Poulis were convicted for claiming in a magazine article that the rights of the Slavo-Macedonians were violated. As in earlier cases of opposition to Greek foreign policy, they were convicted for disseminating misinformation and inciting dissent.
Although the report's discussion of the situation of the Turkish/Muslim minority in western Thrace is accurate, its significance is diluted by the manner in which it is reported. In one place the report states that "exile is unconstitutional and does not occur," a statement which is constitutionally valid but which is a dubious assertion in light of the report's own evidence elsewhere describing the deprivation of citizenship of non-Greek ethnics who travel outside the country (under Article 19 of the Citizenship Code). Freedom of movement, foreign travel and the right of return is guaranteed for Greek "nationals" but is restricted for Greek citizens who are not ethnically Greek. The report is accurate in stating that the government adopted measures in 1992 to reduce other discriminatory practices against the Turkish/Muslims, particularly with regard to property rights. While as the report states the only officially recognized minority in Greece are Muslims, in accordance with the 1923 Treaty of Lausanne which provides for religious freedom, Greece increasingly views this minority as Turkish and susceptible to control by Turkey.
It is noteworthy that Greek human rights organizations have not protested violations of individual human rights, particularly in the area of freedom of expression, nor have they protested the
137
Greece
ensuing arrests and/or prosecution of dissidents. Protests have come from some professional's, mostly academics, and journalists. It needs to be pointed out that although the judiciary constitutionally is independent, the high courts, in particular the Supreme Court, are subject to political pressure exerted by the government. Periodic accusations concerning the politicization of the courts have been made in the press, and in 1992 there were two instances, as the report states, in which charges were filed for "insulting authority." Moreover, the method of appointment to the high court and the high court judges' philosophy diminishes their independence. Theoretically, promotions within the hierarchy of the Supreme Court are made on the basis of seniority. In practice, the Ministry of Justice selects for promotion and chief judge those who are supportive of the party in power.
The use of torture in Greece against persons arrested is a serious problem. It is a continuation of a practice prevalent during the years of military rule (1967-74) against political prisoners and those arrested for alleged crimes. There are no political prisoners since 1974, but torture and cruel treatment is still inflicted by the police at times against demonstrators who protest government policies and at persons who have allegedly committed crimes. Although the report cites allegations of torture and cruel and inhuman punishment on the part of the police and prison guards, the tone of the report is accepting of the government's denial of most of these allegations and of the intention expressed by the Minister of Public Order to take corrective action insuring that no violations by the police take place. The government's official
position is that any bodily harm that may have been inflicted was unintentional. The State Department, instead of merely repeating the government's positions and the findings of an international human rights organization, should have given its own assessment of the issue.
Furthermore, the State Department report regarding adherence to due process of law accepts the constitutional and legal provisions as tantamount to actual practice. No attempt is made to evaluate whether Greek law conforms to fundamental norms or the extent to which the government violates its own guarantees. Although statistics on the precise number of detainees whose procedural rights were violated are not available, failure to notify their families is common. The prevailing practice is not to inform detainees of their rights and access to a lawyer has been denied to those who have been tortured or ill-treated until after interrogation and the signing of a statement. A widespread practice exists of interviewing suspects as witnesses in order to circumvent the necessity of implementing legal rights that are guaranteed to a suspect in a criminal case. Furthermore, non-Greek detainees, who are often tortured, are frequently not provided with a translator and sign confessions which they cannot read.
The report is accurate in stating that women are entitled to equal rights by law and that the number of women in politics is on the increase. A major area of concern is the neglect of the issue of battered women. As the report rightly states, there is a deep cultural constraint in admitting to sexual or physical abuse. On the other hand, there is only one
138
Greece
center, in Athens, for battered women and no effort has been made to educate women as to their rights. Furthermore, the State Department report omits mentioning the harassment of gays and lesbians. The sentencing of Irene Petropou-los, executive editor of a gay and lesbian magazine for "publishing indecent material offensive to public feeling" in late 1991 was accompanied by the judge's statements that homosexuality was "abnormal and against nature."
The report accords appropriate emphasis to the discriminatory treatment of citizens under Article 19 of the citizenship code depending upon whether they are ethnic Greek. Citizenship can be lost by non-nationals, without notice or an opportunity to be heard (except within an appeal process that can be costly and time consuming), if it is determined that they left Greece without the intent to return.
Greece is not receptive to asylum seekers and the report could have been more forthright in its discussion of this issue. In 1991, only two percent of asylum claims were granted. Most of the asylum seekers are Kurds coming from Iraq, Turkey and Iran; the U.S. Committee for Refugees (USCR) reports that fewer than 1,900 were able to file claims for asylum during 1992. The report notes that Albanians in large numbers continued to seek entry into Greece during 1992, however it fails to mention that Greek border police and the army expel summarily undocumented Albanians in border areas, reportedly more than 350,000 in 1992. The USCR reported that Albanians are rarely allowed to file asylum claims, with only three such applications permitted during the year. It should be pointed
out that ethnic Greeks coming from the former Soviet Union for whatever reason are not considered refugees or asylum seekers and they immediately qualify for citizenship. Approximately 3,107 entered in 1992.
The government offers temporary residence permits to persons determined by the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to be refugees. However, a study by the Department of Geography, King's College, London cites cases in which refugees recognized by UNHCR but who were not able to obtain resettlement in another country within the requisite time period, were ordered to leave Greece within 15 days. The study also reports an incident in April in which an Iranian refugee holding a UNHCR-issued mandate document was deported to Tehran.
Overall, the State Department report on human rights in Greece is accurate. Its principal limitations are twofold; one, its failure to recognize Greece's enduring difficulty in implementing and respecting the basic rights of persons charged with violations of the law and second, the potential for increasing restrictions on freedom, already apparent, emanating from Greece's foreign policy concerns. The latter has produced an atmosphere which has already chilled public dissent.
139
