Guatemala
This year's report on Guatemala provides a generally complete catalogue of human rights violations during 1992. However, the report continues to grant the government of Guatemala an unjustified "benefit of the doubt" despite the accumulation of several years of evidence that there is little will or ability to confront human rights violators.
The State Department report treats Guatemala as a democracy, overestimating government reform efforts. Guatemala is still in transition to civilian rule. As the report notes with its reference to the armed forces' considerable autonomy, the civilian government has little control over the military, particularly in the rural countryside. In such a situation, legal reforms and presidential commissions cited approvingly by the report are in fact relatively insignificant gestures. The failure to act on longstanding human rights concerns is compelling evidence of the government's unwillingness and/or inability to confront human rights abuse.
Guatemala's human rights record remains unacceptably poor. The State Department report fails to put this year's statistics in historical context, to acknowledge familiar patterns of targeting, or to point out the interrelationship among abuses. This past year, as in previous years, members of popular organizations of every type -- political, labor, student, religious, and human rights -- were victims of "disappearances," torture and extrajudicial killings. Press attacks continued, forcing several journalists into exile and reinforcing the self-censorship that prevents independent and compre-
hensive coverage of sensitive topics. Worker abuse continued unabated, prompting the U.S. to review Guatemala's eligibility for trade preferences conditioned on observance of internationally recognized worker rights standards.
The report understates the Serrano government's responsibility for contributing to the climate of fear in which human rights monitors operate. The report notes "criticism" of human rights groups by both the President and the Defense Minister, when in fact these attacks went beyond fair comment or criticism. President Serrano and General Garcia Samayoa questioned the patriotism of human rights activists, and publicly associated their activities with the guerrilla insurgency. The State Department notes the Defense Minister's threat to sue forensic anthropologist Clyde Snowe and colleagues for defamation, but fails to report in this section the government's prosecution of Amilcar Mendez, leader of the human rights group Runujel Junam Council of Ethnic Communities (CERJ), on unfounded charges, and ignores completely the blatant attempt to tar Mr. Mendez with references to a criminal case pending against his brother in which he had no involvement. The report places too much weight on the fact that human rights organizations operate in Guatemala, and ignores the connection between hostile government criticism and reprisals against the groups and individuals criticized. The UN Independent Expert on Guatemala, Christian Tomuschat, concluded that the government still does not fully accept these groups as legitimate, an obvious conclusion which the report should have
140
Guatemala
included.
The report suggests that Guatemala's human rights problems stem largely from the internal civil war, emphasizes the guerrillas' responsibility for abuses, and attributes claims of military responsibility for the majority of abuses solely to "human rights groups." The campaign of abuse goes well beyond counterinsurgen-cy efforts, as is clear from the character of abuses. There is evidence that the guerrillas have engaged in some human rights abuses, principally the extrajudicial execution of military officers. But the guerrillas are not the main perpetrators, and human rights groups are not the only ones making allegations against the armed forces. The overwhelming evidence of this has been acknowledged by the UN Independent Expert, the U.S. Congress, and, in the labor context, by the GSP Subcommittee of the office of the U.S. Trade Representative, on which numerous U.S. government agency heads sit. The State Department, after years of monitoring the dismal state of human rights in Guatemala, should not shy away from stating this obvious conclusion in its own voice.
The report does point out succinctly that continued impunity for human rights violations is "a major impediment to human progress." Moreover, the rare convictions are often reversed on appeal. One recent exception, the conviction of four police agents for the murder of 13-year-old Nahaman Carmona Lopez, is noted in the report without mention of its uniqueness in recent years. The report should have noted that where some results are achieved, international pressure, in particular from influential governments,
is crucial to obtaining judicial review of abuse. Even so, these politically charged trials are often severely flawed. The Myrna Mack murder case, regarding which the report notes "some progress," was, in the words of Americas Watch, "riddled with irregularities and multiple layers of coverup, with murder and intimidation the only reward for those who seek to establish the truth." The Mack case, which resulted in the 1993 conviction of a low-ranking member of a military unit, also illustrates the limits on prosecution even where substantial pressure is brought to bear. Superior officers were not investigated in the Mack case, despite ample evidence that the defendant received institutional support in the commission and cover-up of the crime. The report might have pointed out as well that there is no judicial recourse for human rights abuse in many rural areas, where there are no civilian courts, only military garrisons and civil patrols which act with impunity.
The military's close ties to the police have not diminished to the extent that the report's discussion of civilian ascension to police leadership positions appears to suggest. The cited improvements -appointment of a civilian chief and civilian senior officials - were short-lived and superficial. The civilian chief resigned mid-year. Military personnel continued to hold key supervisory roles, while military intelligence maintained links to the police through posting of additional officers. The government's reaction to a crime wave in the capital gives a truer measure of its attitude toward the military relationship with the police. The government turned to the military to command and help staff a crime prevention task force.
141
Guatemala
The police were relegated to a minor support role, even though they alone had relevant training in crime prevention and detection. In light of the Guatemalan military's extensive infiltration of many government functions, the report should probe further into the staffing of "civilian" units.
Several points should be made about the State Department's reporting of extrajudicial killings. This section of the report opens with the statement that "[ploliti-cally motivated killings continued although they were far fewer than in recent years." According to the figures cited by the State Department, the number of reported killings ranged from approximately 250 to 380 on an annualized basis for 1992. For 1991, the same official and unofficial sources found a range of 450 to 575. As in prior years, limitations on resources and the difficulties of conducting investigations in Guatemala limited the number of cases that could be investigated and confirmed. None of the sources claim, however, that their reporting is exhaustive. In addition, the report's simple statement that the numbers are far fewer than in past years is particularly unenlightening because of the extraordinary level of violence that has characterized Guatemala's recent history. In Guatemala the use of targeted killings continues to instill great terror in communities which recall the wholesale slaughter of recent memory. In any event, the roughly one political killing a day reported in 1992 should also be assessed on its own terms, and not simply minimized in comparison to other times. The State Department also fails to meet its obligation to assess this phenomenon from its own point of view. Reciting other sources
with a single editorial comment concerning the decline in numbers tends to trivialize the serious degree of ongoing violence. Moreover, the report omits mention of the three extrajudicial killings of labor unionists to illustrate the targeting of this sector. The report's section on labor rights notes only "credible reports" of threats against union members.
The State Department's assessment of "disappearances" is also flawed by a misplaced reliance on numbers and by an unwillingness to draw conclusions based on the weight of recent history and experience. As the kidnapping of Maritza Urrutia, and others recently documented by Americas Watch, shows, state security forces continue to maintain and use clandestine detention centers. The civilian government is unwilling to acknowledge this or to act to protect victims. In the Urrutia case, the Archdiocese Human Rights Office worked with the U.S. embassy to secure Ms. Urrutia's release, and then to help her flee the country. The government has not undertaken any investigation of the case, making it unlikely that the perpetrators will be identified and punished or that the system of clandestine detention centers will be dismantled.
The numbers of "disappearances" are therefore not particularly meaningful, especially since the groups targeted in 1992 remain the same -- peasants, students and trade unionists. The threat of "disappearance" is undiminished as long as the security forces maintain their capability and continue to operate as they do, with impunity. The report shies away from this obvious conclusion, saying only that "credible reports" linked most "disap-
142
Guatemala
pearances" to "persons connected with the armed forces." Given the U.S. embassy's first-hand knowledge of the Urru-tia case and its larger implications, this caution is unwarranted. It is reasonable to conclude that the perpetrators operate with the acquiescence -- if not the approval and direction - of the civilian government.
Torture and beatings continued, particularly against street children and witnesses to crimes against these children. The report misleadingly suggests otherwise, citing in support one monitor's inability to document any cases. However, Casa Alianza, a group which is responsible for safeguarding and monitoring abuses against children, showed dramatic findings on torture of children in 1992. They reported an 80% increase in attacks on children during the year. The State Department report acknowledges "threats" against Casa Alianza, an understatement. In addition to death threats, the sister of a Casa Alianza staff member who witnessed the murder of street child Nahaman Carmona Lopez was raped by security forces, and several staffers were subjected to harassment. The report notes with favor the government's "increased efforts" to end abuse, but does not specify what efforts were undertaken. It is clear they did not include prosecution, safeguarding of witnesses or increased patrolling and protection of Casa Alianza. The government's formation of the Hunapu Force, ostensibly to combat street crime, only created an additional tool of repression.
The report notes "frequent credible reports" were made of arbitrary arrest and detention. This understates the case.
The Ombudsman reported mid-year on 30 cases of illegal arrest investigated by the office. The UN Independent Expert has also noted allegations of a new kind of illegal detention -- of ex-guerrillas seeking to take advantage of the amnesty law who were improperly detained at military bases.
The report's treatment of civil patrols continues the State Department's practice of minimizing longstanding and serious problems associated with these units. The history of civil patrols has shown that participation is not voluntary as the report states, and that those who resist do so at the risk of violent reprisal. Therefore, to cite, as the report does, only a few incidents where inhabitants openly resisted, and were overcome, for the proposition that civil patrols are sporadically involuntary, is insufficient. In Guatemala, the failure of individuals or communities in remote areas to protest the army's efforts to organize civil patrols may speak less to their voluntary cooperation than to their ingrained fear of reprisal.
The report's mention of a compromise proposal under which new civil patrols would not be established if the guerrillas do not expand operations fails to address the longstanding human rights concerns or the oft-stated conclusion of the UN Independent Expert, endorsed by the UN Sub-Commission on the Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, that civil patrols serve no legitimate purpose and must be disbanded.
The report minimizes claims of army bombings by attributing such charges solely to civilians. Such allegations have
143
Guatemala
been verified by the German Multiparty Commission, an umbrella group of German journalists and church and human rights organizations. In juxtaposing the inhabitants' claims with the military's denials, and failing to draw any conclusions, the report gives the misleading impression that the military's denials are as credible as the villagers' claims. As the UN Independent Expert has stated,
the many complaints, coming from a wide array of sources, cannot be brushed aside as simple propaganda .... [T]he armed forces have not been able to devise a military strategy which, designed to fight the guerrilla forces effectively, would nonetheless leave unharmed the population caught in the cross-fire. The Expert strongly urges the armed forces to restrict their military action to military targets.
The report's discussion of freedom of the press is also inadequate. The State Department notes that while no media figures were killed in 1992, "several" reported threats. It then continues by stating that despite the "alleged" threats, the news media reported all major human rights stories and "publicized" guerrilla, leftist and opposition group communiqués. The report seriously understates a problem which amounts to an active campaign to limit press freedom through terror.
For example, in his annual report to the Guatemalan Congress, the Ombudsman denounced the climate of intolerance and "systematic intimidation," and recommended that the president initiate a dia-
logue with the press to improve press freedoms. Further, more than "several" journalists reported receiving death threats. In particular, there were numerous attacks against the employees of the daily newspaper Prensa Libre. These included an attempted break-in apparently to attack the assistant manager, and, after a series of death threats, the shooting of a columnist who had written on armed conflict and government corruption issues. Prensa Libre is under threat because of its criticism of the government's role in the peace process. President Serrano has threatened retaliation against the paper if it does not cease its criticism.
Other journalists were also targeted. The report downplays military complicity in the mistreatment of newspaper reporter Omar Cano, stating only that he "was beaten ... in the presence of military personnel." Cano, who was investigating illegal timber cutting, was taken by his attackers to a military base after the beating, a fact that the report omits. The Ombudsman has confirmed that members of the army were actually involved in the attack. Other victims of abuse during 1992 include Tele-Prensa reporter Rolando Garcia, nearly abducted; PGW radio journalist Ricardo Castro, shot by agents of military intelligence; and journalist and university professor Alfredo Torres.
While the report notes that the offices of Tinamit magazine, a weekly that has been critical of the government, were bombed, it emphasizes the lack of injuries and slight physical damage. The report fails to recognize the bombing's chilling impact on the employees' willingness to remain publicly critical of the government or its connection to other acts of intimida-
144
Guatemala
tion against the magazine. For example, eight days before the bombing, Tinamit columnist Hugo Arce, who has extensively covered the Mack murder, received threatening telephone calls. A bombing was also attempted of the building from which the popular radio news show Guatemala Flash is broadcast.
In light of the foregoing, the report's statement that "no journalists or media figures disappeared or were killed in 1992" is uninformative and in fact misleading. The body of Mexican radio journalist Ramón de la Mora Bueno was exhumed on March 13 in Guatemala, having been seen last in February. The army claims that de la Mora was a mercenary guerrilla and was killed in a skirmish. However, the victim's family said de la Mora was attending a radio broadcasting seminar and was last heard from when he called Mexico to say he had been detained by Customs officials.
The State Department should have noted as well that none of the assailants accused of participating in these crimes have been apprehended or formally charged. The likelihood of reprisal and lack of recourse has created a climate of fear, inhibiting both the reporting of news and the depth of coverage, particularly on issues of human rights, government corruption and the peace process. As the UN Independent Expert has observed, "authentic investigative journalism which would represent conclusive proof of real freedom of the press" does not exist.
The fact that some assemblies took place this year without incident is not, as the report seems to suggest, compelling evidence of increased respect for freedom
of assembly. It is evident that the ability to peacefully assemble depends a great deal on the purpose of the assembly. Thus, the relatively benign protests which marked the anniversary of Columbus' arrival in the Americas could take place without incident, while the more controversial protests of government inaction on land reform could not. The forcible expulsion of villagers from the central plaza in Guatemala City on July 21, which the report briefly mentions, occurred even though the group was legally authorized to protest. The report's description of the problem — "riot police used excessive force on some occasions in breaking up peaceful demonstrations" - begs a question which the State Department fails to acknowledge. That riot police are utilized in the first place to "break up" admittedly peaceful and legally authorized demonstrations suggests a fundamentally unsound governmental attitude towards lawful assembly, and that the State Department's discussion should begin by acknowledging the root problems rather than the Constitution's written guarantees. Second, the July incident was not the only significant action by police to disrupt gatherings. For example:
•	In April police fired into a crowd of indigenous villagers in Solala who were peacefully occupying a plantation they claimed they owned. Police wounded 12, but prevented medical personnel from attending to the wounded, while they looted the villagers' possessions.
•	In July, police brutally clubbed, tear-gassed and assaulted 500 families who were peacefully and lawfully marching in front of the national
145
Guatemala
palace to protest seizure of their land.
•	In April, students from the Central Institute for Boys protesting the government's failure to appoint additional staff were arrested by riot police, assisted by army special forces. The police and army broke into the school and arrested 112 students who were later sentenced to 45 days in prison.
•	In April, students from the Normal Central School for Boys protesting the arrest of the Central Institute students were beaten by riot police. Twelve were seriously injured and 72 were arrested.
The inability of groups such as the International Peace Brigades, an organization established to provide "protective accompaniment" for individuals under threat, to obtain legal status may inhibit their ability to operate freely. The report fails to recognize this as an improper tactic to limit popular organizing and assembly. As the UN Independent Expert observed, there is "no justification for a legal regime which permits public authorities political discretion in granting or dismissing an application by an organized group wishing to act as an association for legal personality."
The report concludes that religious freedom is respected in Guatemala, conceding only that religious personnel are sometimes threatened for political reasons. This is a significant understatement. "Threats" included: two assassinations, of the director of a Catholic outreach program and of an activist from CARITAS and the local diocese's social ministry; two shootings, of a Catholic
youth leader and a friar; and the detention of a Brazilian priest by Hunapu members. Death threats were made against the highest-ranking Catholic official in Guatemala, Archbishop Prospero Penados del Barrio, and other priests in response to efforts to press the government for improvement in human rights. The report also fails to mention that both President Serrano and Defense Minister Garcia Samayoa accused the director of the Archbishop's human rights office of "playing along with the political platform of the URNG [an umbrella group for guerrilla forces]." This irresponsible statement lent legitimacy to the death threats, weakened the reputation of the Archbishop's human rights office, thereby making more difficult its efforts to take legal action against human rights violators, and heightened the fears of religious workers involved in human rights monitoring.
Travel inside Guatemala was not restricted principally by guerrilla activity, as the report disingenuously suggests. The military's broad control over civilian life in the countryside gives it license to stop and search travellers at will. In addition to civil patrol-related monitoring of village life, the government continues to maintain "model villages," areas tightly controlled by the military in which villagers' movements are severely restricted. The Communities in Resistance, civilian settlements composed of people who have withstood military efforts to exercise control over them, have also been kept, according to the UN Independent Expert, in "enforced isolation" by the army, which has forced them to be completely self-sufficient and has led to "deplorable" living conditions.
146
Guatemala
Violence impedes the ability of elected representatives to communicate with their constituents or to represent their constituents' views effectively. This fact and several illustrative incidents of threats and violence were omitted from the report's discussion of respect for political rights.
The section on discrimination touches on many of the chronic problems facing Guatemala's indigenous population. However, some of the most serious are ignored. This group is deemed by state security forces to be subversive largely on account of its race. As the UN Independent Expert noted, the indigenous population suffered virtually all extrajudicial killings this year, as in past years, a point the State Department should have made. Lastly, the report's own political bias is evident in its choice of words -- its reference to military "drafting]" of indigenous men and "forcible recruitment" by guerrillas.
According to the UN Independent Expert, the government provides virtually no social services to this majority population. For example, in the countryside where most indigenous reside, there is no state-sponsored education or health service. The government's refusal to meaningfully address land reform has particularly adverse effects on indigenous populations, as does the military's counter-insurgency tactics, both of which the report should have mentioned.
Several important aspects of gender discrimination are missing from the report's discussion of this issue. Guatemalan women are not recognized by law to represent the married couple legally. The
male has primary authority over joint property, can legally forbid the female to engage in activities outside the home, and has the sole right to represent a minor or incapacitated child. Women cannot obtain government assistance unless they are widows. Women whose spouses have "disappeared" must choose whether to seek benefits, which requires claiming the missing spouse as dead, or to struggle to support the family alone.
The section on rights of association mentions long overdue reforms to the 1947 Labor Code, but fails to note that the Code still imposes numerous burdensome procedural requirements on organizers and provides inadequate penalties for violations. In addition, employers routinely circumvent or violate the Labor Code to repress union activity. The government has done virtually nothing to punish violations. Moreover, the report's dispersed discussion of problems fails to yield a meaningful conclusion. The UN Independent Expert makes the point succinctly in reference to enforcement of workers rights: "... the administration of labor justice cannot be effective and . . . the Government lacks the political will to provide legal protection of labor rights."
The report's reference only to "threats of violence" and "no reports" of union murders in 1992 is misleading and inaccurate. On the heels of a successful strike demanding higher wages, an STPJ leader, Rogelio Oswaldo Lopez Penate, was shot to death on November 10 just a short time after another STPJ member had been stabbed. Lilian Juarez Escobar, the leader of STIGSS, was tortured and scalped on April 11. On March 31, a STINDE leader was detained and beaten.
147
Guatemala
In January, two UTQ leaders, Robert Yancor and Jorge Ramirez, fled Guatemala after receiving death threats. In April, Hermenegildo Blanco, the labor advisor to the south coast plantation workers received a death threat from Army Colonel Angel Sanchez Gudiel. In July, Milton Orellana Callegas, the Finance Secretary for the BANDESA union, received death threats believed to stem from BANDESA's call for higher wages. In addition, two union headquarters were bombed in 1992.
"Solidarity" associations, parallel associations controlled by management, are used solely to interfere with workers' rights to associate freely, in violation of ILO Convention No. 98, because, as the report fails to note, the solidarity associations are not subject to the maze of regulations applicable to unions. They can, therefore, form much more quickly than unions. Once formed, they displace or neutralize worker-controlled unions. The report ignores these facts, accepting the government's facile explanation that the solidarity associations are civic in character and therefore do not impede employee-sponsored unions.
160
