Guyana
Without doubt, the most notable accomplishment of 1992 was the national parliamentary elections on October 5, whidh not only saw a transfer of power from the self-proclaimed state party of the People's National Congress (PNC) to the opposition People's Progressive Party (PPP), but also an electoral process that was independently judged to be "free and fair." The return to power of the PPP and its leader Cheddi Jagan, who had won every election from 1953 (when elections were first allowed in the British colony) to 1964, when the British - with U.S. support - changed the system of elections to proportional representation in order to favor the PNC, is striking in itself. Once in power, the PNC-controlled electoral machinery in such a way that the opposition had no chance; elections after 1964 were regarded by international human rights organizations as "blatantly fraudulent." Because the transfer also represents a return to power of the Marxist leader the United States helped to undermine in 1964, 1992 also provides a benchmark against which to judge subsequent State Department reports.
For the last 25 years, Guyana has combined a dismal human rights record with, since 1970, a self-proclaimed socialist regime, albeit to the right of the opposition. U.S. criticism of the regime has been muted over the years: as a result of their efforts to undermine Jagan, Forbes Burnham in effect became their man. However, the human rights reports over the last eight years, being largely free of anti-communist policy considerations, have been accurate as well as fairly unflinching. The reports are notable
in the region for considering the investigations and reports of the Guyana Human Rights Association (GHRA) among their sources, rather than relying exclusively on government or embassy channels. An increasing awareness that the abysmal standard of living to which Guyanese are subject is not just a fact of life in developing countries, but may be regarded as a measure of human rights, is also apparent.
Through 1984, State Department reports conveyed a picture of a single-party-dominated state where elections were rigged, dissent was not allowed, and police brutality and intimidation were widespread. In 1985, however, the dictatorial president, Forbes Burnham, died in office, and at the end of the year elections were held to confirm his successor, Desmond Hoyte. Hoyte made some gestures toward international opinion, agreeing at least to investigate charges of police and military brutality, and the report took note, observing that the human rights climate had improved. However, international observers were barred from elections that year and the following year two churchmen who criticized the conduct of the elections were promptly expelled.
By 1987, while still noting "some improvement" in the human rights picture, the report conceded that this was far from institutionalized, and began to point out the harsh treatment of unions and workers, a focus which increased over the next two years. Then in 1990, as evidence mounted that the government intended to again interfere with
149
Guyana
elections, the report dropped the "improved atmosphere" gloss altogether; an increase in police brutality and greater intimidation of union organizers was noted, as was the appalling standard of living of the majority of the population following a currency devaluation of 64%, with workers earning as little as 50 cents a day. The same forthrightness characterized the 1 991 report, with, in addition, greater attention to the problem of violence against women, in many cases legally sanctioned, which up to that point had been noted largely as "charges of violence" against women.
In 1992, with the fact as well as the outcome of free elections, human rights had already taken such a great stride that the report's observations of continued economic deprivation, union intimidation, and police brutality seemed perfunctory by comparison. Only the statements regarding women reflected an effort to distinguish pre- and post-electoral conditions, as the new first lady, Janet Jagan, is an outspoken critic of the widespread abuse of women. The 1 991-92 Report of the Guyana Human Rights Association also did not distinguish between governments, as it was written before the elections, in July 1992. One goal of this critique - the Lawyers Committee's first with regard to Guyana -- is therefore to try to determine in which areas the human rights picture may be expected to improve with the new regime.
Fundamental to any significant change in human rights in Guyana is the overhaul of the existing constitution, adopted in 1980, which gives a gloss of legal respectability to authoritarian practices. Despite expectations of at least
some movement in this regard, nothing had happened by the end of the year (or indeed, six months into the new year), and the president still has absolute powers; he is not accountable to the law and is above all legislative institutions. To be sure, this is a major undertaking, as the government's human rights critics recognize; it is not a matter of a few amendments, but rather, the entire document will have to be rewritten.
The continued subordinate status of the judiciary undoubtedly contributes to accounts of continuing or even increasing police brutality, which by now demand some explanation. In the view of GHRA: "Violence by the police appears to be grounded in a strong sense of impunity fostered by political protection and inadequate judicial action against them." The lack of action is compounded by police corruption, which is at an all-time high, but this is less the result of government or political interference than the inability of the judicial system to protect people from vendettas or investigations initiated by private parties who bribe the police. Both the GHRA and the State Department conclude that the inefficiency of the judicial system, which is lacking in both human and monetary resources, is "so great as to undermine due process." The case of a woman arrested in January 1988 on charges of possession of a firearm, which the State Department describes, is illustrative: held without trial until April 1992, when she testified that she had been raped by a police officer, she was found guilty and given a mandatory life sentence under the National Security Act. The defense attorney then informed the judge that the National Security Act had been repealed in 1991,
150
Guyana
and the sentence was reduced to five years.
While the National Security Act has now been repealed, mandatory sentences under the Narcotics Act of 1987 have resulted in severe prison overcrowding, as people are jailed for possessing even small amounts of marijuana. Prison conditions, which are notorious, began to improve under the Hoyte administration, as the report notes, and continued to improve with the new government, which has requested the assistance of the GHRA in officer training programs. It remains to be seen whether this will improve conditions for women, who suffer sexual abuse by police even while in detention. Indeed, the women's remand center is controlled by the police, who are billeted on the top floor. The increase in women prisoners as a result of the Narcotics Act is dramatic; women prisoners numbered seven or eight in 1985 yet increased to over 100 in 1987. While the report concedes the problems caused by the Narcotics Act, it does not mention that the act was reportedly pressed upon the Hoyte government by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration.
The institutionalized inefficiency noted in the administration of justice highlights the problems facing the new administration with regard to all areas of human rights. Shortage of foreign exchange has created complete dependence on the United States as well as multilateral lending agencies, such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. Thus, while the new president promised to review investment and privatization contracts, this has not been done.
The flurry of press speculations that greeted Jagan's election, asserting that the privatization program begun under Hoyte and encouraged by multilateral lending agencies, as well as the United States, would be reviewed, were apparently so threatening to whatever capital still exists in the country that the new government drew back from any policy that might endanger foreign investment. Jagan has made a plea for foreign investment, especially in food production, processing and shipping; only one-fifth of Guyana's tillable land is now in production.
This attitude is perhaps most notable with regard to the opening of large tracts of the interior to international timber companies, under contracts and terms which have never been made public. One company, the South Korean and Malaysian owned Barama Company, which has distinguished itself by stripping forests in Sarawak, has now been given 4.2 million acres of primary tropical forest (where four Amerindian communities, it has recently been discovered, live) in Guyana which will be subject to virtually no monitoring.
Amerindian rights have long been ignored in Guyana, and only recently have they organized to press their own interests. Perhaps in a desire to at least notice token progress, the report notes that the government distributed land titles to Amerindian communities during 1991 and 1992, adding that these were criticized by the GHRA because they "were smaller than recommended." While it is true that Amerindian rights are championed by the GHRA, which has attempted to publicize their land claims and struggle for autono-
151
Guyana
my, the Amerindian Peoples Association (APA), formed in April 1991, in fact issued its own report in November 1992. The APA pointed out that the lands were distributed just before the elections, in an attempt to win votes, with no consultation with local communities, and fall short of areas recommended by the government lands commission of 1968, which itself allocated much less territory than claimed by the Amerindian communities. Many titles do not even cover lands which communities have occupied unchallenged for years.
A further problem regards Amerindian identity itself, which the government currently has the power to determine. Under the provisions of the Amerindian Act, Amerindians are treated as wards of the government, which has extensive power to intervene in the running of their affairs. The APA charges that non-Indians have begun to encroach on their territories and the government has refused to recognize this, since they determine which non-Amerindian persons acquire access to Amerindian communities. Reports of police abuse of Amerindians, especially women, have been ignored. And while it is true, as the report notes, that the new government has created the position of Minister of Amerindian Affairs, it has given the office virtually no money or staff (not even a permanent secretary), rendering a gesture in the right direction an empty one to date.
While the situation regarding Amerindians can be considered a case of ethnic discrimination, it reflects a more general problem for many developing countries, accurately highlighted by the GHRA: "the
dilemma of being locked into two sets of virtually contradictory international agreements, i.e., the UN international human rights instruments and economic reconstruction agreements entered into with the IMF and World Bank." While the former imply government commitments to improve access to social and economic rights, the latter "undermine these commitments by reducing governmental capacity to deliver them." Guyana is currently burdened with a debt of $2 billion, which under structural adjustment agreement entered into in 1990 directs foreign aid toward debt repayment before undertaking economic recovery.
This recognition may partly explain the hesitancy of unions and other organizations to press the new government harder to pass the long-pending proposed Trade Union Recognition Bill. As is true elsewhere in the Caribbean, workers have the right to organize and bargain collectively, but employers are not obliged to recognize their unions or bargain with them -- which amounts to a right to lose your job. The report recognizes this for the sham it is -- unlike in many other country reports -- and acknowledges that the historical ties of union leaders to both parties have made it hard to pass the proposed legislation. It may be expected, however, that additional explicitly antiunion measures, such as that introduced against utility workers in June, will not be sustained by the new government.
The minimum wage, now 50 cents a day, is, as the report notes, "not currently sufficient to provide a decent standard of living for a family." However, as the GHRA points out, there is no consumer price index or other measure against
152
Guyana
which to measure the value of wages, thus disguising the massive devaluation of real wages of Guyanese workers, which are among the lowest in the hemisphere in real terms. There are indications that the new government is moving to establish such a measure.
Deterioration in health and education over last two decades has reached the point where it also presents a challenge to human rights. Thus for example, in an effort to prevent the spread of cholera, the new government in November tore down squatter communities near reservoirs and restricted activities of street vendors, already among the most marginal of those remaining in the country. Between 1981 and 1990, Guyana saw a total of 12% of its population emigrate to the United States.
Despite enormous resource shortages, as well as the toll on production and infrastructure resulting from the emphasis on bureaucracy and military of the last 25 years, re-orientation of priorities can be expected to yield some gains, in foreign investment as well as national productive capacity. The State Department noted that the military budget had begun to be reduced under the previous regime; indications are that this will be greatly accelerated by the PPP government. A reduction in the lavish foreign missions set up under the Burnham government and long criticized by the PPP in opposition has also begun.
The new government has also moved toward the creation of an autonomous media. Under the PNC, the so-called "national" radio and press were blatant organs of the party while the opposition
papers were denied newsprint; those that published illegally had their editors imprisoned. The newly appointed Minister of Information, Moses Nagamootoo, announced that a new governing board, free of political appointees, would be formed, guaranteeing papers editorial freedom. Sharief Khan, editor of the country's leading independent newspaper, Stabroek News, was appointed head of the country's only daily newspaper, the state-owned Guyana Chronicle. While press freedom is first on the list of priorities, Nagamootoo announced plans to privatize the state radio and television networks in the future. State control of media, as the report acknowledges, included ownership of the country's only daily newspaper, the communications agency, radio and television networks, and the issuance of import licenses for newsprint and printing presses.
Finally, the reports' treatment of the situation for women has steadily increased in scope and quality. The 1992 report notes the limitations placed on the constitutional prohibition of discrimination based on sex by the government-sponsored amendment of 1 988 that rendered the equal pay provision unenforceable except where provided for by specific statute, none of which have been enacted. Thus, as GHRA notes, "the concept of equal pay for work of equal value is not operative in Guyana."
However, the report fails to note a similar problem with the 1990 equal rights legislation, ostensibly introduced to remove gender discrimination. By failing to define the meaning of discrimination, despite the strong recommendations from the Guyana Association of Women Law-
153
Guyana
yers, it left the courts to decide case by case whether discrimination has occurred -- thereby, as the 6HRA notes, "requiring extensive litigation to accomplish what the Act itself could have effected once and for all." As a result, according to the GHRA, almost every area of the law is still in need of reform. Divorce by consent is still illegal, and unequal provisions obtain with regard to adultery as grounds for divorce.
With regard to sexual abuse, evidence of the victim's immoral character is still permitted in rape cases; the principle of marital rape is not accepted; and there is no legal protection against domestic violence. Moreover, there is no legal protection against sexual harassment in the workplace, and dismissal on the grounds of pregnancy cannot be contested. Sexual harassment of women is widespread, according to GHRA. The State Department correctly notes that "while victims have access to the courts for redress, cultural inhibitions limit the willingness of women to pursue their claims." Further, it notes, the government has made no attempt to introduce legislation or other measures to change this situation, despite a call by Mrs. Jagan for shelters and a family advisory bureau -- presumably on a volunteer basis.
Ironically, as the State Department has noted in previous reports, politically, women enjoy some prominence in Guyana. The new parliament includes 13 women (out of 65), from both major parties, and the new cabinet includes two women: Minister of Health Gail Teixeira and junior Minister of Labor Indra Chand-rapaul. While the former government
counted women among its main supporters, it is interesting to note that among his first actions in opposition, Desmond Hoyte dropped four figures -- his main rival and three women, including two senior ministers.
154
