Honduras
The 1992 report accurately and effectively describes the symptoms of the human rights problem in Honduras, but balks at diagnosing the disease. Excellent reporting of facts is tainted by a tendency to disregard or downplay the Honduran military's continuing drive to develop itself as a "state within a state" and to augment its political strength with massive economic power.
On its face, the discussion appears to pull no punches on the subject of abuses by the armed forces (which incorporate the police as an additional branch), summarizing the situation concisely:
Members of the (armed forces] continue to commit human rights abuses, primarily for personal motives. (Armed forces] personnel, especially officers, can still act with impunity in committing crimes. This is due to the failure of the Supreme Court to render decisions about the jurisdiction of the civilian courts over [armed forces] personnel accused of offenses involving civilians; the tendency of [armed forces] personnel to protect officers accused of abuses; the inability of civilians to levy formal accusations before military courts; an ill-trained and poorly equipped judiciary and police force; and an endemically corrupt and inefficient criminal justice system.
This is factual and the points made are well-developed later in the report. The State Department's bias manifests
itself less in the discussion of specific abuses than in a reluctance to level fundamental criticism at the military establishment or its senior leadership and an eagerness to characterize the situation as improving, despite substantial evidence to the contrary.
The report establishes this pattern immediately with its introductory assertion that "while the Honduran armed forces . . . now play a less intrusive role in the country's civilian government, they still operate with considerable institutional and legal autonomy in security and military affairs." The impression conveyed is of steady improvement: less military meddling in civilian life, with the problem limited to the particular arena of "security and military affairs." But this premise is of dubious accuracy and highly misleading. Among other things, it completely ignores an ominous countertrend: the military's increasingly successful strategy of marginalizing, rather than "intruding upon," the civilian government.
The Honduran armed forces already subsume an array of functions normally associated with the civilian sector. In the name of "national security" the military operates the police, the merchant marine, customs and immigration, civil aviation and the airport administration, and the national telephone company, and administers huge sections of the country's interior. Its officers operate as a separate ruling class, with their own government and courts. This military elite already wields decisive political influence, and is aggressively accumulating economic power as well, both institutionally,
163
Honduras
through the huge military pension fund, and individually, through the private entrepreneurial endeavors of its officers.
The report consistently fails to discuss or even acknowledge the military establishment's systematic arrogation of governmental authority, despite the grave human rights implications. Particularly egregious is the failure to mention the "self-reelection" in 1992 of General Luis Alonso Discua Elvir. Discua, reaching the end of his current term as Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces and constrained by the Constitution from seeking reelection, succeeded in intimidating the weak Honduran Congress into repealing the relevant provisions of the enabling Armed Forces Law, thereby permitting himself unlimited additional terms. (The Honduran president, by contrast, remains subject to the single-term limitation.) Both the executive and the judicial branches of the Honduran government have proved as ineffectual as the Congress: despite the repeal's dubious constitutionality, neither the President nor the Supreme Court has objected to or even questioned the legality of the maneuver. This episode alone reveals the hollowness of the State Department's claim of lessened military intrusiveness.
The repeal was the latest in a series of steps taken by Discua in 1992 to consolidate his position. He had previously laid the political groundwork for his reelection by purging opponents and promoting officers favorable to him --most of whom were previously associated with the notorious 3-16 Battalion. This secret "military intelligence" unit, at one time headed by Discua himself, was known as the "Death Battalion" for
its death-squad activities and grievous human rights violations in the 1980's. Another, less successful, effort by Discua was his attempt in early 1992 to abolish the Superior Council of the Armed Forces. This body, composed of the 62 most senior officers, selects the Commander-in-Chief, and functions in practice as a military "parliament." Its elimination would do much to safeguard Discua from internal challenge to his authority and tenure.
Discua's "self-election" has dramatically demonstrated his ability to intimidate the civilian government. Moreover, President Calleja's National Party, which is expected to retain control of the presidency in the 1993 elections, is headed by Discua's brother, Celin Discua Elvir - and Calleja himself is a longtime military ally. Discua's political ascendance has prompted informed observers to express concern that he is on the verge of acquiring "cau-dillo-like power." The events surrounding his "self-reelection" and the growing power of the former "Death Battalion" commander do not bode well for democracy and human rights in Honduras. The report's complete disregard of such matters is an extremely serious flaw.
The military's expansion of power is not limited to the political arena; it is also proceeding, in a new and disturbing manner, within the private-sector economy. Acutely aware of its potential irrelevance in the post-Cold War era, the armed forces establishment is systematically seeking to carve out new national roles for itself. General Discua has trumpeted the usefulness of the army in combatting the recent crime wave sweeping across Honduras. More telling, however, are his vague
164
Honduras
proposals that the military be redirected to "national development" purposes. Taken in context, these comments appear to be public relations cover for his real agenda: a bold new economic strategy for fending off civilian budget cutting.
For countries receiving U.S. aid, such as Honduras, the State Department guidelines require discussion of efforts to reduce military spending, which the report provides: "Total military expenditures for 1989, the last year for which the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency conducted a detailed analysis, were $1 50 million. In the 1992 military spending is estimated at two-thirds that level." Again, the trend sounds promising --downward from $150 to $100 million. But what the report fails to note is that, under the budget released by the Finance Minister in 1992, military spending will actually increase in 1993 as a percentage of the total budget, partly at the expense of health-related spending, which was even more severely slashed. The omission is bothersome but not fundamental: the truth remains that the military budget has been reduced. Much more serious is the report's failure to discuss the armed forces' disturbing new strategy of "self-funding" through private-sector business activity and investments.
The military already owns such incongruous enterprises as an insurance company, a textile factory, a barbed-wire factory and a car dealership. It operates the country's most modern funeral parlor and -- reflecting the senior leadership's interest in public relations -- recently purchased a radio station and an advertising agency. It has recently begun aggressively purchasing prime Caribbean coast-
land to develop for tourism.
The primary instrument of this institutional economic activity is the aptly named Military Welfare Institute (IPM), the armed forces' massive pension fund, which operates its own bank and even offers a credit card to the public. A particularly troubling transaction in 1992 was the IPM's purchase of a state-owned cement company. The perverse result was to transfer the factory, one of the biggest cement manufacturers in Central America, from the external, civilian state to the inner, military one, thereby effectively defeating the sell-off's privatization rationale. What is more, control of the country's largest cement supplier translates into effective leverage over the country's entire construction industry, thereby further increasing the military's economic clout -- not to mention that the government may never realize even the financial benefit of the sale, since the IPM was permitted to purchase the factory on credit. The IPM's latest target for acquisition is the national telephone company (already operated by the military), which the government also wishes to privatize as part of its campaign to reduce the state-owned sector. One begins to grasp the nature of General Discua's conception of "national development."
The military's institutional income from its various business enterprises has been estimated to be as high as $40 million. Calculating from the State Department's figure of $100 million [i.e., two-thirds of $150 million), this "off-budget funding" amounts to about 40% of "official" military expenditure and fully 80% of the $50 million in funding the military received from the Honduran government
165
Honduras
in 1992 (and several times the $6.2 million to $15 million received from the U.S.). One foresees the day when the military establishment will be capable of sustaining itself with no public funding whatsoever, thereby freeing itself from one the few controls still exercised over it by the civilian authorities and the government of the United States. The human rights implications are obvious, and this trend should not have been overlooked.
As in past years, the State Department also fails to note that there are credible reports that senior elements of the military establishment are involved in international drug trafficking, another potentially huge source of "off-budget" income. Such reports deserve serious attention, since not only is the Honduran military endemically corrupt and increasingly profit-oriented, it is perfectly situated for such trafficking: as noted earlier, it operates customs, the airports, the ports, the merchant marine, the police and the telephone company, and even has its own bank.
The "auto-privatization" of the armed forces is also proceeding at the individual level; soldiers continue to use their power and influence to convert themselves into successful businessmen, landowners and commercial farmers. To a degree this is business as usual: the right to exploit one's position for private profit has long been an accepted perquisite of a military career. But the process has accelerated in recent years. Officers now typically dedicate far more time to their personal businesses than to their military duties. They are rapidly converting themselves into a powerful and highly privileged
social elite, citizens of an emerging "state within a state" that itself effectively already possesses all three governmental branches -- executive (military Commander-in-Chief Discua), legislative (the Superior Council) and judiciary (the notorious military courts, which continue to assert exclusive jurisdiction over matters involving military officers and civilians) -- and is rapidly developing its own commercial economy as well. The report discusses, accurately and well, the various symptoms of this burgeoning military cancer: abuses by individual officers for "personal reasons," the tendency to close ranks around accused officers, the ineffective civilian judicial system, and so on. But the failure to acknowledge the tactics and growth of the military state as a whole fosters the erroneous notion that such abuses are merely the unpleasant remnants of an outmoded system that is fading away.
This is unfortunate, since the report is otherwise quite good. The section on political and extrajudicial killings, for example, provides a effective discussion of the investigation into the Agua Caliente killing of five members of the National Association of Honduran Peasants, as well as an excellent description of the institutional paralysis that has resulted from the -Supreme Court's failure to resolve the jurisdictional dispute between the civilian and military courts. The discussion of the investigation into the murder of Manuel de Jesús Guerra is also good, with solid reporting of the abusive attempts by the national police to intimidate another member of Guerra's organization, the National Central of Farm Workers, into confessing to the crime --which culminated, typically, in the civilian
166
Honduras
judge's transfer of the case to a military court.
Yet the tendency to downplay and even obscure military culpability inevitably creeps in. For example, in the discussion of Juan Humberto Sanchez, who appears to have been murdered by members of the armed forces, the report underscores Sanchez's FMLN connections, as if this somehow justified an extrajudicial execution. Moreover, the report fails to mention the pressure exerted by the local military authorities upon the judge to have the case closed as an "unknown" homicide.
An example of the report's tendency to overreach in noting signs of improvement is its dubious enthusiasm for the Office of Professional Responsibility (ORP), established in 1991 to police the police. The report lauds the "modest efforts of . . . Commander Brigadier General Guillermo Paredes to improve the poor image of the police" as a "bright spot," concluding that although ORP's effectivenessagainsthigh-ranking officers "remains to be proven," it "showed itself to be effective in handling allegations against enlisted and low-ranking police officers." Omitted from the discussion is a recent case that indicates the ORP's role may well be directed more toward correcting the image of the police rather than their actual abuses. Three men, Jesús Arquimides Monzón Mejf, Miguel Angel Montoya and Benjamín Manzanares, were allegedly tortured by the police in the municipality of Jesús de Otero, Intibucá; then, after having been released for lack of evidence, they were informed they would have to pay 200 lempiras each to have their "criminal records"
expunged. When the men complained to the ORP, not only was no action taken, but they were allegedly treated in an intimidating manner. The report's discussion of the ORP typifies the overall approach: evenhanded and accurate description of particular abuses, coupled with an unwarranted willingness to seize upon indications that the situation is improving, and to disregard or downplay conflicting evidence.
The same pattern emerges, more subtly, in the section on "disappearances." The report notes the government's failure to make progress in investigating the "disappearances" of the 1980s, then shades its condemnation with the comment that the "disappearances" "mainly occurred . . . under the tenure of former Armed Forces Commander General Gustavo Alvarez Martinez." This is true, but the qualifying phrase implies a fundamental change in military leadership, bolstering the report's implicit premise that power, or at least accountability, is being wrested from the military. As noted above, this premise is false. Moreover, the comment glosses over the fact that both Alvarez and the current commander, General Discua, were closely associated with the notorious 3-16 "Death Battalion." Discua's background and his performance as Commander-in-Chief provide little support for the notion that the two men are cut from different cloth. The report should also have noted that the government has an affirmative obligation to investigate "disappearances" that remain unresolved from the 1980s.
With regard to the report's discussion of the Borjas and Castellón murders, it should be noted that Josué Elf Zúniga
167
Honduras
Martínez, a former agent of the National Department of Investigation (DNI), in early 1993 alleged publicly that Borjas and Castellón were assassinated by members of the 3-16 "Death Battalion." Zún-iga stated that the 3-16, which was supposed to have been dissolved in the 1980s, continues to exist secretly within certain military units and regularly carries out political killings, not only for ideological reasons but for "personal and institutional gain."
The State Department continues to omit the perverse effects of the 1991 amnesty. As discussed above, the military's officers are exploiting their newly underscored lack of accountability to convert themselves into a ruling elite above the law. The report is uncompromising, by contrast, in conveying the de facto impunity enjoyed by the upper class in general, particularly in its discussion of the case of Rosa Castro Bobadilla. Not only did Bobadilla "escape" after being arrested for murdering Fernando Marichal Callejas (the president's cousin), but the examiner charged with maintaining and reviewing the forensic evidence was none other than her brother, then Chief of Legal Medicine. The report's discussion of this case clearly illustrates "the conflict of interest present in the Honduran system of government."
As this example indicates, the report is generally good in identifying the structural and institutional weaknesses of the legal system, which result not only in travesties such as the Bobadilla case, but widespread abuses such as arbitrary arrest and incommunicado detention. The discussion commendably targets detention without sentencing as a particularly
serious rights problem, and drives its point home by noting that "a significant number of defendants . . . serve the maximum possible sentence . . . before their trials are ever concluded (or sometimes even begun)."
The section on governmental interference in private affairs reports that there was credible evidence "that police and armed forces personnel failed at times to obtain the needed authorization before entering a private home," going on to note that "the [military] takes advantage of its operation of the national telephone company to monitor selected telephone lines illegally." Again, the specific reporting is commendable, but couched in language that operates to mitigate the impact of the unpleasant facts presented. The implication is that the problem is either merely one of loose procedural practice -- a "failfure] at times to obtain the needed authorization" - or is limited in scope - the lines illegally monitored are "selected." What is omitted is that the military maintains an entire administrative apparatus permanently hooked into the central switching stations, a system that enables it to tap any line at will, without the necessity of special equipment or effort. Telephone company employees (such as Carlos Kellner, discussed below) have reported that the armed forces take advantage of this system to engage in constant and flagrant wiretapping, not only of political opponents but of civilian governmental ministries and agencies as well. There is also evidence that the military increasingly uses such tapping, as well as other "military intelligence" operations, to further its private economic interests: spying on business competitors, intercepting secret bids submitted for
168
Honduras
auctions of state assets, monitoring labor "troublemakers." No wonder the military is bent on purchasing the telephone company: such industrial espionage has become a key component of its overall economic strategy.
The report also omits any discussion of the civilian government's continuing failure to take action to curb these abuses. Typically, it also ignores the opportunity to tie in disturbing collateral facts, such as the IPM's bid for the telephone company, that reveal an overall trend that contradicts the premise of decreasing military intrusiveness.
The section on freedom of the press accurately notes the corruption and politi-cization of the media. However, it would have been useful to note that military intelligence maintains dossiers profiling all of the country's journalists, a practice recently acknowledged publicly by the commander of the police.
The section on political rights contains a perceptive discussion of the problems created by Honduras's system of unitary ballots and internal party elections, demonstrating that the system "tends to limit direct, popular participation in the process" and "limits the institutional effectiveness and independence of the Congress." Here again, it would have been appropriate to mention the most significant recent demonstration of this legislative weakness: General Dis-cua's success in bullying Congress into passing his special legislation.
The discussion of non-governmental investigation of human rights violations correctly points out the ineffectiveness of
the governmental Inter-Institutional Commission on Human Rights. However, it fails to note the government's continuing failure to prosecute the investigation into the case of Miguel Angel Pavón Salazar, despite the availability of concrete evidence and testimony. Salazar was murdered in 1988, apparently in reprisal for his testimony in a "disappearances" case before the Inter-American Court of Human Rights.
The section on discrimination provides a solid account of the serious problem of indigenous people being pushed off their land by "nonindigenous farmers and cattle growers." As the report notes, " (Ilegal recourse is commonly denied to indigenous groups because of the courts' bias in favor of the nonindigenous party, often people of means and influence." On the other hand, the discussion, although effective, depicts the problem as simply a private-sector matter. The missing dimension is, of course, the military. Individual officers, in their capacity of entrepreneurs and landowners, are frequently involved in these disputes with indigenous peoples, and are not reluctant to abuse the influence and impunity they enjoy as members of the new ruling elite.
Such military involvement undoubtedly fosters the heavy governmental and judicial bias against indigenous people and small farmers in these disputes, but is difficult to pinpoint in specific cases. The lucrative new shrimp farming industry is a representative example. The adverse impact on the native shrimp population produced by such farming has provoked protests by local fishermen, several of whom have been killed in clashes with agents of the shrimp farming interests.
169
Honduras
Yet the government has persisted in taking no action, despite reports that the killers' identities are well known to the people in the area. Clearly, the substantial involvement in the industry of influential military officer-entrepreneurs is a key factor in this prosecutorial indifference. The report consistently fails to assemble these patterns and consistently evades taking notice of the disturbing trends they indicate.
This blind spot is even more apparent in the section on worker rights, which discusses the problem of private companies instituting parallel "solidarity associations" in order to undermine unionization initiatives, but inadequately conveys or analyses the increasing "militarization" of these disputes. The assertion, for example, that "there is no evidence that the military or the government maintain union blacklists" is contradicted by credible reports that military intelligence maintains dossiers on union activists, and provides this information to entrepreneurs and foreign investors doing business in Honduras. Such abuses are certain to proliferate as the military expands into the private sector. The State Department drastically downplays the military's involvement in displacing the legitimate telecommunications union (SITRATELH) and persecuting one of its leaders, Carlos Rodolfo Kellner Garcia. The discussion opens with the misleading statement that "the Government installed a parallel union" (emphasis added), implying that the civilian authorities were behind these actions, and that the role of the army and the police was limited to implementing civilian policy. The reality is the reverse. The policy was formulated and directed not by the government but by the military
high command. The civilian administration's role was essentially one of passive complicity, as when the Ministry of Labor improperly accepted the parallel union's false claim that it had won the union elections and dutifully registered the military-backed parallel group as the official telecommunications union.
The report also underplays the military's treatment of Carlos Kellner, leaving out that during the period he was held incommunicado after his August 28 arrest, he was beaten, threatened with death and repeatedly tortured with the capucha (hood) in an attempt to force him to resign. Kellner had also previously been informed by a friend in military intelligence that he was on a "death squad" list.
These omissions operate to diminish significantly the impact of the State Department's discussion of the SITRATELH/-Kellner case, which, because of the military's proprietary interest in the telephone company, serves to illustrate the armed forces' approach to labor relations. The harsh union-busting and terror tactics displayed are an ominous sign for employees of the increasing number of business enterprises owned by the military establishment and its individual officers. The report should have contained a frank discussion of the problems faced by workers, small farmers and native peoples as they confront businessmen and developers backed by what is, in effect, a huge, all-powerful, extremely well-armed Mafia.
The State Department's aversion to fundamental criticism of the military establishment or its senior leadership
170
Honduras
reflects an institutional unwillingness to confront a political problem exacerbated by years of massive and indiscriminate U.S. military and economic aid (totaling $1.8 billion over the last decade). The Department is also aware that under the terms of the Canal treaties the U.S. will lose its 10 military bases in Panama within this decade; other than Guantanamo Bay, the bases in Honduras will remain the U.S. military's last permanent foothold in Latin America. The desire to hang on to these installations could explain the State Department's perception that human rights concerns must be subordinated to the goal of protecting a working relationship with the Honduran military.
Not only is this policy morally dubious, it is self-defeating. The U.S. government's unseemly embrace of the Honduran military constitutes a gross disservice to the people of Honduras, who are being disenfranchised politically and economically by the predatory military elite. This disenfranchisement threatens to destroy Honduran democracy -- at a time when democracy has emerged as the best hope for enduring stability and prosperity in Latin America and throughout the world.
The report's pro-military slant is particularly ironic because the U.S. ambassador, Crescencio Arcos, has showed an admirable willingness to take on General Discua. His condemnation of the military's handling of the Riccy Mabel Martinez case galvanized Honduran public opinion, generating a wave of public outrage that overwhelmed military obstructionism and yielded an indictment of the army colonel accused of raping and murdering Martinez. The case dramatically demonstrated that the U.S. embassy's position,
presented forcefully and without compromise, can have a powerfully constructive effect. Public opinion may now be the only force still capable of reining in the Honduran military. An unbiased, hardhitting country report exposing the tactics of would-be "caudillo" Discua and the economic power grab by the bloated military establishment could only help Honduran democracy prevail.
171
