Croatia
Any analysis of the human rights situation in Croatia is a daunting task due to the complexities inherent in the ongoing fragmentation of the former Yugoslavia, accompanied by the violent eruption of inter-related political, social and ethnic struggles, the magnitude of which has not been seen in Europe for half a century. The ferocity of these conflicts has resulted in the systematic violation of human rights. Innumerable children, men and women continue to be displaced from their homes, and the conflict has given rise to an acute humanitarian crisis.
The 1992 State Department report on Croatia documents the human rights situation, despite the extraordinary difficulties faced by human rights monitors in substantiating, analyzing and summarizing events in a very complex, politicized and fluid situation. The report, however, has two important shortcomings. First, it fails both to adequately address the fragmentation of central government control, territorial control and legal norms in Croatia, and, at times, underemphasizes the human rights violations. Second, it fails to illustrate the extent of abuses and discrimination against civilians in Croatia, including refugees and displaced persons.
The report should have placed into context the effects of the division of Croatia into government-controlled and Serbian-controlled areas on the protection of human rights in these areas. The report repeatedly refers to "Serbian authorities" (which control a third of Croatia) with the implication of close collaboration between these "Serbian authorities" and the government of the rump
state of Yugoslavia. The report would be more accurate if it described and discussed the difficulty of assigning responsibility for human rights abuses, and if it used consistent terminology to indicate whether the violations in question were being committed by Yugoslav Army forces, Croatian armed forces, or Serbian or Croatian irregulars. The report does not clearly describe which authority or government is in control of what territory and the police or military forces and legal system of that territory, or who is ultimately responsible for maintaining the rule of law. While it is useful to know in which geographic area human rights abuses occur, it is perhaps more important to craft an analysis which ties the abuses to the responsible government or perpetrators of such abuses. The report's approach of switching back and forth between discussions of human rights abuses in Serbian and Croatian-controlled areas makes it difficult to distill an overall picture of what the key issues and trends are in geographic areas under the control of different individuals, factions and/or governments.
The report accurately refers to evidence that rogue military commanders in the Serbian-controlled areas (mostly within the UN Protected Areas -- UNPAs) have committed human rights abuses -- even mentioning "Serbian warlords." It should have included and analyzed reports by human rights monitors (including that of the UN Special Rapporteur of the Commission of Human Rights) of abuses committed by Croatian paramilitary units, such as the detention of large numbers of ethnic Serbs on charges of rebellion (of-
74
Croatia
ten with no tangible evidence of real links to the unrecognized government of "Kraji-na" and the Serb forces loyal to it), effectively amounting to the detention of the civilian population on the basis of their ethnic origin.
The report should have paid greater attention to credible evidence that some prisoners have died of torture and mistreatment in Croatia, as well as the real threat to the lives of prisoners because of poor nutrition, crowding and other substandard conditions of detention. One example of torture of prisoners in Croatia is the Beljovar prison where the UN reported that two prisoners were first tortured by the local police and later -- over a period of several days - by military police. Torture methods included beatings (causing broken teeth and ribs), electric shock, mock execution, burning with cigarettes and burning the beard of one of the prisoners. The UN Protection Force (UNPROFOR) reported that the Croatian police failed to cooperate in the investigation of such crimes.
The discovery by Dr. Clyde Snow, a forensic anthropologist accompanying Tadeusz Mazowiecki (the UN Special Rapporteur), of a site near Vukovar of a mass grave confirms witness evidence of the "disappearance" of about 175 persons from the Vukovar hospital during the evacuation of Croatian patients on November 20, 1991. The report should have paid greater attention to this UN report instead of only referring to it as reported by "an international investigating team."
The State Department report states that "persons incarcerated for ordinary
crimes are not usually treated harshly," but it fails to assess reports that political detainees are classified as criminals and what such characterization implies for the detainees and the protection of their rights. No reference is made to the use of unrecognized detention facilities containing from 10 to 100 prisoners, including homes, schools, disused factories and warehouses. The report does not assess the actions of the military wing of the openly fascist political party, the Croatian Right Party, even though some observers consider this militia to be responsible for some of the worst human rights abuses against ethnic Serbs. Furthermore, while the report refers to prisoner seizures and exchanges for captives of another nationality, it fails to make the extent of such flagrant abuses clear.
Ethnic minorities living in Croatia remain vulnerable to human rights violations. In areas under the government's administration, harassment and discrimination are perpetrated against such minorities: the refusal of citizenship rights; the destruction and confiscation of property; arbitrary arrest and detention; dismissal from employment; torture and mistreatment of Serbs in Croatian police and military custody; and strict government control over the media. In the territories where Serbian groups maintain de facto rule, Serbian militias and local Serbian authorities repeatedly carry out activities known as ethnic cleansing (particularly in the UNPAs South and East), eliminating and intimidating members of other ethnic groups.
Despite the January 1992 cease-fire agreed to by Croatian and Serbian authorities, some 340,000 Croatians remain
75

Croatia
internally displaced and about 350,000 refugees are outside Croatian borders. An estimated 390,000 refugees who fled Bosnia and Herzegovina and 30,000 refugees from Serbia remain in Croatia. The report should have scrutinized the refugee policies and practices in Croatia to a greater extent, given the magnitude of the crisis. The continuing influx of refugees into Croatia and the financial burden of assisting their needs led the Croatian government to implement policies which increasingly restricted access for Bosnian refugees. Such policies resulted in the rejection at the border of thousands of refugees fleeing for their lives, and UNPROFOR (which controls much of the border between Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia) limiting their entry into the UNPAs, thus violating the principle of non-refoulement.
The report does not discuss a key concern in Croatia -- the future of democratic development in the face of what many critics across the political spectrum regard as the authoritarian tendencies of President Franjo Tudjman and his ruling Croatian Democratic Party (CDP) against the press and political opponents. The report does not mention that the main issue during the August election campaign was the commitment of President Tudjman and the CDP to democracy, since both were widely accused of using public office for partisan ends. The government has been accused of using a variety of tactics to silence or complicate life for journalists and for publications. Although the report refers to restrictions on freedom of the media, it does not assess government violations of civil liberties. First, the government used complex privatization laws or accumulat-
ed debts of once subsidized publications to close them down or to take them over (for example, the government's 51% stake in Vjesnik). Then the government employed further legal harassment against periodicals which the CDP did not favor, by applying Article 197 of the Criminal Code (which makes "verbal offenses" a crime) against journalists and politicians of all political persuasions, including employees of Novi Danas, Slobodna Dalmacija and Globus. Ironically, Article 197 is a remnant of communist legislation previously used against Tudjman and others in the governing party.
Investigations into the bomb attack which destroyed the empty car of Mar-inko Bozic, the owner of Slobodni Tjednik, have neither refuted nor confirmed allegations by Bozic that this incident was the latest in a series of bomb attacks against known critics of the CDP. Yet the report distinguishes between bomb attacks by "criminals" and "terrorists" without any clear basis for doing so.
The analysis of human rights violations in Croatia should have assessed more clearly attempts to terrorize specific ethnic groups into leaving areas where they have lived for centuries and the cumulative effect of the deliberate, repeated use of human rights abuses directed exclusively at individuals ~ often civilians -- in a specific ethnic group.
While the UNPAs are technically under UN jurisdiction and patrolled by UNPROFOR, UNPROFOR does not exercise real control over the interiors of UNPAs in Croatia. Inside these areas, bands of Serbian irregulars, apparently accountable to no one, are in control.
76
Croatia
Ethnic cleansing reportedly eliminated most of the local Croatian population, and the remaining minority population lives in fear for their lives, facing constant harassment and threats. UNPROFOR officials have witnessed the export of feed, harvest, and even livestock from UNPA Sector East into Serbia.
The report should have provided more detail on the nearly total absence of the rule of law in the UNPAs. Local civilian and military authorities make decisions on a purely ad hoc basis within these areas. Crime is rampant in most parts, including everything from theft of gasoline from UN vehicles to arson, rape, murder and house bombings. For the most part, such crimes go largely unpunished, despite efforts by UN civilian police (part of UNPROFOR) to monitor the functioning of local police. In the few cases where crimes are prosecuted, the punishment often does not reflect the severity of the crime. The local police force, largely comprised of demobilized soldiers who merely changed uniforms when the UN was deployed, lacks professional training. There are credible reports that members of the local police are those committing many of the criminal offenses in the UNPAs, particularly against the remaining minority population.
The report makes no assessment of the judiciary or the judicial system in Croatia, or of the military tribunals which charged nearly 8,000 people, most in absentia. It also fails to ascribe some of its assertions about human rights violations to any source, making evaluation of the report's accuracy more difficult. For example, the report states that "'so-called judges' carry out extremist policies direct-
ed against non-Serbian minorities....."
without making it clear if "kangaroo or peoples courts" are involved, who the judges are, what the extremist policies are, and who is making these allegations.
The report presents a factually accurate summary of many of the abuses that have been committed. However, it does not adequately address the complexity of the political and ethnic conflict in the former Yugoslavia and the novel and difficult human rights questions associated with this conflict.
77
