Haiti
Haiti had a horrific year in 1992. Observers deplored the situation in Haiti during 1992 as a "human rights tragedy" (Amnesty International), a "human rights nightmare" (Lawyers Committee for Human Rights) and a "human rights catastrophe" (Americas Watch). Considering its space limitations, the State Department report provides a generally fair review of that abysmal situation. Several significant omissions, under-emphases, and biases in the 1992 report deserve note -- as do instances of the fair and thorough coverage which it otherwise exhibits.
More striking than the report's shortcomings, however, is the larger discrepancy between its findings and U.S. policy. U.S. policy toward Haiti often fails to acknowledge the horrific conditions which the State Department report documents.
The report accurately indicates that repression is endemic throughout Haiti and that its targets include rural Haitians, members of community organizations, supporters of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, clergy, journalists and labor unions. It deserves credit for such statements as "indiscriminate violence remained substantial, especially in the rural areas, where 70% to 80% of Haitians live," and "[politically active clergy were frequently victims of arbitrary arrest and harassment by the military as part of a more general intimidation campaign against Aristide sympathizers, particularly in the countryside."
The report should have reinforced such generic accounts by describing a
few specific examples of intimidation. Reported outrageous responses to minimally political acts (some from late 1991) include arresting and executing 20 people for attending a memorial Mass for coup victims, executing people "simply because their name was Aristide," killing someone for putting up posters of President Aristide, beating people after a search of their house turned up a single picture of President Aristide, and jailing and beating people for celebrating Bill Clinton's U.S. presidential election victory.
The report should have noted other frequent targets of official repression: lawyers, students, educators and community leaders. High school and university students have been targets of particularly harsh repression throughout 1992. Two examples typify the many reported cases. On July 14, police fired into a demonstration of 200 students at the school of medicine, and then arrested at least 50. Several students were reportedly executed in Titanyen, a mass graveyard used by the Duvalier dictatorship, during the night of December 4-5.
The report recognizes repression against all Aristide supporters. This is a significant improvement over last year's report, which concentrated on the risk only to "prominent" supporters of President Aristide. This is critically important as his supporters are an enormous group, comprising at least 67% of the voters in the December 1990 election. The report should have added that supporters of other political parties also suffered persecution.
155
Haiti
The report's conclusion that official intimidation prevented most Haitians from even attempting to hold meetings reflects an incisive analysis of the negative conditions underlying a superficially favorable trend. The report states that "[rjeports of the forceful dispersal of peaceful assemblies declined later in 1992, apparently more from civilian reluctance to try to congregate than from any lessening of the army's determination to prevent civil unrest."
These acknowledgments of nearly ubiquitous official repression imply that very many Haitians, not only city dwellers or former top governmental officials, fear political persecution. U.S. policies such as skepticism toward political asylum claims and the requirement that asylum applicants contact U.S. officials in Port-au-Prince ignore the prevalence of violations. A U.S. diplomat in Haiti, quoted in the New York Times, typifies this factually unsupported attitude: "The vast majority of these claims are nonsensical, and most of the Haitians themselves know this. That is why they are getting into boats instead of coming here to the embassy." U.S. policy toward Haiti should heed the report's compelling findings of widespread fear.
The State Department describes briefly but thoroughly the harassment of religious groups. Again, here the report could have more clearly depicted the situation by adding statistics and specifics. Several Haitian human rights organizations detailed attacks on the clergy and one report listed 75 priests, nuns and other religious workers harassed by the government since the coup. Bishop Willy Romelus was detained three times in
September, and his rectory stormed by soldiers.
The report understates the persistently high level of official brutality during 1992 by comparing it to the eruption of violence at the end of 1991: "The year 1992 did not see the same degree of wide-scale political violence that followed the September 1991 coup d'etat and claimed between 300 and 400 victims." After the coup, as the UN special expert noted, the government tried "to avert popular protest by means of preventive repression." While human rights violations during 1992 did not match the brutality of that reign of terror, they remained at an intolerable and extremely high level throughout the year.
The report's comparisons to the coup aftermath, and its statement that abuses were worse under the Nerette-Honorat government than under Bazin, imply that conditions improved somewhat during 1992. Contrary to that suggestion, the report should have recognized that violations sharply increased during some periods, such as from mid-May into July (including the days around Bazin's swearing in), and again in November and December.
The report understates human rights violations in four important areas: the number of political murders, interference with citizens' right to change government, intimidation of journalists and prison conditions.
In 1992, at least five independent organizations estimated the number of political killings since the coup: the Platform of Haitian Organizations for the
156
Haiti
Defense of Human Rights, the Inter-American Commission of Human Rights, the UN Commission on Human Rights, the Caribbean Conference of Churches, and Human Rights Watch. Their estimates range from "well over 1,000" to "approximately 3,000."
The State Department report estimates that 300 to 400 people were killed following the coup (a slight reduction from last year's estimate of 300 to 500), and that in 1992, "(djozens of murders, presumed to be political, were carried out by individuals in authority." The report deserves credit for noting the difficulty of counting political killings because the Haitian government rarely investigates any murders. But the State Department should explain the method behind its low figures.
The section on respect for political rights is too brief. Its main paragraph states: "The right of citizens to change their government was forcibly abridged in September 1991 when rebellious soldiers forced the duly elected President to flee the country after a military coup. Most senior members of Aristide's administration either went into hiding, fled the country, or took refuge in foreign embassies." That statement, while accurate, ignores many points which the State Department instructions regarding the preparation of the country reports emphasize are relevant. First, the Nerette-Hon-orat and Bazin governments have not only rejected the democratic election result of an overwhelming majority of voters, but they also frustrated international attempts to restore that result. Second, government forces have repressed political opposition by means of murder, torture,
arrest and harassment. Third, authorities have repressed all levels of political participation, from the president, parliamentarians and mayors to individuals with the most marginal political involvement. Fourth, the paragraph about Parliament should have noted that parliamentary debate is threatened by extensive intimidation in Parliament and to its members; senators have been threatened at gunpoint in sessions of Parliament, and arrested, shot and beaten outside of it.
Groups which protect freedom of the press have thoroughly reported violations of that right, violations which the report also understates. The "many" reporters arrested and intimidated were often beaten as well, and suffered confiscation of credentials or equipment. They represented foreign and local news organizations. Such repression occurred throughout 1992, not only during the period immediately after the coup as the report emphasizes. For example, Dominique Levanti, the bureau chief of Agence France Presse, had his passport and credentials confiscated in May. Guy Delva of the Voice of America received death threats, then was beaten and arrested on May 22. While covering a demonstration on November 12, Patrick Slavin of the Miami Herald was attacked and threatened by the military, and Clarens Renois and Jean-Max Blanc, of Radio Metropole and the Voice of America respectively, were detained and beaten.
Several publications closed after the coup, contrary to the report's assertion that there was little clampdown on print media. In an incident bearing on both press freedom and labor relations, on November 17 the army reportedly entered
157
Haiti
the premises of the newspaper L'Union during a labor protest, and 40 employees were dismissed. Haitians were reportedly arrested for "the mere fact of owning a copy of newspapers such as Haiti Progrès and Haiti en Marche," and for listening to Voice of America.
The Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) gives figures on radio stations which are different from the report's. CPJ states that 25 radio stations operated in Port-au-Prince before the coup, and only five shortly afterwards. The State Department only counts 18 stations before the coup, based on its statements that four stations have permanently closed since the coup and 14 now operate.
Haitian prison conditions are described accurately but too briefly: "Prison conditions are abysmal. Detainees regularly have no access to legal counsel and continue to suffer from a lack of the most basic hygienic facilities as well as inadequate food and health care." More detail would more fully depict the prisons' inhumanity and note additional violations. A Caribbean Conference of Churches mission estimated that 70% to 85% of detained Haitians are subject to torture or ill-treatment. The UN Special Rapporteur on Torture received reports that "persons arrested for political reasons were almost invariably beaten on arrest and were subsequently maltreated in prison." Amnesty International reports that, particularly in the Saint-Marc prison, prisoners regularly are beaten, die from malnourish-ment or lack of medical treatment, and must pay bribes in order not to be beaten, to use the toilet or to get a drink of water.
The military and section chiefs are the major abusers of human rights in Haiti. The State Department's reporting regarding them is commendable, but its analysis could have probed more deeply.
The report's introduction deserves credit for squarely blaming many of Haiti's worst human rights abuses on the military, and for recognizing the civilian government's lack of will or authority to stop the military's brutal repression. The report establishes the military's institutional role and criticizes the continued high military budget and the military's unconstitutional usurpation of police powers.
The report understates the Army's political clout -- although it recognizes the necessity of support from "Armed Forces Commander General Cedras as well as lower ranking officers and soldiers" for Bazin's elevation to Prime Minister. The report's failure to explicitly acknowledge that the military continues to hold the real political power in Haiti leaves a misleading impression.
The report merits praise for implicating the notorious "section chiefs," local officials feared throughout Haiti as autocratic and brutal. It commendably details how corruption and abuse percolate through the military to local levels: "Section chiefs commonly obtain their positions by bribing the military commanders who appoint them and recouping their 'investment' by accepting money from numerous 'deputies' who extort money from the peasant population."
The report should have made explicit the implications of this statement, that
158
Haiti
corruption is endemic to the armed forces at all levels. The report's description of "deputies" could highlight their illegality by noting that the law limits the number of a section chief's deputies to two, but that in fact the deputies often form "private armies" that number in the dozens.
Showing commendable thoroughness, there are several indications in the report that the government rarely investigated violations. However, the report should have explicitly acknowledged, here as with the deputies, the implication of its statements: high-level complicity in military violence. The report blames "elements of the armed forces," without analyzing which elements are responsible. Assigning responsibility to the military is important, but the report should go a step further. Virtually the entire military, including its senior levels, are implicated in human rights violations. While analysts disagree over the level of cohesion in the Haitian military, its nationwide peaceful facilitation of December 1990 elections indicates that the military is capable of being organized, disciplined and controlled, rather than chaotic.
The report mentions few individual cases, about 20 incidents among thousands, because of space constraints. Those accounts deserve praise for diligent investigation, but sharp criticism for lowering the standard of evidence regarding one incident.
The murder of Yves Jean-Pierre, the bodyguard of Prime Minister-designate Rene Theodore, during a gathering of representatives of 12 political parties, is described well. The State Department's immediate reaction to the incident, with-
drawing the U.S. ambassador, was appropriate and strong. The report admirably pursues evidence beyond the government's admission of police involvement to incriminate Leopold Clerjeune (former leader of the notorious Anti-Gang Bureau) in the raid. Some description of that evidence, which seems not to be publicly available, could verify the report's allegation.
In the case of the 1991 killing of Roger Lafontant, the imprisoned former leader of the Tontons Macoutes, the State Department also admirably seeks to assign responsibility. Here, however, the report presents a flimsy case, apparently in order to raise allegations against President Aristide. The report generally maintains a high standard for proof, publicizing only well-documented and confirmed reports. Its evidence that Aristide ordered the Lafontant murder fails to meet that standard. Analysts have declared the Lafontant murder unsolved. If weak evidence of Aristide's involvement is presented, the contrary evidence should at least be aired. Notably, when he allegedly ordered the Lafontant murder, Aristide was under Army detention in the midst of a coup against him, and was being threatened with his own execution.
The Lafontant murder is also an exception to the report's general practice to avoid describing in detail abuses which occurred in 1991. The inclusion of this case is egregious, given the report's divergence from its standards of evidence already noted. The New York Times reports that its inclusion was controversial, and demanded by Bush administration State Department officials. The dispatch of an expert from the U.S. Fed-
159
Haiti
eral Bureau of Investigation to Haiti to investigate the Lafontant killing also seems irregular. If officials in the U.S. government are attempting to discredit Aristide, the State Department's human rights report should not become a tool in such a campaign.
In its discussion of the refugee situation, the report asserts that "[Haitian] authorities have made only token efforts to interfere with the migration [from Haiti to the United States] .... Since February, the U.S. Embassy in Port au Prince has conducted Creole-language interviews with over 3,000 repatriates, without finding a single credible claim of mistreatment or retribution against any Haitian for having attempted to leave Haiti." This brief statement deserves close attention because it implicitly condones the U.S. practice of sending back everyone who flees Haiti by sea. That policy, widely criticized as illegal and immoral, helps to legitimize Haiti's repressive regime and subjects persons with legitimate fear of persecution to increased risk that such persecution will occur.
In response to reports of retribution raised by, among others, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the U.S. sent officials from the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) and the State Department throughout Haiti. These teams interviewed repatriated refugees and sought to refute claims of retribution. They announced that they found no repatriates harassed for having attempted to leave Haiti. The State Department's claim of non-retribution has aroused widespread doubt. Since the report repeats that claim, it should also at least acknowledge the existence of these
reservations.
Americas Watch and the National Coalition for Haitian Refugees reviewed cables and depositions of officials, and found the State Department's work to be "deeply flawed." They pointed out that the 2,500 repatriates interviewed through May excluded those asylum-seekers who had presented credible claims of persecution. Those Haitians, the roughly 30% of refugees with the most reason to fear retribution, were allowed into the United States before May 24, but would be repatriated under President Bush's "Ken-nebunkport order" of that date (which President Clinton has allowed to stand). The Americas Watch critique pointed out that the State Department's methodology is "as if a survey conducted among a group of Haitians from whom all those over six feet tall had been removed concluded that no Haitian is over six feet tall."
Methods of finding repatriated refugees were skewed, particularly by relying on the Haitian Red Cross, whose information is deemed unreliable by many informed observers, given that it often works with the military and many of its local leaders are political figures.
Statistics suggest that many repatriates avoided interviews or were in hiding. The teams of U.S. officials, seeking to meet the largest possible number in a short time, made few efforts to locate people in hiding. Those efforts they did make turned up few people. The interviews were short, mostly under five minutes (three minutes of which were spent taking biographical information). They were biased, as interviewers strove
160
Haiti
to discredit any claims of retribution. INS investigators in particular were often hostile to refugees' claims. "I feel that 95 to 97% of the people obviously have had no problems," said one INS team leader.
Interviews were often conducted in public, and sometimes in the intimidating presence of Haitian soldiers. During interviews in Corail, the State Department cable states, "a policeman armed with an automatic weapon stormed up and down the street shouting that whoever had put up the [pro-Aristide] propaganda was going to be in trouble. ... It is noteworthy that the 30-odd repatriates waiting to be interviewed barely seemed to notice the policeman's theatrics."
The report's assertion and the interviews have an important qualification: they found no cases of retribution "for having attempted to leave Haiti." The State Department thus ignores repatriated refugees who were persecuted for political reasons, rather than for their repatriation -- although both groups are endangered by the U.S. policy of indiscriminate repatriation. For example, interviewers reported that they ignored one returned refugee's report of being beaten because the beating occurred "not as a consequence of his repatriation, but of an act [marching in a pro-Aristide demonstration] widely known to be subject to military/police reaction."
Finally, despite its biased methods, the State Department recorded in its reports of its investigations several accounts of danger to repatriates. Upon one's return "the section chief had apparently told him to watch out." Others
avoided retribution by going into hiding. When the State Department learned of soldiers firing on departing boats, it initially doubted the reports, then attributed them to boat owners' failure to pay police "protection money," adding with typical skepticism, "[bjut, the story is often embellished in order to build a claim to political persecution." Interviewers earmarked several claims of retribution which they could not initially discredit for follow-up interviews. On future visits, they rejected those stories by finding implausible details or inconsistencies. Interviewers deemed all of the foregoing to be instances where repatriates did not face reprisals.
Many commentators have stated that the rule of law must be reinstated in order for human rights abuses to end. In contrast with previous State Department reports, the 1992 report admirably describes this underlying structural failure:
interrogation without legal counsel present is the norm, and the use of beatings and torture to extract confessions is widespread. Moreover, contempt for the judiciary dating back to the Duvalier regime rendered it a vestigial branch of government, understaffed, poorly trained, and inadequately compensated. Six years after the Duvaliers' fall, the judicial branch's lamentable state has not changed. All governments since 1986 have continued the practice of appointing and removing judges at will and of exerting political influence at every stage of the judicial process.
161
Haiti
As did the 1989 report, however, this section of the current report fails to acknowledge explicitly the role of the military in perverting justice in Haiti.
In conclusion, the report has several major shortcomings. It underreports the general nature of human rights abuses, particularly regarding the number of murders, the rejection of democracy, press restrictions and prison conditions. It minimizes the continuing nature of official brutality, which was pervasive throughout 1 992, by comparing it to the post-coup eruption of violence in late 1991. While the report points out military responsibility, it avoids implication of every level of the military structure. The report reduces its requirement for the burden of proof to blame President Aristide for the Lafontant murder. The report implicitly condones the U.S. policy of repatriating Haitian refugees by repeating dubious State Department claims to have found no retribution against repatriates.
Haiti is a country with a vibrant, rich culture and history. But it is also one whose government violently abuses power on an obscene scale, a country where people are killed for putting up a poster or for having the name Aristide and virtually every social organization is suppressed. A member of a U.S. congressional investigation said, "just living here is a violation of human rights." Contrary to every paragraph of the State Department's own report, U.S. policy reveals official skepticism toward allegations of human rights violations in Haiti.
162
