Hungary
The report on Hungary is largely an accurate and complete survey of human rights developments in the country during the past year. It captures many positive developments that have occurred, due regard being given for example to the establishments of human rights groups such as the Martin Luther King Organization, although it could have more strongly emphasized the significant positive role of the Constitutional Court. The report also discusses most of the significant setbacks, although in a few instances it omits or understates problems or raises legitimate criticisms only in the name of "the opposition" rather than confronting the problems directly. Overall, the changes in Hungary have been largely favorable. As a result, the country is still viewed as an island of relative political stability despite some uncertainty over divisions in the ruling coalition.
While the report describes the Constitutional Court and mentions its important role in declaring the media law unconstitutional, it does not discuss other areas in which the court has had a significant influence in establishing the rule of law. For example, in March the court annulled a law passed in November 1991 allowing former communists to be prosecuted for crimes committed during the 45 years of communist rule. The law would have extended the expired statute of limitations for past communist crimes, but the court held that such a retroactive change in the statute of limitations was unconstitutional. Additionally, the Constitutional Court declared the Parliament in default for its failure to pass a minorities law as required by the Constitution, and it set a
deadline for parliamentary action. Through such actions, the court has played a critical role in establishing the rule of law, and its rulings are largely respected by the other branches of government and the public. The report inexplicably gives short shrift to these major accomplishments.
The report also omits the background to Parliament's failure to pass a minorities law. As the report alludes, constitutional amendments require Hungary to protect its minorities, guarantee their participation in public life and their right to establish self-governing bodies. The report also discusses the Minority Roundtable, an advisory body which was established to negotiate with the government regarding the implementation of such guarantees. While Parliament did prepare a draft law, the report omits the fact that the Minority Roundtable rejected this law reportedly because it did not provide for affirmative action; it excluded Roma (gypsies) and Jews on the grounds that they are ethnic and religious groups, respectively, not national minorities; and it did not resolve the issue of minority representation in Parliament. While the State Department need not endorse the specific views of the Minority Roundtable, a mention of the debate seems warranted.
The report otherwise devotes a detailed, lengthy section to the two minority groups suffering the most discrimination, namely Roma and Jews. The report's treatment of the widespread discrimination and violence directed against the Roma is excellent, and includes discussion of socio-economic issues, popular
172
Hungary
prejudice and police abuse. Similarly, the report's description of attacks by so-called "skinheads" on foreigners of color is accurate and complete.
The report also accurately describes the anti-Semitic tract published by Vice-President Istv^n Csurka in August, but it somewhat overstates the government's response to this publication. Prime Minister Jdzsef Antall initially played down the publication's significance and only addressed its anti-Semitic overtones in his second statement a week later. The Cabinet's statement mentioned in the report did criticize "extremist political views," but it did not expressly refer to Csurka. The report fails to directly criticize the government for this inadequate reaction to Csurka's comments, but merely states that "opposition parties" found the government's, response insufficient. It also fails to mention that in an October interview Csurka repeated his assertion that Jews are the enemy due to their links to the communist era and "the fact" that they control international financial markets. The report should have acknowledged in more detail the government's excessive and unjustified caution in repudiating Csurka's views.
Hungary's "media war" was another critical event in 1992, and the report correctly devotes a lengthy section to describing the government's struggle over control of the media. In two respects, however, the report should have been stronger. First, the introduction of the report merely indicates that there was some "uncertainty over the status" of the broadcast media, and only acknowledges later that the media war "raised serious concerns about the freedom of the press
from government control." Second, despite its accurate description of the Prime Minister's attempts to remove the presidents of Hungarian radio and television and his takeover of their budgets, the report does not directly criticize these actions. Rather, it merely states that "theopposition" and "international organizations" felt that these actions were a threat to freedom of speech and freedom of the press. Such actions warrant stronger and more direct criticism in the State Department's own voice.
Finally, the report properly notes many of Hungary's constructive efforts to deal with its large influx of refugees, and it discusses allegations that some refugees were detained too long or denied asylum. The report omits, however, allegations of beatings and tear-gassing at the refugee detention camp in Kerepes-tarcsa, outside Budapest, a former communist prison holding 7,000 alien deportees, mostly economic migrants from Asia, Africa and Romania. The government acknowledged that these incidents occurred, but asserted that force was used in the context of a riot in self defense and that no one was injured. While the incidents seem to have been isolated, there was a sufficient number of credible sources of information to warrant a mention in the report.
173
