Indonesia
The State Department's report on the human rights situation in Indonesia offers a generally accurate analysis of the Indonesian government's human rights performance in 1992. This year's report goes further than previous reports in recognizing the institutional nature of human rights problems in the country.
The 1992 report provides a more accurate picture than past reports of the Suharto government and the role of law and legal institutions, implicitly recognizing that the political structure of the state is the fundamental factor in the perpetration of human rights violations. The report properly characterizes the rather futile nature of the 1992 elections and ties them to the institutional structure of the government. The State Department correctly observes that the people of Indonesia are not able to change their government through democratic means such as national elections and a multiparty system.
In important respects, however, the report fails to adequately portray the scope and severity of human rights violations by the Indonesian government in 1992. It understates government abuses in areas where there are independence movements and is weak in its criticism of the government's response to the 1991 massacre in Dili, East Timor. Its discussion of torture does not convey the extent of this problem, which is endemic in Indonesia. The report also fails to convey the pervasive nature of government repression in Indonesia, most evident in its omission of the student-led golput (blank ballot) campaign and of the government's
continued use of anti-communism as a justification for harassing perceived government opponents.
The report understates the full extent of government repression in Aceh, Irian Jaya and East Timor. While the report is correct to conclude that there has been a decrease in reports of killings in these regions in 1992, it should have noted that a heavy military presence remains in each of these areas. The fact that security forces have turned to civic action projects in Aceh, for instance, is not as positive a development as described in the report. The projects ensure military control over a large portion of society and allow the government to further infiltrate social organizations. The army also continues its practice of shooting suspected rebels in Aceh rather than taking them into custody. For instance, two Acehnese were shot in Padang, Tiji and in Delima, Pidie in early 1992. The deaths were explained as the result of their refusal to surrender. The discussion of extrajudicial executions should have included the killing of Martinus Prawar in Irian Jaya. Prawar, a leader of the Free Papua Movement, was killed by Indonesian soldiers on May 30 after they captured his hideout. Of the eight people in the camp, only Prawar was killed, raising concerns that he was summarily executed after his capture.
The report's discussion of government actions in the aftermath of the November 1991 massacre in Dili, East Timor is unsatisfactory. To its credit, the report states that "credible sources" believe that of those missing following
178
Indonesia
the massacre "most, if not all, of them were dead." This contradicts statements by the Indonesian government that most of the missing either returned to their own villages or joined the armed opposition. The report refers to "government efforts to cope with the aftermath of army troops' killing of unarmed demonstrators" (emphasis added), as if the government itself was not responsible for what happened at the Santa Cruz cemetery. And while it is true that the disciplinary action against military officers was "unprecedented," all action against senior officials was undertaken secretly, without any public accountability.
The report states that 13 Timorese were convicted "in connection with the incident" but fails to point out that they were arrested and convicted solely for engaging in the peaceful exercise of their rights to freedom of expression, association and assembly. Charges against those arrested included "obtaining the sympathy of the outside world for human rights violations," organizing the Dili demonstration, and presenting an image of East Timor to foreigners that suggests that the Indonesian government does not respect human rights.
In the section on the right to a fair trial, the report provides useful detail on violations of due process during the cases emerging from the Dili massacre. Still, by stating that the "trials were substantially fairer than the Aceh proceedings," the report misconstrues the notion of a fair trial. Official interference in political cases means that there is little relationship between the trial proceedings and the verdict and sentence. As the report notes, the "harsh sentences were intend-
ed specifically to deter future such anti-integration activity," which is a core objective of the Suharto government. Similarly, the introduction to the report states that although the trials of civilians were "open and generally conducted in accordance with Indonesian law, they failed to meet all international standards of fairness." The report should have stated forthrightly that the trials were unfair. The fact that certain international standards were met means little when those arrested were tried by courts that were fundamentally neither independent nor impartial.
The discussion of the trials of military personnel implicated in the Dili massacre also falls short. The report states that the security personnel were charged only with "relatively minor offenses." The report should have made it clear that in all but one case against the security personnel, the charges were for failing to obey orders or control subordinates, not for shooting on unarmed demonstrators without provocation. (The only policeman charged was convicted of cutting off the ear of a demonstrator.) Moreover, the government made no attempt in the trials of security personnel to examine ultimate responsibility for the shootings. The report should have noted that these trials were probably no more fair than those of the East Timorese activists, in that the verdicts and sentences were undoubtedly decided by the government and military.
The report asserts that there were no reports of politically motivated "disappearances" in Indonesia in 1992. This contrasts with reports received by the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary
179
Indonesia
Disappearances of the UN Commission on Human Rights, which received information on four "disappearances" occurring in 1992. Moreover, while the State Department report discusses "disappearances" related to the November 1991 East Timor massacre, it neglects "disappearances" occurring elsewhere, particularly in Aceh. Both Asia Watch and the UN Working Group have reported "disappearances" in Aceh, the latter citing seven cases, including alleged members of the Aceh Merdeka (Free Aceh Movement) and others arrested after their forcible return from Malaysia. It is feared that many of these people are dead. The State Department's instructions for the preparation of the reports require that "[i]f there were disappearances in the last two years that the government has made no apparent effort to investigate," it should be noted in the report. The reports of Aceh "disappearances" should have been included in the report.
The report's description of torture in Indonesia is inadequate, lacking in scope, depth and detail. Torture is an accepted tool of law enforcement in Indonesia and the report should recognize this fact. Torture is used to obtain political and other information, intimidate suspected political activists and extract confessions. The forms of torture vary, but include electrocution; slashing with razor blades and knives, including inside the mouth; beating on the head, shins and torso with fists, batons, iron bars, bottles, rocks and lengths of electric cable; sexual molestation and rape; kicking with heavy military boots; burning with lighted cigarettes; threats and deliberate wounding with firearms; immersion for long periods in fetid water; isolation; and sleep depriva-
tion.
The report should have done more to illustrate the problem of torture, which in non-political cases at least, has been well-documented in the Indonesian press. In the course of a land dispute in Menggala, North Lampung, one man was tortured while in illegal detention for 17 days, five people were abducted and beaten until they agreed to move off their land, and three other people were abducted and beaten, with one suffering serious internal injuries. Cases reported by Amnesty International included two women who were reportedly raped in front of their relatives and one man who was hospitalized after his limbs were broken and fingernails and toenails pulled out.
The report discusses the KUHAP, the criminal procedure law, and recognizes that it offers only minimal protection for the accused. It states that the KUHAP safeguards are "often" violated -- rather, such violations are routine.
The discussion of judicial independence should have noted the institutionalization of the Polgar Mahkehjapol in October. Previously an unofficial body, the Polgar Mahkehjapol makes national policy on justice issues. Consisting of the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, the Minister of Justice, the Attorney General and the Chief of Police, the body permits the direct intrusion of the executive branch and the security apparatus in judicial matters.
The section on press censorship could have provided significantly more detail on instances of censorship of the press in 1992. The firing of three editors from the
180
Indonesia
magazine Jakarta Jakarta following its publication of eyewitness accounts of the Dili massacre goes unreported. The journalists were fired by the magazine's publisher following pressure from the Armed Forces' Information Center. The local press in East Java was under instructions not to report on religious unrest; information on such incidents only became public as a result of a parliamentary hearing in which then ABRI Chief of Staff General Try Sutrisno participated. The report also does not mention that the government-controlled Indonesian Journalists Association appointed a commission to guard against "exaggerated and unreliable reporting" by the media. Lastly, although the report notes that the government threatens foreign journalists with the non-renewal of their visas, it fails to report that some journalists have had their visas revoked, such as Kenichi Asano, the Kyodo bureau chief.
The State Department's analysis of the new immigration law understates the chilling effect such a law could have on those critical of government policies. The law could be used against anyone deemed to have "tarnish[ed] the good name of Indonesia" or "endangered] national security," phrases that have been broadly interpreted by the Indonesian government in other contexts to justify arrests for peaceful political activity.
The report's discussion of government action against human rights monitors is good. However, it should have mentioned the case of Dadang Trisasong-ko, a lawyer for Yayasan Lembaga Ban-tuan Hukum (Indonesian Legal Aid Foundation), who was arrested and detained for four days because of his representa-
tion of villagers in Singosari, Gresik, near Surabaya, who were protesting the construction of a high voltage power grid over their homes. Initially charged with subversion, he still faces trial on charges of spreading hatred and expressing hostility toward the government.
The report does not fully address the 1985 Social Organization Law (ORMAS). Minister of Coordination of Police and Security Sudomo reportedly considered plans to expand the law to include previously exempt non-governmental organizations. The government's intimations of an expanded law had a chilling effect on the activities of affected organizations.
The discussion of the severe restrictions on the right of Indonesians to change their government is good. However, the report should not have buried at the end of a paragraph this crucial sentence: "In practice. President Soeharto and the military dominate the political system, and the MPR's selection of President Soeharto to repeated terms has been pro forma." The report describes government and military control of the feckless parliament, the dominance of the ruling Golkar organization, the government screening of ail candidates to elected office, the absence of genuine opposition parties and the onerous campaign restrictions. The report should have noted that the campaign rules were tightened further prior to the June 1992 polls. While it points out that virtually all government workers belong to Golkar, it should have added the tremendous pressure on them to vote for Golkar in elections.
The report does not discuss government repression of the student-led go/put
181
Indonesia
(blank vote) campaign of 1992, in which citizens were urged to boycott the elections. In the section on freedom of expression, the report notes without providing any context the case of two students in Semarang who were arrested after urging citizens not to vote. Other cases are ignored. Four other students were arrested in May for publicly suggesting that the Indonesian electoral process was unfair and two were charged with public expression of hatred towards the government. Forty-two people were arrested in Yogyakarta for demonstrating against the strict rules on election campaigning and urging people not to vote. Other violations were condoned by the government such as banning K.H. Sumarno Syafei from speaking at United Development Party rallies because he raised "prohibited" issues including ethnic and religious topics.
The report completely ignores developments in 1992 that demonstrated the Indonesian government's growing intolerance of the non-Muslim minority or its willingness to prosecute individuals because of demands of local Muslim religious groups. In November, the Indonesian government interfered in the election of the leader of the Batak Protestant Christian Congregation in North Sumatra. Major General R. Pramono, the regional commander, issued a decree appointing a member of the army faction to act as head of the church after he attempted to force the existing leader to resign and surrounded the church headquarters with troops. (Protests by church members led to a crackdown by the military in January 1993 and dozens of arrests.) In two separate incidents, students were arrested and sentenced to prison terms for
punning well-known phrases from the Koran during campus events. The government also interferes in the freedom of religion by officially forbidding interfaith marriage.
The State Department gives the government figures of 8,897 for persons listed on the Indonesian government's "blacklist." Non-government sources not cited in the report have given estimates ranging from 17,000 (Amnesty International) to 33,000 (TAPOL).
In the worker rights section, the report discusses the onerous requirements imposed by the government on the formation of unions. The report neglects to state that the efforts of the fledgling unions are stymied by the government through laws and intimidation. For example, the Serikat Burah Sejahtera Indonesia meeting on October 28 in Tangerang was broken up by the police. A union member, Mochtar Pakpahan, was picked up at home on October 29 by the police and interrogated by a military agency. Nine members of the Prosperous Indonesia Labor Union, formed in April, were arrested and held over night.
The report should have noted cases where striking workers were arrested by the authorities. For example, six workers were detained for questioning after the May 18 strike at Dong Joe Indonesia in Tangerang. After the Medan Canning Company strike on February 5, five female workers were arrested and detained overnight by the police at the district military command.
Forced labor continues to exist in Indonesia and was even discussed in the
182
Indonesia
Indonesian media in 1992. The report mentions only 1990 cases of forced labor in Irian Jaya, but there are more recent reports of such occurrences by logging companies, some with government involvement. For example, Asmat workers for P.T. Phoenix have been kept in permanent debt through the use of a "credit card" system whereby the workers must purchase goods against their income. Logging companies have government inspectors declare good logs to be substandard to deprive workers of income earned.
Also ignored by the report is the labor case involving Yayasan Tiara, a foundation run by Suharto's eldest daughter, and the Ministry of Manpower. They were implicated in separate incidents of luring East Timorese laborers to Java on false pretenses. In one case, 100 Timorese youths were placed in an armed forces training center in Cijantung were they were given military training before being sent to factories. Those who protested their treatment were interrogated and beaten by soldiers, accused of being political activists and threatened with electric shock. There has been no satisfactory government investigation into the incident.
As noted in past critiques, the State Department continues to ignore the ongoing manipulation by the government of anti-communist sympathies. Nearly 30 years after the destruction of the Indonesian Communist Party (PKI), the government continues to persecute persons by labelling them as communists or communist sympathizers. For example, on October 27, 11 people were beaten by the military and police in the streets of Yog-
yakarta and accused of being communists when they were preparing for a meeting at Gajah Mada State University. The government also banned an academic book because of its treatment of the former cultural organization LEKRA, a group associated with the PKI. The government stated that the book's favorable treatment of the organization and Indonesian communism conflicts with the principles of Pancasila and therefore was illegal.
183
