India
The 1992 report reflects a continuing improvement in the State Department's coverage of the human rights situation in India. It offers a fair and balanced account of the major developments during the period under review. Unfortunately, it also contains some inaccurate or misleading statements and a few glaring omissions.
The report is especially good in its citation of casualty figures and other statistics which are, as a rule, notoriously difficult to obtain in India. It has also succeeded significantly in achieving a better balance than its predecessor in its reporting of human rights abuses by government security forces.
While the destruction of the Babri mosque in Ayodhya did occur late in the year, the report should have focused more attention on the human rights implications of this event. The report correctly describes the large-scale violence that erupted all over the country following that incident, but it makes no mention of reports that police in Bombay (where the violence was especially ferocious) behaved in a partisan manner, generally ignoring and even participating in attacks on the minority Muslim population. That such criticism was not unfounded was borne out by the subsequent decision of the state government to transfer several senior police officers involved in maintaining law and order in the city.
There are significant inaccuracies in the report's description of Indian legal provisions. The section on the National Security Act (NSA), for instance, wrongly
states that detainees must be brought before an advisory board within seven weeks of arrest. In fact, the Act does not impose any such obligation on the government: it only requires the government to send documentation on each detention to the board within three weeks from the date of detention. The advisory board is obliged to submit its opinion regarding the continuation of detention within a further period of four weeks, during which time it can give the detainee an opportunity to appear before it in person.
The report is only partly correct in stating that persons detained under the NSA must be informed of the grounds for their detention within five days. The law allows the government, in undefined "exceptional circumstances," to defer disclosure of the grounds for detention for a further period of five days. In the state of Punjab, this period has been extended to 10 days, thus allowing the authorities there to keep the grounds of detention secret for up to 15 days from the date of detention. The report appears to be in error in stating that the NSA allows a person to be detained for up to two years in Punjab; that special provision was reportedly allowed to lapse in 1989 to bring detention powers in Punjab in line with those in force in the rest of the country. The Lawyers Committee has, however, received conflicting reports about this provision in the past, and despite considerable efforts, has not been able to obtain official confirmation about its repeal in 1989.
The report's treatment of the Terror-
174
India
ist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act (TADA) is even less satisfactory. While it correctly states that TADA allows for detainees to be held in police custody for up to 60 days (as against 15 days allowed under ordinary law), it errs in stating that the Act permits "additional administrative detention up to 1 year while an investigation proceeds." In fact, the period of one year during which a detainee may be held pending investigations is to be counted from the date of the initial arrest. The report, by not highlighting some of the rigors of the Act, is likely to give the uninitiated reader a misleading impression of its true character. As pointed out in last year's critique, TADA:
dent may proclaim an emergency either throughout the country or in a part of it.
The report fairly describes the Indian judiciary as being independent with strong constitutional safeguards. However, its statement that "effective appeal channels exist at all levels of the judicial system" is misleading in that it does not take into account the fairly severe abridgement of appellate rights under the special security laws. Those convicted of offenses under TADA, for instance, are only allowed one appeal -- instead of the two permitted under ordinary law -- and even that appeal has to be filed within a restricted period of 30 days from the date of their initial conviction.
permits detainees to be produced before executive magistrates (who are under direct executive control from the state's Home Ministry) instead of before judicial magistrates as required under normal criminal law; . . . imposes unduly onerous burdens on defendants seeking bail; . . . suspends, under certain circumstances, the traditional safeguard available to a defendant that confessions made to the police are not admissible in evidence; and . . . imposes serious limitations on the right to appeal.
The report only partly corrects another error highlighted in last year's critique: the circumstances under which a state of emergency may be proclaimed. The relevant constitutional provision refers to armed rebellion, and not "armed aggression," along with war and external aggression, as grounds on which the Presi-
The report is equally silent on the strong adverse reaction that followed the dismissal on December 16 of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) governments in Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan ~ clearly as an act of "punishment" for the BJP's alleged support for the pro-Hindu zealots involved in the events at Ayodhya. Even many of those opposed to the BJP saw the dismissal as an act of political vendetta and one that could not be justified on constitutional terms.
A significant omission in the report concerns the reaction that was provoked by the Indian government's decision to set up a governmental human rights commission -- a development which finds but a passing mention. Although the idea was generally welcomed in principle, several prominent individuals and nongovernmental organizations active in the area of human rights expressed grave doubts about the manner in which the
175
India
government intended to implement it. Fears have focused particularly on the independence of the proposed commission and on the government's willingness to give it the necessary powers and resources to carry out investigations of its own into complaints of human rights violations by state security forces, including the army.
The report correctly highlights the harassment of Ajit Singh Bains, the retired judge of the Punjab and Haryana high court who was detained under TADA for more than four months after delivering a speech which the authorities deemed to be seditious. It could have usefully added that the 70-year-old Mr. Bains, who was suffering from a heart condition, was reportedly handcuffed and made to stand in the sun while his home was being searched.
In its comment on the Indian government's response to the 400-odd cases of torture, rape and custodial deaths submitted by Amnesty International, the report refers to the government's contention that many of the 153 cases investigated by it revealed death by natural causes, suicide or crossfire rather than by ill-treatment attributable to state agencies. It should have added that in none of those cases did the government provide any details or documentation to support its conclusions.
The report notes that the Indian government is "sensitive" about international allegations of human rights violations. "Sensitive" here should be defined to mean "hostile" rather than "responsive." The government's meetings with Amnesty International and its review of alleged
cases of torture submitted by the group were important developments, as the government largely continues to refuse or restrict "official" visits to the country by international organizations.
The report should have also stated that the Indian government has been less than forthcoming in its responses to communications about alleged human rights violations from the various United Nations bodies. The UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances had, for instance, received specific responses to no more than 35 out of 169 cases transmitted by it to the government by the end of 1992.
The report fairly describes the longstanding problem of torture and other forms of ill-treatment by the police and army, which have often led to deaths in custody. It could have underlined the seriousness of the problem by noting a far-reaching judgment delivered by the Calcutta high court in June 1992 in which the government was ordered to carry out a judicial inquiry into all deaths in custody occurring in the state of West Bengal between 1977 and May 1992. That judgment also ordered the government to ensure that adequate monetary compensation was paid to victims of custodial violence or their dependents, and directed the chief judge of the city civil court in Calcutta to nominate a sessions judge to make surprise visits to police lock-ups to check mistreatment of detainees.
In its discussion of freedom of the press, the report rightly highlights the three-day strike launched by journalists in Srinagar to protest attacks and harass-
176
India
ment of journalists by both militants and government forces. It makes no mention, however, of another strike organized by journalists in the state on March 6 to protest a government order banning the reporting of news about and statements by outlawed insurgent groups, as well as a police attack the previous day on a group of journalists who were demonstrating against government restrictions on the coverage of events in Kashmir in which four journalists were injured. The report could also have usefully stated that Yusef Jameel, the British Broadcasting Corporation correspondent into whose house a hand grenade was thrown, was clubbed on the head by government security forces on September 25 while he was trying to interview women who were being arrested during a protest march in Srinagar.
The report's description of the Press Council of India could have been better phrased. The Council is more than "an independent board of journalists": it is a statutory body consisting of 28 members drawn from working journalists, proprietors of newspapers and news agencies, experts in the fields of education, science, law, literature and culture, and Members of Parliament. It is headed by a chairman - not a director -- who is usually a retired Supreme Court judge, and has power to investigate complaints against newspapers and news agencies that have allegedly offended journalistic ethics or public taste, or against journalists who may have committed an act of professional misconduct. The report's observation that "many journalists complain that the Council's actions promote self-censorship, resulting in a 'chilling effect' on investigative reporting," is
debatable.
A few minor errors should be noted. It is incorrect to state that under Articles 330 and 332 of the Constitution, seats in the Parliament and state legislatures are reserved for "scheduled tribes": such reservations also extend to the "scheduled castes" who form a distinct and separate group of historically disadvantaged people. The names of two laws are wrong: the Children's Act - not the Children's Law -- of 1960 and the Religious Institutions (Prevention of Misuse) Act -- not Ordinance of 1 988.
177
