Iran
The 1992 State Department report on Iran gives a generally unexceptionable account of the widespread abuse which continues to characterize the country's human rights situation. Indeed, the report is so unexceptionable and lacking in hard information as to be bland and platitudinous. The reader is left with the strong sense that in producing this report the State Department has merely gone through the motions, with little effort to investigate sources of information other than the UN Special Representative's reports on the human rights situation.
To be fair to the State Department, the major obstacle to reporting on the human rights situation in Iran continued to be the Iranian government, which, as the report correctly points out, makes efforts "to conceal its human rights abuses." The Iranian government became more obstructive in 1992, denying access to the UN Special Representative, suspending the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) prison visiting program in March, and continuing with its policy of assassinating prominent political opponents abroad, particularly in Europe, thereby deterring exile Iranians with firsthand experience of human rights abuse from coming forward with information. The government continued with its policies of forbidding domestic human rights activists to organize, and of denying international human rights organizations access to the country to carry out independent research into the human rights situation. Following the critical February 1992 report from the UN Special Representative, the government asserted that the Special Representative "had fallen
under the influence of certain powers," and that future human rights investigators admitted to the country would have to be "neutral persons free from the influence of the powers."
The report is wrong when it states that "Iran continued to assert that it should be judged by 'Islamic,' rather than Western, human rights principles." In fact, in its May 1992 report to the UN Human Rights Committee in accordance with its obligations as a State Party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the government of Iran asserted that the laws and regulations of the Islamic Republic "generally remain consistent" with the rights set forth in the Covenant. Iran's second periodic report then sets out in considerable detail its purported compliance with each article of the Covenant. Similarly, Iran responded at considerable length to stinging criticism from the Special Representative, seeking to refute many of the specific case examples put forward by the Special Representative in support of his criticisms. However, these refutations typically took the form of denials without any possibility for verification of the government's claims. Similarly, members of the Human Rights Committee, 18 experts in international law charged with reviewing States Parties' compliance with the Covenant, commented that Iran's periodic report failed to shed much light on the way that the legal system defends individual civil and political rights in practice. Far from denying the applicability of international standards to the human rights situation in Iran, the government claims almost complete compliance with these standards,
184
Iran
but then places obstacles in the way of international verification of its claims. The State Department's repetition of the assertion that Islam somehow precludes the applicability of international human rights standards to Iran merely serves to mystify a quotidian example of a government seeking to evade responsibility for its abusive human rights record.
What is regrettable is that the Iranian government's tactics of crude obfusca-tion have been effective in holding off international pressure for improvements in its human rights performance. Iran's domestic human rights record has not proved an obstacle in the normalization of trade relations with a number of European states, and U.S.-Iranian relations are in a seemingly intractable malaise for reasons other than Iran's domestic human rights policy. Despite almost nine years of international scrutiny by a UN Special Representative, the pervasive abuses which led to the initial appointment in 1984 remain in place. The State Department's report contains nothing that will assist international efforts to bring about human rights reform in Iran.
The report even omits to mention major incidents of human rights abuse which received some coverage in the international media, and in the reports of human rights organizations. No mention is made, for example, of the government's heavy-handed clampdown on civil unrest in Mashhad, Shiraz and other Iranian cities in April and May. Amnesty International reported that at least eight people were sentenced to death after summary trials, and that hundreds of others were detained without access to due-process safeguards in the aftermath
of this unrest. The UN Special Representative recognized the significance of these events as an indication of the government's predilection to resort to reactive repression in the face of any perceived challenge to its authority. Rather than letting the justice system take its course, the authorities issued instructions to the security forces "to seek out trouble makers and destroy them like weeds." Using provisions of the purportedly reforming Law on the Formation of Penal Courts I and II of June 1989, the Head of the Judiciary, Ayatollah Yazdi dispatched ad hoc judges to mete out swift punishment to alleged malefactors in Mashhad and Shiraz. These ad hoc judges are appointed at the discretion of the Head of the Judiciary, need meet no minimum qualifications, and clearly undermine the authority and the independence of the established judiciary. As the Special Representative remarked in relation to these incidents, "independent citizens feel concerned because they are unable to foresee the reactions of the authorities to situations of tension or public disturbance."
It is this "absence of a climate of legal certainty," to borrow another of the Special Representative's condign phrases, which defines the nature of the human rights disaster in Iran. Iranian law is riddled with qualifications and caveats which permit the government broad discretionary powers to summarily arrest, detain and execute. There is no accountability for these abusive actions, which may often find justification in legislation. Independent institutions which could act as a counterweight to this unbridled government discretion, such as an independent bar association or domestic
185
Iran
human rights groups, are not permitted to exist. International scrutiny, as described above, is successfully kept at arms' length.
It is to be hoped that the U.S. government will play its part in strengthening the human rights mechanisms of the United Nations so that innovative approaches can be devised to respond to the challenges of chronically abusive governments that are unresponsive to international monitoring. To have any effect on the human rights situation in Iran, the U.S. government will have to demonstrate considerably more familiarity and engagement with the issues than are shown in this year's State Department report.
198
Iran
Iraq
The events of the past two years have had a tremendous impact on shaping the Iraqi economic, political and social landscape. As with the State Department's 1991 report on Iraq, however, the 1992 report fails to contextualize its description of human rights violations in a historically meaningful way. Although the 1992 report improves on last year's report by discussing the region's ethno-geography, and by highlighting the impact of UN sanctions on the country, its description of human rights conditions remains fragmented and incomplete.
The report invites charges of bias by its apparent attempt to describe the Iraqi regime's practices in the worst possible light and by failing to present controversy surrounding particular allegations of abuse. Descriptions of specific regime abuses are presented with little comment about their credibility, despite the fact that State Department guidelines require that "(i]t is important, however, to make a conscientious effort to report what the available evidence shows and, where it is ambiguous to report that." Generalized descriptions of conditions in northern or southern Iraq seem slanted and politicized; the report makes conclusory statements about the situation in these regions and about the motivation of the government without benefit of any first-hand investigation. Despite the fact that information for State Department reports is conventionally gathered and assessed by embassy staff in each country, the report makes no mention of the fact that because currently there is no embassy staff in Iraq, none of the information has been gathered independently in the field. Final-
ly, the report often leaves the reader guessing about whether a particular abuse occurred in 1992 or at some unspecified time in the past.
The 1991 Gulf War, the subsequent popular uprisings in the Kurdish north and Shi'a south and the UN sanctions have dramatically affected the conditions in Iraq, paradoxically both weakening and strengthening the Iraqi regime. On the one hand, Saddam Hussein's government has been weakened by the armed opposition in the north and south, and by the Allied imposition of two "no-fly zones," above the 36th parallel in the north and below the 32nd parallel in the south. The Allies have also created a "safe haven" in the north, which has effectively ended the government's military and political control. Free from government repression, this has left the Kurds free to manage the region autonomously. In the south, the ban on aerial monitoring has given Shi'a rebels sanctuary and greater freedom of movement. Finally, international sanctions and constant UN surveillance have restricted the government's ability to enforce its rule over the entire country, perhaps limiting the human rights abuses which would otherwise have taken place.
On the other hand, these same conditions have reinforced the ruling party's hand as the only authority capable of providing for the everyday needs of the population under its control. What little food or medicine that does enter the country is controlled and distributed by the government; the local population is more isolated and cut off from the rest of
187
Iran
the world than ever before. Sanctions have nearly eliminated the once-thriving private sector, also eliminating a potential source of opposition to the regime. As there has been no change in the country's leadership, it is not surprising that the regime's brutal and repressive practices continue unabated. Indeed, according to some human rights reports, the "no-fly zones" have aggravated the government's siege mentality and enabled it to "justify" ever-heightened persecution and retribution against real and imagined opponents.
Because the "no-fly zones" and other international interventions have created vastly differing human rights conditions and concerns in the Kurdish north, gov-ernment-controlled center, and Shi'a south, this critique examines the State Department's coverage of the human rights record in each region separately.
The imposition of the Allied "safe haven" on Iraqi territory north of the 36th parallel and the subsequent withdrawal of the Iraqi administrative and military apparatus in October 1991 left a large part of Kurdish Iraq in a state of de facto autonomy. This autonomous state, while much welcomed by the Kurdish population, has been accompanied by unstable political and economic conditions.
The State Department report takes special note of the internal economic embargo the central government has imposed on this region as a cause for the economic distress: "The regime's total blockade of the north includes humanitarian necessities like food, medicine and fuel .... The embargo in the north caused serious hardship there in the winter of 1991-92 and was expected to do so
again in 1992-93." The report fails to point out, however, that Kurdish leaders have repeatedly insisted that the UN embargo is the primary cause of their economic problems and have called on the UN and the United States to exempt them from the sanctions. Indeed, a well-publicized delegation of Iraqi opposition figures, led by the Kurdish leaders Mas-soud Barzani and Jalal Talabani, met with representatives of the State Department and formally requested that the Kurdish north be excluded from the sanctions because of their devastating economic impact.
The report also fails to discuss the May 1992 Kurdish elections. Kurdish leaders decided to elect a parliament and leader in the Kurdish-controlled region in order to fill the political and administrative vacuum left by the withdrawal of the central government and to solidify the north's quasi-independent status. Neither the United States nor any other Western government sent an official delegation to monitor the election. Indeed, the State Department opposed the elections as an infringement on Iraqi sovereignty. It went so far as threatening to charge the International Human Rights Law Group, which organized the only U.S. delegation to monitor the elections, with violating a presidential decree that prohibited Americans from spending money in Iraq.
Fifteen political parties with radically differing platforms vied for the 100 seats in the new parliament; four candidates competed for the leadership post. Throughout the election, observers noted wide-scale respect for freedom of speech and association, with political rallies and speeches occurring in every town and
188
Iraq
village. The public openly displayed banners and tags of political affiliation, as all parties distributed weekly or daily newspapers throughout the region. Election day itself was remarkably free of violence. Over 88% of eligible voters participated in the balloting, and women and men voted in equal proportions. While there were some problems with ballot secrecy, observers unanimously declared the elections to be on the whole open and free.
Despite this considerable achievement, the report ignores the elections. The only mention made of Kurdish political organization is a dismissive (albeit correct) reference to the existence of a Kurdish puppet legislature controlled by the central government. The report does not even mention several bomb attacks directed against human rights and election observers in the region. During the course of the elections, two bombs were detonated in hotels where election observers were known to be staying; one journalist was injured as a result. In addition, following the elections, during a visit by a French delegation which included Danielle Mitterand, head of the human rights organization France Libertés and wife of French president François Mitterand, and France's health and humanitarian affairs minister, Bernard Kouchner, seven Kurds in a car accompanying the French delegation's motorcade were killed by a car bomb. These attacks were widely believed to have been sponsored by the Iraqi government to dissuade foreign support for the Kurdish elections. However, the Iraqi government asserted that the attacks were a ploy by Kurdish leaders to attract international attention.
In another troubling omission, the report fails to make any mention of Turkish aerial bombardment of several towns and villages in Iraqi territory across the border from Turkey. The Turkish government justified these attacks, which killed hundreds of Kurdish civilians, by claiming that it sought to destroy newly established strongholds of the Turkish Kurdish Workers Party (PKK), a Kurdish political group seeking independence for Kurds in Turkey. The State Department has apparently closed its eyes to these violations of Iraqi territorial sovereignty, while at the same time condemning similar Iraqi aerial attacks in the north and the south. Such politically expedient coverage does not serve the ends of neutral human rights reporting.
In the same vein, attacks by Iraqi Kurds against the PKK in northern Iraq receive very mild mention in the report: "There were credible reports the Iraqi Kurdish Front denied the ICRC access to PKK prisoners and that some PKK prisoners were turned over to Turkish military officials." Numerous reports, however, indicate that the Kurdistan Front, in an apparent bargain with the Turkish government, organized a broad attack on PKK members, resulting in arbitrary arrests, detentions and executions. In October, for example, reports indicated that one raid on the PKK resulted in between 50 and 300 deaths. Another report regarding offensives against the PKK described the situation as an "all-out war."
The report's overall description of government-sponsored human rights abuses in central Iraq is entirely accurate: "The Iraqi regime's abysmal record on human rights continued without improve-
189
Iran
ment in 1992. Systematic violations of human rights in virtually all categories continued." However, there are also instances of exaggeration that detract from the report's credibility.
The report mentions the UN Special Rapporteur's report of 12,000 to 18,000 cases of disappearance, but gives no indication of when they occurred. In contrast, the Special Rapporteur notes that of the 11,500 cases of disappearances (an additional 5,000 names have not been verified), the vast majority are Kurds who disappeared in the 1980s, and that only 500 cases were reported to have occurred in 1992. The State Department commendably includes all unresolved cases of disappearances as the reporting guidelines require, yet the report should specify which are new cases and which are unresolved and pending from earlier years.
Two items featured in the report seem exaggerated on their face. The report states: "There were also credible reports in the spring that the al-Radwan-iya prison near Baghdad was the site of mass executions. According to these reports, 100 or more executions, thought to be of political prisoners, were being carried out each day." Similarly, after noting the deportation of 2,500 inhabitants of the southern marshes, including women and children, to a military camp, the report cites an escapee's testimony that "100 of the detainees were taken out and shot every night."
If the alleged conduct at Radwaniya, for example, lasted for even a month, it would amount to the execution of 3,000 prisoners. Similarly, the inference regard-
ing the marsh inhabitants would be that all were eventually executed. Despite the fact that these incidents, if true, would constitute extraordinarily severe abuses, no caution is taken to note the scant nature of the evidence provided. Both items come from reports (by the UN Special Rapporteur and Middle East Watch) which feature one or two eyewitnesses and no independent corroboration. This treatment contrasts sharply with many other country reports where the State Department frequently distances itself from conclusions despite powerful and even overwhelming evidence of gross violations. In addition, the State Department versions differ significantly from the reports from which the information apparently derives, which describing both incidents, state only that "hundreds were killed." Compare, for example, the UN Special Rapporteur's February 1993 report on the incident at Radwaniya prison: "According to reports attributed to two former prisoners . . . hundreds of detainees were executed during the spring of 1992."
The report's assessment of the human rights conditions in the Shi'a south, particularly in the marsh regions, is the most controversial, and apparently politicized. Several human rights organizations have produced diverging descriptions of the relationship between the regime and the local population; none are based on actual eyewitness observations on conditions in the south. The report fails to discuss these conflicting accounts, instead presenting as factually confirmed the most negative assessments of government conduct. In some instances, the report makes conclusory assertions about the government's motivation and the
190
Iran
history of the Shi'as in the south which do not appear to be based either on the State Department's independent factual investigation or on available human rights reports. Because the source of these conclusions is never revealed, their credibility seems dubious, and in any event, unverifiable.
The relationship between the Iraqi government and certain segments of the Shi'a community have certainly deteriorated over the last 15 years, as the Iran-Iraq War caused some fragmentation in the loyalties of the Iraqi Shi'a community. This fragmentation culminated in the armed uprising of the Shi'a opposition against the government of Iraq. After the government's brutal repression of the uprising, several of the rebel groups retreated to the marsh islands, occupied for centuries by "marsh Arabs." They were joined by army deserters and other opposition elements fleeing from the government. It is in this context that the Iraqi regime embargoed, attempted to evacuate and launched several aerial attacks on marsh villages which resulted in the deaths of hundreds of civilians.
The State Department report focuses on two areas of government persecution in the south: repressive policies directed against the Shi'a community as a whole, and attacks targeted against the Marsh Arabs. In both areas, the report's conclusions go beyond or overstate available evidence and information about the region.
Regarding the Shi'a community as a whole, the report asserts that "the Government's calculated drive against the Shi'a of the south betrays a deep preju-
dice against Shi'ism." It is unclear on what basis the report has found that the government has a "deep prejudice" against Shi'ism. Indeed, the Ba'ath party is a secular party, deeply committed to preserving its absolute rule, and deeply prejudiced against any group, be it communist, Shi'a or Kurd, interested in challenging its control. The report discusses the terrible repression directed against Shi'as, but confuses symptom with cause. It is because the Shi'a community have organized politically and in some instances, militarily, that they have been targeted for repression and not merely because they are Shi'a.
The report provides only scant and parenthetical contextual information about the government's attacks on the marshes, casually mentioning the existence of an armed opposition movement in the area. Yet on at least three occasions, the report asserts that the Iraqi government has targeted civilians in the Marsh regions: "[particularly flagrant abuses committed in 1992 involved military operations against noncombatant Shi'a civilians . . .", "[djuring the spring and summer, Iraqi armed forces launched numerous attacks against the civilian population in the southern marshes," and "[s]ome of these attacks appeared to be specifically focused on civilian targets." In contrast, most reports, even those most critical of the regime's repression of the Marsh inhabitants, including the UN Special Rapporteur and Middle East Watch, describe the shelling and aerial attacks, at worst, as "indiscriminate." Only Amnesty International expresses a position close to the State Department's, stating that past events "heighten Amnesty International's fears" that the bom-
191
Iran
bing may have been deliberate.
The report notes allegations that the Iraqi regime is draining the marshes, but makes no mention of the controversy regarding these allegations: "Credible accounts implicate Iraqi armed forces in the draining of some marsh areas in order to afford military units better access to targets." There is, as of yet, no evidence to support the conclusion that the government has undertaken the draining of the marshes in order to better attack the Marsh population. Even the reports which speculate about the government's intentions have been careful to point out that the draining of the marshes is part of a long-existing irrigation plan to create a "Third River" in Iraq, in order to reduce soil salinity, reclaim arable land, and create an alternate port to Basra. A more balanced presentation would have included a discussion of these competing views on the purpose for the draining of the marshes.
On the whole, the report is much better organized than last year's report; it provides improved contextual information and presents its data in a more meaningful and coherent way. Nevertheless, like prior reports, it is politicized, leaving the impression that its coverage of human rights conditions is strongly influenced by the State Department's geo-political calculations regarding Iraq.
204
