Israeli-Occupied Territories
The 1992 State Department report continues to present a distorted account of the human rights situation in the Israeli-occupied territories, although there are some improvements over last year. As in the past, our main complaint is that the report consistently downplays the human rights violations which it describes by neglecting to draw conclusions on the basis of the facts presented, omitting relevant information, placing significant statements at the end of uncontroversial passages, and by giving undue prominence to Israeli government justifications of its practices. Through a combination of these omissions and distortions, the report fails to convey the continuing gravity of the human rights situation in the occupied territories.
The most significant improvement from last year's report is the greatly reduced emphasis on Palestinian violence as a justification for Israeli human rights violations. Last year, this attempt to balance the two phenomena colored the whole report; it is encouraging to see the reversal of this trend. Further, the sections dealing with torture and extrajudicial killings are more detailed and clear than in previous years. Reports of the practice of these violations precede the official Israeli position that such practices do not occur, and/or are prohibited by law, providing a more appropriate context for the discussion than in previous years. More information is also usefully provided in the section on discrimination, which now refers to the different tax systems applied to Palestinians and Israeli settlers living in the occupied territories. The straightforward statement that the report deals
"with territories under military occupation," rather than the contorted syntax of previous years, is welcome.
However, the report fails to provide the context to enable the reader to understand the nature and extent of the Israeli occupation, and no attempt is made to describe the imbalance between the status of the occupier and the occupied, as exemplified by Israeli military control over many aspects of Palestinian daily life. In particular, no reference is made to the cumulative impact of repressive Israeli measures used throughout the 25-year occupation, including collective punishments such as the sealing and demolition of houses and town and area curfews, as well as deportations and the use of administrative detention as a means of punishment without trial, all of which violate international law. Moreover, there is little or no mention of many of the Israeli policies and practices designed to benefit Israelis living in the territories, as well as the Israeli economy, which are carried out at the expense of the Palestinian population, for example, the numerous laws and regulations which have resulted in the acquisition and settlement of approximately 65% of the land in the occupied territories by the Israeli authorities. The report also fails to address in detail the restrictions on Palestinian planning, water use and other measures which have undermined the traditionally land-based Palestinian economy.
As in previous years, the presentation of the international legal system governing the situation in the occupied territories is wholly inadequate. The report
193
Israeli-occupied territories
states that Israel claims to observe the humanitarian provisions of the 1949 Fourth Geneva Convention Relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. It fails to comment that Israel's refusal to accept the de jure applicability of the Convention is contrary to the position of virtually the entire international community (including the United States, the United Nations and the International Committee of the Red Cross), and that for a State to claim to accept only some undefined "humanitarian provisions" of a treaty to which it is legally bound, is unacceptable. Reference should also have been made to the point that, as an occupier, Israel has a duty to ensure public order and the safety of the protected (i.e. Palestinian) population -- a duty which Israel has demonstrably failed to perform.
Although this year the introduction does state that "several" Israeli practices violate the Fourth Geneva Convention, those it specifies (transfer of prisoners outside the occupied territories and house demolitions or sealings as collective punishment) are only two of numerous such breaches of international law, many of which are later referred to but not explicitly condemned in the report. The reader is left in doubt whether the State Department condemns all Israeli violations of the Fourth Geneva Convention or only some of them.
Moreover, some of the most serious practices, such as extrajudicial killings by Israeli undercover units and torture and ill-treatment of detainees, are either omitted from the introduction, or seriously downplayed (as in "there continued to be instances of Israeli mistreatment of Pales-
tinians during arrest and interrogation"). In an oral statement to the 1993 session of the UN Commission on Human Rights, Amnesty International concluded: "During 1992 Palestinian detainees continued to be subjected to systematic torture or ill-treatment." By failing to give due prominence to the most serious human rights violations, such as these, the introduction is seriously misleading.
The introduction should have stated squarely that serious violations of international law continued to be committed, often as a matter of policy, by the Israeli authorities in 1992. It should, in particular, have characterized the alarming number of extrajudicial killings, the continued use of torture on Palestinian detainees, and the mass deportation of over 400 Palestinians in December, as grave breaches of the Fourth Geneva Convention.
Further, at times the report focuses on the government's promises, rather than its actions. This fails to follow the State Department's own instructions for the preparation of these reports which say: "We will generally report such [positive) developments when they occur, as opposed to when they are talked about or promised by government officials." To cite one example, the report notes that "in August, the Government announced plans to release 800 prisoners." According to al-Haq, the West Bank affiliate of the International Commission of Jurists, the newspaper report announcing this decision made clear that only those prisoners who had served more than two-thirds of their sentence were eligible for release. Moreover, one month after the announcement, reportedly only about 520 of the 800 had been released.
194
The introduction also heralds the decision of the newly-elected government to cancel the deportation orders against 12 Palestinians expelled in January 1992. However, the subsequent mass deportation of over 400 Palestinians in December should have been explicitly noted in this context, and the conclusion drawn that the initial cancellation of deportation orders did not represent a change in policy towards the illegal practice of deportation.
In the main body of the report, the discussion of political and other extrajudicial killing is an improvement on previous years insofar as it acknowledges that "numerous reports suggest that [undercover] units frequently killed suspects under circumstances in which it may have been possible to apprehend them without killing."
However, the report fails to give its own view on whether or not there is a policy of extrajudicial killings by the undercover units. Commenting on the over 120 Palestinians shot dead by Israeli forces in 1992, Amnesty International noted in its statement to the 1993 Commission on Human Rights that some were "killed in circumstances suggesting summary execution or other unjustifiable killings." In particular, the practice of Israeli undercover units operating in the territories, in some cases disguised as Palestinians, has been public knowledge for some time. In some cases there is evidence that victims have been shot, and after they fell to the ground either beaten to death, or fatally shot at close range. Moreover, Israeli military open-fire regulations were again liberalized in 1992. According to al-Haq, "the new regulations
Israeli-occupied territories
now apparently permit armed forces to shoot to kill, without warning, any Palestinian suspected of carrying a weapon." Such broad regulations violate international standards on the use of force by law enforcement officials.
Furthermore, while the report accepts that at least 45 Palestinians were killed by undercover units operating in disguise as Palestinians, it emphasizes the Israeli assertion that all such killings are investigated. Again, contrary to the State Department's instructions, there is no assessment of the integrity or value of these investigations. The instructions clearly state:
It is not sufficient merely to note that. . . abuses are not the result of government policy or that the "government repeatedly has denounced" such acts. If few officials are ever punished for such abuses (or are given inordinately mild punishment) that must be reported because in such a situation there is the strong implication that the government (a) secretly instigates, (b) tacitly condones, (c) is unable to control those responsible, or (d) some combination of (a) - (c).
The report, however, leaves the reader with the impression that such investigations are independent, impartial and result in appropriate convictions and sentences. It does not explain, as it should, that under current procedures the IDF is left to investigate itself, Palestinian eye-witness-es are usually not interviewed and investigations take many months or even years to complete. The report does not say
195
Israeli-occupied territories
that the results of investigations are not usually made public, and on the rare occasions when an investigation results in a prosecution and a conviction, the sentence given is routinely so light that it creates a climate of impunity. In this context, the reference to the one-month suspended sentence (plus demotion) given to the lieutenant-colonel who was convicted in 1992 of negligence after he gave orders to "shoot into the center of the mass" of a crowd of fleeing suspects is totally inadequate. The inadequacy of this sentence should have been forcefully condemned in the report.
Moreover, the way these investigations are carried out contravenes the UN Principles on the Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions. These Principles require that a thorough, prompt and impartial investigation be carried out into all suspected cases of extralegal, arbitrary and summary executions, that families of the deceased and their legal representatives be informed of, and have access to, any hearing as well as to all information relevant to the investigation, and that a written report be made public within a reasonable period of time on the methods and finding of such investigations.
Another example of the report's minimizing the impact of information showing that Israeli officials have been guilty of human rights violations, can be found in its discussion of torture and inhuman treatment. Credible reports of the systematic ill-treatment and torture of Palestinians interrogated by the General Security Service (Shin Bet) continued during the year. However, the highly unusual statement issued by the Interna-
tional Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in May 1992, which noted that "means of physical and psychological pressure are being used that constitute a violation of the Geneva Convention," is only found halfway into the discussion. The ICRC has a well-known rule of confidentiality; breaking this policy occurs rarely and highlights the concern of the ICRC at the continuing problem.
In March 1992, B'Tselem, an Israeli human rights group, reported that Palestinians interrogated by the Shin Bet were routinely subjected to methods of interrogation which constituted ill-treatment, and conformed to most accepted definitions of torture. This followed publication one year earlier of a report which concluded that out of 41 Palestinians interviewed who had been interrogated by the Shin Bet, every one had been subjected to some form of ill-treatment, and all but one had been physically beaten.
The report does present a detailed description of some of the practices which have been frequently and reliably reported to occur, such as hooding, confinement in a small place, blows and beatings, and deprivation of food or sleep, and informs the reader that Israeli officials acknowledge that "abuses" occur. But, by failing to condemn this treatment as torture, in its own voice, the report minimizes the impact of this admission. The sanitization of this section concludes with an account of the number of investigations undertaken into the actions of Shin Bet interrogators, again without assessing the effectiveness of these investigations.
Despite overwhelming credible evi-
196
Israeli-occupied territories
dence (and, in particular, the fact that such treatment appears to be the norm, rather than an aberration), the State Department report fails to condemn this most serious violation of international law. Moreover, after five years the State department has still not publicly criticized the 1987 Landau Commission report, which specifically endorsed "moderate physical and psychological pressure" during interrogations, and which has never been rejected by the government of Israel.
At times, the report gives undue or exclusive attention to the Israeli government's side of an issue, failing even to compare the actions under discussion with the relevant international law standards. The clearest example is the reference to the mass deportation of the more than 400 Palestinians in December. Israeli authorities alleged that all the men were associated with two outlawed Islamic groups, Hamas and Islamic Jihad, but did not charge or try them for any offense.
The report does not mention the worldwide condemnation of this act, nor Security Council Resolution 799 (1992) which the U.S. government supported and which strongly condemned the deportations and called for the immediate return by Israel of all the deportees. Deportation is a grave breach of the Fourth Geneva Convention; Israel's blatant disregard for its international law obligations should have been forthrightly condemned as such in the report.
With respect to military trials, the report baldly states that "by law, military trials are public although access is limit-
ed. According to Israeli officials, exceptions are rare." In fact, while military courts may themselves be open to the public they are located within military compounds which are not. To obtain admittance to the court is an extremely time-consuming, difficult task, frequently involving long hours of waiting, and one which often results in failure.
In the section on military justice, the report omits pertinent information, on at least one occasion misrepresents facts, and fails to criticize certain violations of human rights. Most of the detail that is included focuses on Israeli military laws and regulations governing arrest and trial for Palestinians. The report devotes significantly less attention to the situation in practice, and fails to compare either the laws and regulations or the practice with internationally-accepted standards. The reader is left uncertain what the view of the State Department is, whether trials in the military courts are in conformity with international latv standards, and whether or not justice is done.
In reality, the trials of Palestinians in military courts raise serious human rights problems. Lawyers are routinely denied access to their clients for 20 days or more (not the 7-15 stated in the report), in violation of Article 14 (3)(b) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Bail is denied in almost all "security" cases. Detainees are held without charge for extensive periods, sometimes for as long as several months. There are unjustifiable delays in notifying a detainee's lawyer and family of his/her whereabouts. The government continues to refuse to allow ICRC representatives to visit a detainee until 15 days after deten-
197
Israeli-occupied territories
tion.
In addition, since many cases are decided by plea bargains, after confessions have been obtained during interrogation, the fact that coerced confessions can be admitted as evidence if the judge believes that the content of the confession is true, should have been highlighted in the report. All of these details contribute to the creation of an environment in which it is extremely difficult for a defendant to receive a fair trial. By focusing on Israeli laws and regulations rather than the practice, the report fails to convey this to the reader. The report mentions Military Order 1 369, introduced in 1992, which permits the authorities to sentence (without trial) any person who does not respond to a special summons, but fails to condemn this denial of the presumption of innocence.
Throughout the report there is a reluctance to comment forcefully on the illegality of many of the practices that are described. In its discussion of administrative detention, for example, the report fails to draw the same conclusion as it did last year, i.e., that administrative detention as a means of punishment without trial is a violation of international law. Only two pages later, halfway through a discussion of special, restrictive identity cards, does the report finally note that administrative detention is a form of punishment without trial. The report also fails to question or supplement the Israeli official position when it discusses appeals of administrative detention. It does not provide any information on how many appeals were submitted, how many succeeded and what "success" meant.
There are some welcome additions to the report, including mention of the practice of Israeli security forces of removing Palestinian patients from hospital beds while they are undergoing medical treatment, or prohibiting Palestinians in need of medical attention from going out during curfews or crossing roadblocks.
The report provides a useful description of the restrictions on freedom of movement imposed on Palestinians. In a rare analysis of the facts, it concludes that the issuance of "green cards" which prohibit entry into Jerusalem and abroad is punishment without charge or trial. The report does not criticize the practice of prolonged curfews as a form of collective punishment in its own voice, although it does note that some human rights groups make this judgment.
In short, while the State Department presents useful information, its report is flawed by its failure to present a full picture of the human rights situation in the Israeli-occupied territories, or to criticize violations in its own voice.
198
