Jamaica
According to the State Department's report for 1992, Jamaica's record as a constitutional democracy continued to be marred by a consistent pattern of official violence. With one grave exception -- the failure to address possible expansion, including retroactive application, of the death penalty -- the report provides a generally accurate picture of Jamaica's human rights problems, especially within the penal system.
The freedoms of expression, assembly, association and religion continued to be constitutionally protected and were generally respected in practice with some exceptions. Nevertheless, the rising incidence of official and unofficial violence has led to an environment in which important human rights and fundamental freedoms were violated by the government. Although the Jamaica Council for Human Rights (JCHR) remained active and independent, its offices were vandalized in 1992 and its leaders have received death threats.
The State Department appropriately recognized the seriousness of a number of Jamaica's human rights problems in its introductory summary:
Extrajudicial killings, beatings, and threats perpetrated by police and prison guards, often with impunity, remain Jamaica's principal human rights problems. Conditions in Jamaican jails and prisons remain appalling, with serious overcrowding, poor sanitary conditions, and inadequate diet the norm. An inefficient and
overburdened judiciary is responsible for lengthy delays in trials,
sentencing, and appeals.
These practices and conditions violate international standards, particularly as specified in the UN Standard Minimum Rules on the Treatment of Prisoners.
The report accurately describes most violations of civil and political rights that could be directly linked to official government action. As in previous years, it describes the summary execution of criminal suspects by members of the police force, the Jamaica Constabulary Force (JCF). The report did not mention that the UN Special Rapporteur on Summary or Arbitrary Executions for the Commission on Human Rights has sent a letter to the Jamaican government requesting that it reply to unanswered allegations transmitted in 1991 of extrajudicial, summary, and arbitrary executions.
The report correctly notes that there were few successful civil suits brought against members of the JCF for police misconduct, as well as the fact that "99 policemen had been dismissed from the force since March 1991." It notes further that the JCF has attempted to respond to the problem of police violence by including a seminar on preventing the use of excessive force run by the JCHR in its training program for new officers. The State Department makes no mention of whether similar programs are planned for the rest of the force, but states that a police civilian review board was put in place in December 1992. Despite these few positive efforts made to prevent or
199
Jamaica
punish police violence, the report places appropriate emphasis on the fact that the extrajudicial killings continue at an alarming rate.
Official violence follows detainees and convicts into the jails and prisons of Jamaica. The report states that "a number of persons in police custody died under circumstances that strongly suggest extrajudicial killing." It goes on to cite specific instances of beatings, some of them fatal, of prisoners by prison guards or police officers. The State Department also properly discusses the case of the highly-publicized prison death of Lester Lloyd Coke (also called "James Brown") in February 1992, but fails to mention that the fire was of a suspicious origin, and does not discuss the speculation, which received media coverage in the United States, that Coke was killed in order to ensure his silence about political party connections to the drug trade.
Coke, awaiting extradition to the United States on murder and drug charges, died after suffering injuries in a suspicious Kingston prison fire the day before his extradition hearing. The State Department notes that "credible reports" indicate that security personnel delayed giving Coke medical attention after finding him lying injured in his cell. Coke's political links to the opposition Jamaica Labor Party (JLP) are mentioned, and the report notes that there were "allegations of official involvement," but adds that a coroner's inquest into the death was inconclusive. Media reports allege that Coke was believed to be the "don" of the "Shower Posse," a powerful group believed to be involved in drug trafficking and other illegal activities in the United
States and Jamaica. A number of such gangs controlled sections of west Kingston and appeared to maintain patronage ties to the JLP or the PNP, the two major political parties in Jamaica. Coke's funeral was attended by Edward Seaga, former Prime Minister and leader of the JLP.
The report again succeeds in describing the misguided efforts of the Jamaican government aimed at the longstanding problem of violent crime in Kingston's ghettos. It notes that the 1 974 Suppression of Crime Act (SOCA), in force in the city of Kingston and the two adjoining parishes of St. Andrew and St. Catherine, gives police extraordinary discretion to conduct warrantless searches and arrests merely on the "reasonable" suspicion of a crime having been committed by the individual(s) involved. The report does not mention that, as in years past, Jamaican officials defended the SOCA, as well as other official policies that violate human rights, as necessary to combat the serious violent crime wave in Jamaica.
Nevertheless, the Jamaican government cannot justify measures that violate the fundamental human rights of its people on the basis of "crime prevention." In a letter of protest to the Jamaican government, Caribbean Rights, a regional human rights organization, has condemned the SOCA as "obnoxious, oppressive and a serious blot on the statute book of a civilized society" and charged that the government "could not be unaware of how members of the constabulary force systematically abuse power under the Act."
The report's mention of certain anti-crime measures should have registered a
200
Jamaica
cry of alarm. In a disturbing move, the Jamaican government has instituted the use of combined military and police action. The report cites "Operation Ardent," under which the government created combined JCF and Jamaica Defense Force (JDF) rapid response units in three key locations, and increased joint foot patrols. As the report notes, "the task forces were also given authority over specially constructed detention centers to be commanded by the military." This ominous sign merits further comment, which is not forthcoming from the State Department.
The report makes no mention of the possibly discriminatory use of force by the government in response to violence. Observers speculate that the government's overzealous, militarized response was primarily motivated by the adverse local and international publicity generated by the expansion of violence beyond poverty-stricken urban centers to include attacks on foreigners and prominent individuals. A German tourist was killed in a robbery; Vic Higgs, a prominent organizer of annual golf championships, was killed; and Evelyn Mafood, a prominent philanthropist, was shot. Media and human rights observers have noted that the government's abuses in its failed attempts to deter criminal activity are at least in part based on (but not justified by) a distinctly economic motive -- protecting the huge tourist industry, which earns approximately $750 million annually. Although the vast majority of violent crimes in Jamaica take place in the urban ghettos of west Kingston, representatives of the hotel and other tourism-related industries have expressed concern that foreign visitors will associate violent
crime with Jamaica generally. Obviously, the loss of life among poor Jamaicans should be of no less concern to the government. However, there appears to be a particularly strong government reaction to crime whenever it is feared that tourists might avoid even the insulated resort areas on the north coast (which are protected both by private security forces and more recently, by military patrols as well). Official encouragement of, and tolerance for, abuses of the civil and political rights of Jamaicans cannot be fully understood without reference to the issue of the influence of private business interests on government policy.
The report makes no mention of the fact that representatives of the JCHR, Jamaica's primary independent human rights monitoring organization, also have argued strongly that, as a state party to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Jamaican government's responsibility extends to addressing the causey of urban violence in Jamaica. Denis Daley, Chairman of the JCHR, called upon the government to take steps to confront the roots of the crime wave which are the conditions under which people live.
The report thoroughly discusses the "abysmal" prison conditions in Jamaica, noting grossly overcrowded and unsanitary conditions, inadequate food and medical attention.
In addition to the official abuses related to police violence, the SOCA, the militarization of crime prevention, and prison conditions, the report indicates that Jamaica faces a serious failure of judicial process in both form and function.
201
Jamaica
Jamaica's judicial system remains independent, but is overburdened and inadequately budgeted. This has led to major human rights violations in the form of delayed trials and appeals and inadequate provisions for court-appointed attorneys.
It is with respect to the failure of due process that the report makes its most glaring omission. It fails to mention that a recent change in Jamaican Jaw may allow the execution by hanging of death row prisoners on an expedited basis without important procedural protections. It does not discuss the fact that the Jamaican government plans to begin renewed executions by hanging of death row prisoners after a four year halt. Human rights organizations such as the JCHR, Amnesty International, Caribbean Rights and others, have long argued against the death penalty in general and have further contended that the years spent awaiting execution on death row are an additional form of cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment. In September, however, the Jamaican parliament passed the Offences Against the Person (Amendment) Act to create two classifications of murder --capital and non-capital. "Capital murder," punishable by death, includes murder of a member of the security force while in the execution of duties; murder of a judicial or correctional officer; and murder committed in the course of rape or burglary. "Non-capital murder" is subject to prison terms of up to life imprisonment.
The amended Act has been applied retroactively, thereby permitting a few prisoners to have their sentences commuted to life imprisonment, but subjecting the others to the possibility of almost immediate execution. This would amount
to a gross violation of the American Convention on Human Rights, to which Jamaica is a party and which forbids the extension of the death penalty to situations not previously punishable by death. More disturbing is the possibility that the death penalty will be imposed ex post facto on prisoners already sentenced to life imprisonment. The State Department's failure to condemn this gross violation of human rights law is a serious evasion of responsibility, regardless of formal U.S. policy towards the death penalty itself. Minister of Security Keith Knight, long an advocate of the death penalty, has indicated that he wishes to pursue the reclassification of the 270 inmates on death row quickly and to begin renewed hangings in early 1993.
The new law has also raised due process concerns where there are already indications that some prisoners may have been convicted through the use of coerced confessions or with the lack of adequate legal representation. Decisions about reclassifications would be made by a single judge based only on written records, some many years old. By the end of 1992, 166 cases had been reclassified, 107 capital and 59 non-capital. While the law provides that prisoners have 21 days in which to apply for review of their classifications, Amnesty International and others have expressed concern that such persons do not have an adequate opportunity to consult legal counsel.
In early 1993, the Court of Appeal, which was to review prisoners' appeals of capital murder classifications, agreed to postpone the appeals process pending a hearing on the constitutional challenge
202
Jamaica
to the classification process. The case could ultimately be heard by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London, the court of final appeal for Jamaica. It is hoped that next year's report will focus on this important issue.
The State Department commendably mentions, although briefly, some of the serious economic difficulties that are affecting the human rights situation in Jamaica. It notes that "the Government has promoted private investment to stimulate economic growth and modernization, pursuing in the process a sometimes painful program of structural adjustment." In its worker rights section, the report recognizes that "there was a major increase in strikes and other industrial actions by a wide variety of unions and professional associations in 1992. The announced layoff of 8,000 government employees, and the erosion of real wages through inflation (which exceeded 100 per cent in one 12-month period in 1991-
1992) were the most common reasons	*
for industrial action." Finally, the report
notes that "the Government raised the
minimum wage by an unprecedented 87
per cent, in an effort to keep pace with
inflation of over 275 per cent since the
previous increase."
The report was more specific in its discussion of violence against women, noting that such reports increased from 1,006 in 1990 to 1,091 in 1991. It discusses the anti-battering efforts of women's groups such as the Women's Crisis Center and Sistren, as well as the fact that the JCHR has begun to focus formally on women's issues.
203
