Kenya
The 1992 State Department report provides an accurate description of the human rights situation in Kenya, and is composed with generally appropriate tone and emphases. Although Kenya formally returned to a multi-party political structure during the year, culminating in parliamentary and presidential elections in December 1992, the report highlights various human rights violations and antidemocratic activities which were perpetrated notwithstanding some measurable overall progress towards enhanced political rights. While the government of longtime strongman Daniel arap Moi relented to international pressure in permitting the organization of political parties and the holding of elections, the report accurately notes that "these same freedoms were undercut by the Government's unwillingness to implement reform measures uniformly and its repeated efforts to inhibit legitimate opposition activities."
Among the most serious manifestations of official resistance to the full implementation of democratic reforms was the patently political use of the criminal process against opposition figures on such charges as rumormongering, sedition and incitement to violence. In addition to the January 10 arrest of leaders of the Forum for the Restoration of Democracy (FORD) on rumormongering charges and the levelling of incitement charges against Democratic Party (DP) activist Njenga Mungai, both mentioned in the report, former MP Michael Kijana and four other FORD members were arrested on April 1 for allegedly distributing leaflets advocating a national work stoppage to protest government policies. FORD vice-chair-
man Samy Mwangi Njorge was arrested in May in connection with his allegations that government officials were fomenting ethnic violence, and DP leader Paul Kiptoo arap Koech was charged with sedition on July 24 for allegedly advocating ethnic strife at a public gathering. These abuses were omitted from the report.
Perhaps as blatant a pattern of the official abuse of prosecutorial powers --and insufficiently detailed in the 1992 report -- was found in the harassment of the weekly press. In the wake of the impoundment of the entire January run of Society magazine for containing materials "false, inflammatory, and clearly intended to bring hatred or contempt, or excite disaffection against President Moi," and similar subsequent seizures in March and June, editor Pius Nyamora and his wife Lois Nyamora were charged with sedition for publishing articles "deliberately tarnishing the performance of the President and government." In August, the publisher and editor of Finance magazine, Njehu Gatabaki, faced arrest on similar charges for the publication of articles stating Moi's responsibility for the country's economic and political problems. The arrest of his wife, Rachel Mwaihaki Gatabaki, followed in September, and successive issues of Finance were impounded in November and December (the former apparently because it contained the headline "Impeach Moi"). Also arrested for sedition in August were the Reverend Jamlick Miano and two co-publishers of the magazine The Jitemega, and the publisher of The Observer was prosecuted for incitement to public disorder in December for an article accusing Presi-
204
Kenya
dent Moi of corruption. The government has also apparently undermined the magazine press through less visible means, such as pressuring banks into denying loan applications. Harassment of magazine editors has continued into 1993, indicating that the situation is more serious than reflected in the report.
While the government used the judicial system to harass opposition spokespersons and media figures for criticizing it, the opposition was itself subjected to extreme verbal attacks by President Moi and members of his party, the Kenya African National Union (KANU). Although the report notes this "inflammatory rhetoric" and the violence it sparked at numerous opposition political gatherings, the report would have benefitted from including specific examples of such partisan official statements. In February, Moi accused the opposition of subversion, implying some connection between it and a shipment of arms allegedly intercepted at Mombasa. The government subsequently attempted to link FORD with an alleged force of Libyan-trained guerrillas who were to target vital national infrastructure. In March, Vice-President George Saitoti accused FORD of "using crude tactics, including violence, lies, abuses and blackmail as a means to secure political power," while registering his "grave concern on the impolite comments being made on the presidency and person of his excellency, the president." Saitoti later characterized opposition allegations of official complicity in tribal clashes as coming from "minds of doubtful sanity." Such attacks continued in the days preceding the December election, with President Moi accusing opposition leaders of disseminating "cheap propaganda by
enemies of children," and, finally, and most incredibly, warning of opposition plans to lace alcohol with hallucinatory drugs to keep KANU supporters from the polls.
The combination of official abuse of vague laws against those critical of the government, on the one hand, and unrestrained government denunciation of the opposition, on the other, resulted in a systematic imbalance in the ability of the competing parties to bring their respective positions to the Kenyan public. This imbalance was further exacerbated by distorted coverage of political developments by the Kenya Broadcasting Corporation (KBC) and the Kenya Television Network (KTN), the country's sole broadcasting outlets. As documented by the Professional Committee for Democratic Change, KBC and KTN consistently allocated far more air time to President Moi and KANU than to opposition parties. For example, during a five-day period in October, KBC newscasts tarried an average of five Moi/KANU items compared to a total blackout on opposition activities. Coverage of Moi/KANU was consistently favorable whereas that devoted to other parties was almost entirely negative.
Although this bias in the broadcast media is mentioned, the State Department report does not emphasize the problem sufficiently, nor does the report elaborate on its impact on the electoral process. The report is generally adequate in considering the more flagrant government abuses in obstructing the electoral process, including irregularities in the registration process, the arbitrary denial of licenses for anti-government gatherings and officially-inspired violence against
205
Kenya
opposition elements, although the specific circumstances of numerous disturbances at opposition rallies and physical attacks against the person or property of opposition leaders are omitted. The report does not, however, sufficiently articulate the cumulative effect on the fledgling electoral process of these abuses and more subtle official distortions of public political debate.
Two other deficiencies in the report warrant remark. First is its consideration of the treatment of Islamic Kenyans. In March, severe riots occurred in Mombasa, during which four people were killed and Muslim leader Khalid Salim Balala (among others) was arrested while preaching in a mosque. Although these events are duly noted in the report, they are decried not in objective terms or in the State Department's own voice. Instead, the report merely repeats the reaction of the victims only, viz., "Muslims were incensed by" the violence and arrests. The denial of registration for the Islamic Party of Kenya is handled in a similar manner. The report also fails to note the killing of three Balala supporters at a celebration upon his release, and his rearrest in July on sedition charges for, among other things, "publicly imagining" President Moi's death. Also omitted are details of the nature of the March violence, in which police descended on worshipers at prayer and beat them with clubs and gun butts. If these events did not constitute religious discrimination, they certainly evinced a religious insensi-tivity on the part of Kenyan authorities, and should have been more forcefully presented as such in the report.
Second, and more importantly, the report fails to address in sufficient detail
the situation of refugees in the country. In its discussion of refugees, the report accurately notes the large increase in the number of asylum-seekers since 1990. It should have also noted that there are serious protection problems in a number of the camps. While the report notes that "[t]here is increasing violence in the northeast where most of the camps are located," it should have provided details to give dimension to the problem. For example, in the Dadaab area camps in northeastern Kenya (Dagahaley, Hagadera and Ifo), the security situation is very serious, resulting from the activities of bandits, but also including the participation of Kenyan police and soldiers in some reported incidents. Beatings of refugees as well as sexual assault and rape of refugee women are frequent occurrences. The Kenyan government reported in January 1993 that nine security personnel and 38 refugees had been killed in violent incidents in refugee camps during 1992. In August, 15 refugees were killed, possibly in retaliation, after four police were killed by bandits. The Lawyers Committee received reports that the bodies of the refugees had been burned, and that witnesses had specifically implicated police in connection with some of the killings. Many refugees do not report attacks to the Kenyan police because they either are afraid of retaliation or consider such complaints futile.
In addition, the report did not adequately describe the plight of Somali refugees in Kenya. Of the approximately 400,000 Somalis in Kenya, as many as 75,000 have sought safety in remote camps at Mandera and El Wak, in the extreme northeastern part of the country, where they have been deprived of such
206
Kenya
basic necessities as blankets, tents, cooking utensils and regular food distribution. The U.S. Committee for Refugees estimates that, as a result of this policy of "light intervention" (which was intended by Kenyan authorities to stem further inflows from Somalia, and for which the UN High Commissioner for Refugees also shares responsibility), 2,000-4,000 of the refugees at Mandera and El Wak died in the period May-September, and that child malnutrition rates were running as high as 50%. Widespread abuses, including killing, rape and looting, have also been committed against camp residents. The report should have described these abuses and the government's failure to provide even minimal levels of assistance and protection to this significant refugee population.
This said, however, the report represents an accurate and relatively complete treatment of the human rights situation in
Kenya during 1992. Despite some im-	i
provement in conditions over the past year, human rights violations continue to obstruct the realization of full civil, political and other freedoms. The report succeeds in conveying this mixed picture with appropriate skepticism and detachment.
207
