Kyrgyzstan
As is the case for several other State Department reports, this is the inaugural report for Kyrgyzstan, a former republic of the Soviet Union. The introductory paragraphs of the report justly emphasize the transitional conflicts occasioned by the sudden disintegration of the Soviet Union and the declaration by Kyrgyzstan of sovereignty on August 31, 1991. President Askar Akayev, the only Central Asian leader who did not hold a prominent Communist Party position during the Soviet years, has expressed and has demonstrated a strong commitment to human rights and to a democratic society, notwithstanding the upheaval. His principles, as played out to date in his human rights record, distinguish him and his administration from other leaders in the Central Asian region. Of course, the ultimate standard to be observed in the area must come from international human rights norms.
The Akayev administration's commitment to human rights and reform has not been codified or sufficiently institutionalized. As the report notes in varying contexts, many old Soviet laws are still "on the books." Without the necessary new legislation and codification, as the report observes, the Kyrgyz government's overall commitment to human rights may not survive Akayev's personal rule, although a number of dedicated democrats belong to Akayev's administration, including Feliks Kulov, the Vice-President. This may be especially true while local government leadership resists reform and is not implementing new laws consistent with Akayev's policies.
The State Department report correctly notes President Akayev's own commitments. In fact, the report accurately and thoroughly summarizes the general human rights situation in Kyrgyzstan. Still, it does not succeed in conveying clearly enough the strong undercurrents of old-style, repressive thinking against which President Akayev must manoeuver. Such tendencies are best reflected in two incidents left somewhat undeveloped by the State Department report: the arrest and detention of Omurbek Suvanaliev and the abduction of Abdamannob Pulatov.
Omurbek Suvanaliev, a reformist police major in Chulpon-Ata in the Ysyk-K6I region, had been actively pursuing arrests of local organized crime figures when he was abducted without a warrant on March 23, taken against his will to Bishkek, and detained in a former KGB jail without formal charges being brought against him, according to reports by Tass and the British Broadcasting Corporation. Suvanaliev was eventually charged with violating Article 178(2) of the Kyrgyzstan Criminal Code relating to "abuse of professional position and excesses of power." The report correctly notes that the abduction of Suvanaliev was in all likelihood politically motivated because of his law enforcement efforts directed against the son of a prominent local government official. Yet the report fails to mention this case in the section on arbitrary arrest and detention.
The report fails to describe the rather widespread protests occasioned by the abduction, suggesting rather that only "journalists and human rights monitors"
214
Kyrgyzstan
had objected to the incident. Instead, press reports claim that during March 1992, hundreds of Kyrgyz police and militia demonstrated in Bishkek against the abduction and detention of Suvanal-iev. The report also does not mention that, fully apart from the illegal and clandestine manner in which he was abducted, Suvanaliev was reportedly denied reasonable access to defense counsel at the beginning of his detention.
Such actions by government officials against zealous law enforcement recall the tendency under Russian domination to ignore rule-of-law principles at the behest of government or Communist Party officials. The Akayev administration clearly continues to battle such tendencies. It is noteworthy that public demonstrations against the abduction were allowed to take place, although several police officers who participated were reported to have been fired or reassigned within the Republic.
The happy ending to the Suvanaliev case, one that the State Department could not have predicted, occurred in early January 1993 when Suvanaliev was fully acquitted after hearings in the Bishkek City Court. The court found that he was acting "according to his official duties." The decision indicates that the traditional control of the procuracy over the outcome of politically-charged trials may be weakening, at least under President Akayev.
The abduction of Abdamannob Pulat-ov, an Uzbek human rights activist (Uzbek Human Rights Society), during a human rights conference in Bishkek, not only severely embarrassed President Akayev,
but again demonstrated the old-line tendencies of officials around him. The report's account of the incident omits several vital details and creates a mis-impression concerning the Kyrgyz government's complicity in the matter.
As the report relates, Bishkek hosted a human rights conference in December 1992. On the last day of the conference, December 8, Uzbek law enforcement officials abducted three participants. The three participants, including Abdamannob Pulatov, were forced into a van near the conference hotel and driven across Kyrgyzstan and Kazakhstan, back to Tashkent, Uzbekistan. Pulatov was one of the conference organizers and had met with President Akayev on human rights issues the night before.
Such an event could not have occurred in Kyrgyzstan without the cooperation of Kyrgyz officials. The report accepts the justification of the Kyrgyz Ministry of Internal Affairs that it was obligated to cooperate with the Uzbek authorities under the terms of an extradition agreement with the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) that allegedly permitted the extraterritorial arrest of criminals. The report goes on to state that the Ministry itself acknowledged that "it might have acted differently had it known there was a human rights dimension to Pulatov's arrest." It is difficult to give such a statement much credence in view of the facts that Pulatov is a known human rights activist, he had organized the Bishkek human rights conference, and he was in Bishkek for the express purposes of attending the conference and meeting President Akayev to discuss human rights issues. The State Department
215
Kyrgyzstan
should have questioned the Ministry's explanation.
First, the report did not mention any potential contact between the Kyrgyz and Uzbek governments before or during the abduction. The Democratic Movement of Kyrgyzstan (DMK), in its independent investigation of the abduction, found, however, that the day before the kidnapping Uzbek special services officers approached Valéry Balykin, the Deputy Internal Affairs Minister of Kyrgyzstan, and informed him of their intent to arrest Pulatov. Balykin stated that the Uzbeks had an arrest warrant charging Pulatov with "insulting the honor and dignity of the president [of Uzbekistan] during the student riots ... in Tashkent." Additionally, during the drive back to Tashkent, according to a member of the DMK commission, the Kyrgyz State Motor Vehicle Inspectorate (GAI) stopped the Uzbek van outside of Bishkek. Militia at the GAI post telephoned Deputy Minister Balykin who reportedly told the militia to let the Uzbeks leave.
Balykin claimed that his actions were compelled by the Alma Alta agreement on the extradition of criminals signed by the CIS countries. Internal Affairs Minister, Abdybek Sutalinov, defended Balykin's actions to the DMK committee. Sutalinov stated that Balykin "acted within his powers." It has also been reported that the Kyrgyz were acting under color of a Soviet-era cooperation agreement among internal affairs ministries of former Soviet republics.
The report merely noted that Balykin purported to be acting under the color of an extradition treaty and failed to analyze
the treaty provisions. Human rights activists from Uzbekistan and the DMK committee have found that the abduction violated the treaty. Articles 3 and 4 of the treaty reportedly provide i) that an individual can be arrested only by the internal affairs agency of the republic where the individual is located, ii) the party seeking the arrest must make a timely request to such agency, and iii) there must be a determination made as to the individual's residence and the validity of the charges. Neither the Kyrgyz nor the Uzbek authorities involved followed these procedures. In addition, the Uzbek charges against Pulatov do not constitute crimes in Kyrgyzstan, giving another basis under the extradition treaty, as well as international norms, for refusing extradition.
The report also neglects to mention some of the important events that occurred in the aftermath of the abduction. The DMK committee proposed that the Kyrgyz Supreme Soviet make an official inquiry to the Uzbeks about the treatment of the detainees and that the Supreme Soviet take measures to prevent similar incidents. On December 1 5, democratic groups in Bishkek appealed to the presidents of Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan and to international human rights activists. To protest the arrests, democratic groups in Kyrgyzstan were planning to stage a rally in Bishkek and to send a group to Tashkent to speak with the Uzbek government. The president of the Union of Councils for Soviet Jews, the group sponsoring the human rights conference, sent President Akayev a letter requesting that Vice Minister Balykin "and all those who may have been complicit in the egregious actions of the Uzbek authorities" be re-
216
Kyrgyzstan
moved from office. Vice-Minister Balykin and other responsible officials in the Ministry of Internal Affairs have since been dismissed. These events both attest to the effectiveness of international protest, as well as to the desire of the Akayev administration to conform to international standards.
As the report notes, Pulatov remained in prison in Tashkent at the end of 1992. At the beginning of 1993 and subsequent to the report's preparation, Pulatov was released by the Uzbek authorities after intense lobbying by numerous human rights groups and particularly by President Akayev. The other two men abducted with Pulatov were reportedly released after interrogation.
In sum, the report too readily settles for the first official explanation of the abduction. The incident as a whole reveals in another fashion, however, the resistance of attitudes that were rewarded during the Soviet era. It also demonstrates the fragility of any human rights advances.
Ethnic rivalries threaten the stability of much of Central Asia, including, though perhaps to a lesser extent, Kyrgyzstan. The report's analysis of the problem gives only a starting point for understanding the ethnic troubles in the country. The report notes the Akayev administration's commitment to the protection of the rights of all citizens regardless of their ethnic origin, gender or religion.
The report fails to describe adequately the Parliament's strong resistance to efforts to protect the rights of all ethnic
groups. The report characterizes complaints as being based primarily on "perceived discrimination." There is more to the ethnic problem in Kyrgyzstan, however, than mere "perceived discrimination."
Nationalist Kyrgyz political parties, such as the Kyrgyzstan Party of National Regeneration [Asaba, meaning "banner"), and other nationalist groups have pressured Akayev and the government to adopt pro-Kyrgyz legislation. Asaba recently published an article proclaiming that land in Kyrgyzstan belonged solely to the Kyrgyz people. Asaba also complained that the state law making Kyrgyz the national language was not being enforced. More seriously, Asaba warned that, if the government did not address its demands, there would be a "destabili-zation of the situation fraught with unpredictable consequences and loss of life," according to a June article in Moscow Pravda. While Asaba is a small party, its nationalistic sentiments create a hostile atmosphere and disturb other groups, like the ethnic Russians, who have been steadily leaving Kyrgyzstan.
Although the report mentions that Kyrgyzstan is populated by over 40% non-ethnic Kyrgyz, it does not mention that ethnic Russians make up about 20% of the total population. The history of Russian domination during the Soviet era will present sensitive issues now that the ethnic Kyrgyz find themselves in power. For example, the Russian newspaper Moscow Izvestiya reported that a Russian woman sold her apartment at a low price and hurriedly left Kyrgyzstan because she heard that a date, March 23, had been set for the expulsion of Russians from Kyrgyzstan. Upon hearing the story,
217
Kyrgyzstan
Akayev quickly made an official statement denying that an expulsion was planned.
Despite Akayev's peacekeeping attempts, many members of ethnic minorities feel that it would be best for them to leave Kyrgyzstan. According to The Current Digest, one-fourth of the Russians have decided to emigrate and fewer than a third have definitely decided to stay. As of September, 47,000 people, mainly of European ethnic origins, had reportedly emigrated in the previous six months. About as many people were reported to have emigrated during 1991. The report fails to note any of these incidents and does not mention the broader emigration problem, including the deteriorating economy's role in propelling emigration.
Despite the tension among ethnic groups, President Akayev has begun the process of providing a legal basis for the rights of minorities. He introduced a Bill on National Minorities in Parliament that purports to protect the rights of minority ethnic groups. In March, a draft law on citizenship stated that "Kyrgyz citizenship shall be granted to all people irrespective of their nationality, race, or religion." All resident citizens of Kyrgyzstan when the law takes effect will automatically become citizens of the new sovereign state. Akayev also managed to defeat a provision of the law on presidential requirements that would have permitted only ethnic Kyrgyz to be president.
Many of the ethnic Kyrgyz concerns stem from memories of Russian oppression. Under Russian rule, ethnic Kyrgyz occupied a few visible positions to pres-
ent a Kyrgyz "face," while those truly in power were Russian. During 70 years of such domination, Russians became deeply entrenched in control positions. Even now, Russians typically have more money, higher wages, and more prestigious positions than the Kyrgyz. Budding Kyrgyz nationalism is in part a backlash against such "communist" discrimination. President Akayev and the reformist members of his government are caught in the middle of this stand-off. As Guy Dinmore put it in a March Reuter Library Report article, "[clommunists decline to be
named for fear of a witch hunt by radical i ' nationalists while Kyrgyz extremists are
equally afraid of a sudden return to Marxist-Leninist oppression." The report mentions incidents of discrimination against ethnic Russians but does not put such incidents into this broader historical context, nor does it assess the likelihood of continuing tensions based on this experience.
Language has also been a point of contention among the Kyrgyz and the Russians. As the report notes, the state language, by law, is Kyrgyz and the language of inter-ethnic and business communication is Russian. The report did not, however, fully explain the rift that the language issue has created. Nationalist Kyrgyz groups demand exclusive use of the state language, while Russians want their children to have a Russian education. In addressing the conflict, Parliament proposed an amendment to the draft constitution to the effect that no one would be denied civil rights for failure to know the state language. However, under the draft constitution, one of the qualifications for the presidency is fluency in the state language.
218
Kyrgyzstan
The report also failed to include an account of the discord which erupted upon the opening of the Slavic University in Bishkek. The DMK opposed a Russian-language university. President Akayev nonetheless officially opened the university on October 9 during a summit with Boris Yeltsin. According to reports, Akayev, because of DMK opposition, was forced to reschedule the originally planned opening until the summit provided a "political curtain" for the event. Kyrgyz nationalists have accused Akayev of being overly attached to Russia. The opening of a Russian-language university in Bishkek intensified the criticism. Akayev stated that the Slavic University will serve all nationalities desiring to study in Russian. In practice, however, there may be a trend in higher education toward favoring ethnic Kyrgyz.
There have been reports of some discrimination against ethnic Germans in Kyrgyzstan. In early 1992, Akayev established two German districts by presidential decree in areas where ethnic Germans are clustered. A statute published on March 13 set up a fund for economic, social and cultural development for the ethnic German areas. President Akayev has also met with German Chancellor Helmut Kohl to agree on measures to prevent German emigration. The report made no mention of the new German districts or of these special arrangements for ethnic Germans.
Kyrgyzstan faces a new problem with the immigration resulting from refugees fleeing the Tajik civil war. Three hundred thousand such refugees reportedly fled to southern Kyrgyzstan and are now living in that area. Border patrols were stepped
up to help stop the flood of refugees coming into the region. Kyrgyzstan has no official policy concerning the refugees and it is unclear at this time what rights they will be accorded. The report is inexplicably silent on this key issue.
One of the most volatile issues separating the competing ethnic groups is the privatization of land, dwellings and industry. The report fails to deal with the issue at all. For example, in southern Kyrgyzstan in June 1990 conflicts between Kyrgyz and Uzbeks over land privatization resulted in at least 300 deaths and more than 1,000 injured in the city of Osh alone. The violence occurred in part because the local soviet had decided to give to ethnic Kyrgyz the land of a collective that had been farmed for years by ethnic Uzbeks. The Kyrgyz government had to bring in troops to stop the killing. The tragic events likely impressed upon President Akayev the seriousness of the problem, but have resulted only in the passage of a resolution to control strictly the distribution of land. On the other hand, the Akayev administration has apparently managed to maintain the peace around Osh without resort to repressive measures.
Now, as in 1 990, ethnic Uzbeks have opposed land reform for fear that they would suffer discrimination from native Kyrgyz. The ethnic Kyrgyz comprise only about 53% of the population, while the remainder is made up of eighty different ethnic groups.
As mentioned above, Nationalist Kyrgyz parties have again demanded that all land go to ethnic Kyrgyz. President Akayev opposes such measures and
219
Kyrgyzstan
recently vetoed a bill introduced in parliament that had been intended to reserve all land to the ethnic Kyrgyz for private ownership. He vetoed the bill three times before it was finally defeated. Because of continuing nationalist opposition in Parliament, however, Akayev was forced to stipulate that 50% of privatized land would go to ethnic Kyrgyz.
President Akayev has stated his opposition to privatizing in favor of any one ethnic group. Although ethnic Kyrgyz comprise just over half of the population, other ethnic minorities with higher incomes than the Kyrgyz actually have more money to spend on small businesses being auctioned by the state. The Kyrgyzstan National Renewal Party recently called for a halt to privatization because they believed too much land was going to non-ethnic Kyrgyz. In July, the party criticized Akayev, claiming that his privatization plan was designed by ethnic Russians. Privatization plans in Kyrgyzstan have been considerably slowed by fears of further ethnic violence or unrest such as the Osh occurrences.
The report's evaluation of the status of women is correct. President Akayev has stated his commitment to equality of treatment for men and for women. In September, the Kyrgyz government announced the creation of the first women's lyceum in Kyrgyzstan. The school will be financed by Turkey, and will educate students in Kyrgyz, Turkish, Russian and English. Only ethnic Kyrgyz women will be admitted to the school, however.
In its discussion of the judicial system, the report notes that the substantive and procedural criminal laws of the Soviet
period for the most part remain in place. Although the report cites no instances of abuse of pre-trial detention, it does not mention the case described above of Omurbek Suvanaliev.
The report fails to mention that problems have arisen regarding treatment of prisoners convicted of crimes. For example, individuals convicted for crimes committed during the Osh incidents of 1990 still await sentencing, according to Amnesty International. In addition, the report does not mention the existence of the death penalty.
Although President Akayev opposes the death penalty, there are approximately 11 Kyrgyz citizens currently on death row on sentences prior to Kyrgyz independence. During the Soviet period, those sentenced to death in Kyrgyzstan were executed in neighboring countries, especially in Kazakhstan. Consequently, no execution facilities exist in Kyrgyzstan. The Kyrgyz government has stated, however, that it will no longer send death row inmates to Kazakhstan or other countries to be executed. Nonetheless, the Kyrgyz government has not stated a new policy for its death row inmates.
The report's discussion of freedom of expression is accurate. It notes the passage of a new law protecting freedoms for the press and mass media and indicates that some newly independent sources of information may be disadvantaged by government subsidies offered in various guises to government-owned media. This may create additional concerns of self-censorship for such government-owned publications. In the midst of the growing ethnic tensions, Akayev has
220
Kyrgyzstan
been very critical of the media for what he labelled an "anti-Russian hysteria."
Finally, the report's evaluation of the status of worker rights during 1992 is well formulated and accurately detailed. As reported, workers in Kyrgyzstan have the right to organize and bargain collectively. While working conditions are well below western standards, attention has been paid to workplace safety regulations.
The report fails, however, to assess the practical state of worker rights given the general economic context now existing in Kyrgyzstan. In 1992, Kyrgyzstan suffered economic conditions worse than those of any CIS country except Armenia. How worker rights are maintained and developed depends in part upon the creation of a stable, prosperous economy. The factors now exerting the greatest influence in the Kyrgyz economy include the privatization of state land and enterprises, government attempts to build a market infrastructure, and the availability of foreign aid ancf investment. These factors will determine the quality of workers' rights to a significantly greater extent than the mere adoption of government decrees and policies, however well-intentioned.
The shock of moving from a state command economy controlled by Moscow to a local, mixed market economy has had profound effects on workers. The most serious consequences have been a drop in manufacturing, increased unemployment and high inflation. Manufacturing production fell by 27% during the first nine months of 1992 and national income fell by 25% over the same
period.
The outlook for the future is even more dismal. President Akayev stated in late 1992 that in 1993 Kyrgyzstan could experience a 50% decline in manufacturing with a 20% unemployment rate. Inflation has already exceeded 1,454% since December 1991.
Inflation is a consequence of price liberalization. Price increases have also been blamed on the fact that those in charge of production are monopolists who held high Communist Party positions. Instead of producing more goods, these groups reportedly have been content to let prices rise. To combat the problem, Akayev proposed procedures for establishing and regulating prices. These factors collectively have meant lower standards of living in the short-term for workers in Kyrgyzstan.
The government has instituted measures such as minimum wages and social programs to aid workers during the economic crisis. Minimum wages were established for all workers in both state-owned and private enterprises. The government has also created social grants for students in higher education and technical and vocational schools. Social programs, however, are limited by available government funding, and the government, like the people, is caught in the economic crisis.
Hopes for Kyrgyzstan center on foreign aid and investment. The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank have estimated that Kyrgyzstan will need $400 to $500 million to reform its economy. Kyrgyzstan joined the IMF in Sep-
221
Kyrgyzstan
tember, and began compliance with an IMF plan to restructure its economy. Turkey, Japan, Russia, the United States, the European Community and other countries have sent aid to and have invested in Kyrgyzstan. For example, General Electric has worked with the Kyrgyz government on building a hydroelectric plant in the country.
While Kyrgyzstan begins to attack its economic problems it is to be hoped that at the same time a secure legal foundation will be laid for the protection of human rights in the Constitution, the criminal code, the criminal procedure code and labor laws. Without such a foundation, the human rights commitment of President Akayev and his government may not survive his presidency. As can be seen in the events described above, hardline and repressive elements continue to exert an influence in the country.
222
