Cambodia
The State Department report on the human rights situation in Cambodia is accurate and hard-hitting. There were many significant human rights developments in Cambodia in 1992, both positive and negative, and the report is generally very successful in presenting them in context without oversimplification. The lack of access to verifiable information in Cambodia makes information gathering a formidable task, but the report does a good job of presenting information from conflicting sources.
The 1991 Peace Accords and the arrival of the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) had an enormous impact on human rights developments in Cambodia in 1992. The report usefully points out positive developments, such as the ratification of human rights treaties and the release of nearly all political prisoners, that could be directly ascribed to the UN presence in the country. Problems that emerged from the new political dynamic in the country resulting from the Peace Accords, such as attacks on the offices of newly formed political parties and the establishment of secret detention centers to avoid UNTAC scrutiny, are also addressed.
In light of UNTAC's quasi-governmental role, the report should have assessed its effectiveness in promoting human rights in Cambodia instead of just describing its activities. As the report notes, UNTAC human rights monitors conducted their own investigations of alleged human rights violations. UNTAC decided not to make public the findings in individual cases, in part out of concern for the
safety of those reporting abuses. Instead, they were privately submitted to the offending party, primarily the State of Cambodia (SOC), with requests for disciplinary action. This policy proved to greatly limit the effectiveness of UNTAC investigations. As the report notes, SOC investigations of abuses were inadequate - or, more accurately, were not seriously undertaken in the first place. (Recognizing their failure to gain prosecutions or disciplinary action against human rights offenders, UNTAC in early 1993 appointed a special UN prosecutor to prosecute human rights cases through the Cambodian courts.)
The report says that "UNTAC sought to gain control over the SOC political security apparatus" but should have made it clear that UNTAC acted ineffectively in this regard. The UN was also extremely reluctant to use the power entrusted to UNTAC Special Representative Yasushi Akashi under the Peace Accords to "require the reassignment or removal of any personnel" in key Cambodian government departments.
The report should also have noted UNTAC efforts that were questionable from a human rights perspective. In September, in response to mounting violence against ethnic Vietnamese, UNTAC issued regulations that criminalized the publication of "information which is false, fabricated or untruthfully attributed to a third person" and is found "likely to disturb the public peace." In addition, the criminal code issued by UNTAC provides criminal penalties of imprisonment for up to eight years for defamation and
55
Cambodia
libel. These provisions violate standards of freedom of expression under international law, including Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which Cambodia ratified in 1992.
The report's introduction, while in general an excellent summary of the overall situation in Cambodia, contains some questionable word choices. "Some" cases of political killings of independent political party members are said to be "clearly attributable" to the SOC security forces. This sentence casts doubt on overall SOC responsibility for the killings. It would have been better for the report to say that "most" such cases "appear attributable" to SOC security forces or those acting on their behalf. The introduction also states that the independent parties were subjected to SOC harassment in Phnom Penh -- in fact, new party offices were subjected to harassment in many provinces.
The section on extrajudicial killings is particularly good. The report details the most important cases and does not hesitate to discuss questions of fact that remain unanswered. It would have been helpful if the State Department included its own assessment, based on its own reading of available information, as to the facts of a particular case. The description of the Ath Sadorn case should have made it clear that he and his mother were killed (not just shot). Ath Sadorn was a Khmer People's Liberation Front activist, not just a member. The section concludes with a useful assessment of official SOC responsibility for the political killings, which is particularly necessary given the dearth of hard case-specific
information.
The discussion of the Cambodian trial process - unfair and rarely used -- is good. The report should have made it clear that judges have absolutely no independence. They are beholden not simply to the provincial authorities, as the report indicates, but to the ruling Cambodian People's Party. The report is correct to describe the system as "dysfunctional," and so UNTAC's new code of criminal law and procedure could hardly be said even to have "commenced implementation." By year's end, the new code was announced and a few judges, prosecutors and defenders received some basic training, but little had been done to put the system into use.
Freedom of expression in Cambodia is well chronicled in the report, both favorable and unfavorable developments. The report did less well in addressing the legislative inroads on press freedom in the past year. Noted above is the failure to discuss problems in UNTAC regulations on press freedom and the law on defamation and libel. The report also does not mention the law enacted by the SOC in April that prohibited the new independent media from using "ill-intentioned and destructive criticism" and permitted the Minister of National Security to sanction media in order to "protect national security, public order and the good customs of the nation." Following pressure from UNTAC, this press regulation was suspended.
The section on the freedom of assembly and association overstates the importance of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front Congress in Phnom Penh.
56
Cambodia
This event appeared only to be possible because of the considerable UN presence. While noting SOC obstruction of the establishment of political parties' offices and activities, the report should have pointed out that parties with offices in the provinces found it impossible to hold party meetings out of fear of arrest, let alone hold public gatherings.
The discussion of the fledgling human rights community in Cambodia is generally accurate. However, the report incorrectly states that these groups have begun investigating human rights complaints. To date, these groups have involved themselves only in human rights education; legitimate concerns for their members' safety as well as a lack of expertise in monitoring have prevented these groups from including investigations of alleged human rights abuses in their mandates.
The discussion of fact-finding by international human rights organizations contains some minor inaccuracies. Prior to the arrival of UNTAC, several delegations visited Phnom Penh and were able to visit provincial areas so long as they had express government approval. The first such trip was undertaken by the Cambodian Documentation Center in September 1989. The Lawyers Committee undertook a fact-finding mission to Cambodia in October 1991. Beginning in 1992 after the arrival of UNTAC, Amnesty International, Asia Watch and the Lawyers Committee have undertaken fact-finding missions to provincial areas without restriction.
57
