South Korea
In many respects, this year's report on the Republic of Korea (ROK or South Korea) is an improvement over previous State Department reports. Information on some issues is particularly detailed and several sections are expanded to include new topics. Contradictions between protections afforded by law and the practices of authorities are pointed out, and language used previously to blunt the significance of certain abuses is generally avoided. However, this year's report does lack details of several significant abuses and areas of concern.
With the December 18, 1992 election of Kim Young Sam, the country's first civilian leader in three decades, many observers expect significant improvements in the human rights situation. On March 6, 1993, Kim announced the largest amnesty in South Korean history. It included the release from jail of dissident leader Moon Ik Hwan, dozens of student activists and six people held since the end of the Korean War for allegedly spying for North Korea.
These recent developments are an outgrowth of changes that have taken place since 1987. But, as the 1992 report forcefully states: "Democratization continued, but elements of the ROK's authoritarian past survive. ... In 1 992 democratic ideals and practices had not fully supplanted undemocratic practices left over from the pre-1987 era."
The coverage of serious human rights violations is more extensive than in last year's report, which singled out only two - police abuse of detainees and the mis-
use of security laws. This year's report acknowledges the existence of additional serious problems: denial or unlawful restrictions on a detainee's right to legal counsel, discrimination and violence against women, voting and campaign irregularities and labor laws that do not meet international standards.
In particular, this year's report emphasizes the ways in which people detained by the police or security forces are denied timely legal representation or due process. The report notes lawyers' charges that people who voluntarily submit to questioning by the authorities are often held for up to 24 to 48 hours, much longer than the six hours allowed by law. Moreover, "the authorities continued to block or make access difficult to legal counsel for suspects under interrogation or in detention awaiting trial, especially in political cases." Although these practices are not new, this year's report is the first to give so much attention to them.
This year's report is also less equivocal than previous reports about the role of the National Security Law as the primary tool used to suppress dissent. South Korean authorities argue that the National Security Law is necessary to defend against North Korean subversion, but the report states that the security laws "were frequently used to punish the nonviolent expression of opinion or the exercise of the freedom of association or travel."
The 1992 report also repeats that assessment for the first time in sections on freedom of speech and the press and with reference to political prisoners. In
357
South Korea
the section on freedom of speech and press, the report notes that the government's definition of pro-North Korean or anti-state is "so broad that it often includes persons who attempt to express nonviolently views which the Government opposes." Added to the boilerplate language on political prisoners is a new phrase that says the number of political prisoners remains high "because of continued prosecutions under the vague National Security Law and other security-related laws."
The report mentions that in January the Constitutional Court ruled that security agents violated the Constitution when they tape recorded a meeting between a member of the banned teachers' union and his attorney. However, The Law Times, a South Korean publication, reported that security officials refuse to abide by the ruling and continue to tape such meetings, a charge the report fails to mention.
The section on torture states: "Credible allegations of cruel treatment by the authorities continue to be made. . . . [T]he mistreatment reportedly includes acute sleep deprivation, verbal abuse and beatings." In general, the report could have been strengthened by reference to more specific examples. For instance, Baik Tae Ung, a member of the Socialists Workers League (Sanomaeng) who was arrested in May, testified in court that he was beaten, deprived of sleep and injected with drugs during his interrogation. The report refers to the arrest of activist and writer Kim Nak Jung and more than 60 people in connection with an alleged spy ring, but does not mention charges by Amnesty International and Internation-
al PEN that Kim and others were beaten, deprived of sleep and denied visits from relatives during their interrogation. Song Hae Suk, arrested in connection with the case, was reportedly beaten and threatened with sexual abuse in front of her three-year-old son.
The report also understates the seriousness of allegations of mistreatment made by members of the banned teachers' union Chonkyojo. The report states that the five teachers alleged that "police abused them." A fuller description of their alleged mistreatment suggests a word stronger than "abuse." Amnesty International reported the following: Pae Choon-il, 51, alleges that he was forced to lie on the floor while seven police officers stepped on his neck, pulled his hair, pulled his arms and legs behind him and punched him in his back and shoulders. Han Young Sun, 31, reported that she was hit in the face, stomach and chest, kicked in the knee, and thrown against a wall headfirst. Kim Sang Choi, 41, was reportedly pulled by his hair and dragged down two flights of stairs then beaten on his head and chest until he lost consciousness. Lee Jong Chon, reported that officers pulled his hair, hit him in the head and chest, stomped on his back and twisted his legs and neck.
In the section on the right to a fair trial, the report notes that by the end of 1992, "the number of political prisoners and detainees as defined by international human rights standards remained in the hundreds." New this year is a reference to Amnesty International's estimate of the number of political prisoners. As in previous reports, there is no mention of the estimates of Korean human rights
358
South Korea
groups, which put the number at more than 850.
The report also neglects the problem of long-term prisoners of conscience who refuse to sign "conversion statements" renouncing real or alleged political views. At least 30 "unconverted" political prisoners have spent more than 20 years in prison, two for more than 40 years. Although other prisoners sentenced to life terms have been released after 16 to 18 years, the "unconverted" prisoners continue to be held because they refuse to sign the conversion statements.
This year's report acknowledges for the first time in several years that conditions in Korean prisons "remain harsh." However, the report repeats the claim that conditions have improved without citing any evidence that this is the case. If conditions have improved each year, it is curious that they still remain harsh, unless previous reports were overstating the improvements.
In the section on religion, the report neglects to mention allegations that the ruling party used security forces to pressure Buddhist leaders to support Kim Young Sam's presidential campaign.
The report also does not mention charges about excessive force used against military recruits by officers or pressure exerted by officers to influence the votes of soldiers during National Assembly elections.
The report does show a new sensitivity toward language and new concerns. For example, last year's report stated that some Korean human rights monitors
"alleged" government harassment and surveillance while this year's report uses the words "credibly reported," a subtle difference, but one which suggests a change in attitude toward complaints against the government. The discussion of difficulties faced by Amerasian children, foreign workers and the disabled is new, and the section on women's status is expanded.
The section on labor rights is also expanded and improved. While previous reports referred to "hard-line" policies against labor unions, the 1992 report refers to "the Government's repression of dissident unions and insistence that labor actions remain within the bounds of the highly restrictive labor laws." This year's report also notes that since 1991 South Korea has been suspended from the U.S. Overseas Private Investment Corporation insurance programs because of a poor record on worker rights. The 1991 report omitted this information.
A discussion of the laws forbidding third-party intervention in labor disputes is expanded, although it could have been bolstered with additional examples. In June, Chong Woo Dai, chair of the Federation of Trade Unions in Taegu, was arrested for making a speech critical of the government's wage system. He was charged with "third-party intervention." The same day, Kang Pyung Jae, head of the Federation of Taxi Workers Associations in Pusan, was arrested for leading a protest against the arrest of his predecessor. The one example cited in the report, the arrest of Yang Gun Mo, does not mention that she was also targeted for arrest for making a speech to union members.
359

South Korea
Information on industrial accidents in South Korea, mandated by the State Department's instructions, is included for the first time in the section on conditions of work. The report notes that South Korea "suffers from unusually high accident rates," that the Ministry of Labor employs few inspectors and that its standards are not effectively enforced.
Finally, the observation in the report's introduction that "there is little public pressure exerted" to protest high military expenditures seems disingenuous in light of the report's acknowledgment that people may be arrested and detained under the vaguely worded National Security Law.
360
