Kuwait
One approaches the report on Kuwait expecting that it will try to show that the members of the dynasty on whose behalf the Gulf War was fought are turning the country, if not into a model democracy, at least into something better than the corrupt and oppressive autocracy that prevailed before the Iraqis invaded in 1990. Although the State Department report on human rights in Kuwait does touch on the main human rights problems, as in the report of the previous year, it deals very gently with the ruling family, effectively sanitizing the political record of the Sabah government, tending to minimize the Sabahs' culpability for human rights violations and to downplay their demonstrated hostility to democracy.
The treatment of freedoms of speech and press is illustrative of this tendency. The statement that pre-publication censorship was eliminated in 1992 without further discussion portrays the situation in far too rosy a light. In 1992, in lieu of the censor's scissors, tactics such as arrests of editors and journalists, lawsuits for "defamation" or breaching "national security," and the imposition of fines were resorted to by the government to intimidate the press. Curiously, the report refers to some of these lawsuits --but without actually seeming to recognize their motivation or the chilling effect they are meant to have. One takes away from the report no sense of the menace in the government's lawsuits directed against both the editor of al-Oabas, the last remaining independent newspaper in the country, and one of its columnists. There is no mention of the case of Abderrahman
al-Madhaji, a Yemeni journalist thrown into the Talha detention center and marked for deportation for his reporting on a controversy at the Ministry of Education.
The lack of balance is noteworthy. "Strident attacks against senior Kuwaiti officials, including the Prime Minister" (who is also the Crown Prince) are cited, but the threatening statements made by members of the ruling family are not. For example, in March, the Prime Minister/Crown Prince ordered an end to all criticism of the government, accompanied by a threat that he would resort to measures to enforce compliance if needed. His was no idle threat, since the government has resorted to tough methods to discourage criticism by its political foes, including harassment of Ahmad al-Khatib, one of the most outspoken of Kuwait's opposition figures, and his family. Thus, the report is whitewashing the government's policy of seeking to silence critics when it says that Kuwaitis can "speak without fear of official retaliation." They cannot do so -- at least when their speech is directly or indirectly critical of the government. Moreover, the report's decision to label attacks on the government "strident" smacks of bias. The circumstances in Kuwait, where the incompetence of the pre-invasion cabinet had left the country totally unprepared for the Iraqi attack and where staggering levels of corruption in the management of the country's finances had been revealed in 1992, were such as to justify the strongest criticisms of the government and the ruling family, several of whose members were directly implicated in the invasion debacle as well
208
Kuwait
as the financial scandals.
In a similar vein, the report credits the government with showing "a willingness to cooperate with the National Assembly, for example by permitting ministers to submit to Assembly questioning" -- as if some major concession, a grand gesture of noblesse oblige, were involved. In actuality, by cooperating in this manner, the government was merely following the dictates of the Constitution ~ for a change. (The rights of members of the National Assembly to question ministers and to demand information from them are stipulated in Articles 99-101 and 114 of the Constitution.)
The report notes that the 16-member Cabinet established in the wake of the parliamentary elections included six ministers chosen from the elected National Assembly members, "the largest percentage of elected Assemblymen in the Cabinet in Kuwait's history." Again, this is no real concession. The Constitution in Article 56 says that Ministers shall be appointed from among the members of the National Assembly and from others. The wording suggests that the first pick should be from the National Assembly. Thus, a report written from a neutral perspective might have made the critical observation that after parliamentary elections in which about two-thirds of the elected candidates were opposed to the government, only six members of the Cabinet were selected from elected members of the National Assembly.
The report mentions that "the Al-Sabah family's tradition" holds that the Crown Prince shall be Prime Minister, implying that it might be somehow nor-
mal in a country like Kuwait to have such a "tradition." But, this "tradition" is no more than a desire by the ruling family to maintain power in its own hands. Putting the Crown Prince in that position has no warrant in the political order as established in the Constitution. The report apparently deems that "tribal" rules are appropriate for a society like Kuwait's. In a different section, the report seems cheered by the fact that union officials "enjoy free access to the Crown Prince and other senior officials." What does this mean? That the modalities of tribal society are seen as "normal" in the exotic setting of Kuwait? It is apparently deemed normal for the Sabahs and union officials to be sitting down together to cut their own deals affecting labor relations. However, politically aware Kuwaitis who aspire to have principles of legality and transparency honored in their government would like for all such important exchanges and negotiations affecting the public weal to t\e conducted according to published laws and regular procedures and carried out in formats that would permit oversight by the elected representatives of the people.
The report is also inclined to take at face value government statements professing to take measures to clean house in response to criticisms from international human rights organizations. The report blandly records that the government has maintained "that it was continuing to investigate" the extrajudicial killings in the period after liberation. In reality, it seems that the "investigations" have been singularly unproductive, having only led to the publicly acknowledged arrest of one alleged perpetrator - and that only after the most vigorous internal and interna-
209
Kuwait
tional protests and pressures. In a 1992 letter to the Kuwaiti Association to Defend War Victims, the country's major independent human rights organization, the Attorney General indicated that it was necessary for the victims of abuses in the period after liberation to lodge their own complaints about offenses, specifying the perpetrators, for prosecutions to be launched. Given this attitude, the meager results are not surprising. Similarly, in the absence of any showing of results, the government's statement that it is "continuing to investigate the remaining cases of disappearances from 1991," should not be simply presented without comment --although in the report, it is.
A tendency to resort to euphemisms can be seen in the description of the trials held in the 1991 martial law courts after liberation, which according to the report "did not generally meet international standards of due process." In actuality, these trials were profoundly offensive to basic human rights standards in the area of criminal justice. It is misleading to say that international human rights organizations "commented favorably" about the proceedings of the state security courts in 1992. These undeniably constituted a vast improvement over the atrociously unfair proceedings in the 1991 martial law courts, but, in noting the improvement, the organizations were hardly acclaiming the virtues of the trials conducted by the state security courts. A particular failing of these trials was that much of the evidence against defendants was collected during the martial law period when detainees were held in unregulated incommunicado detention and torture was widespread.
The report also fragments information so as to dilute its potential significance. For example, the report states that under Kuwaiti law "no Kuwaiti may be exiled." Only some pages later does the report acknowledge that the government follows a practice of revoking Kuwaitis' citizenship in violation of the Constitution. The Kuwaitis whom the government is forcing into exile are exiled after their citizenship has been officially revoked; thus, the government can claim that it is only exiling "non-Kuwaitis." There is a vague allusion to a Kuwaiti who lost his citizenship in a complicated dual citizenship case and was allowed to return to Kuwait in 1992, implying that the system can be benign; citing the case of a first class Kuwaiti citizen who was deprived of his citizenship and deported - as a "non-Kuwaiti" -- to Iran because of his pro-Iranian sympathies and not allowed back would have given a fairer picture of how imposed exile normally operates.
Occurrences of serious human rights abuses and torture are acknowledged but sharply downplayed. For example, the details of specific incidents that could illustrate the arbitrary use -of torture are omitted. Staying at the level of abstract generality, the report uses an equivocal formulation in acknowledging that "some cases of serious abuse or torture continued to be reported in 1992." Not only were they "reported," the abuses and torture actually occurred, and the facts of individual cases have been published elsewhere. Regarding torture, other accounts suggest that it is being commonly used -- but not necessarily in the official detention centers to which the International Committee of the Red Cross has access. The report does not mention
210
Kuwait
that it appears that new, informal detention centers have been set up to avoid international monitoring. The State Security Police (KSS) were flexing their muscles in the most ominous way in 1992, a year when there were indications that they were "learning" techniques from Egyptian State Security, which has long been notorious for its brutality and inhumane treatment of detainees. The report states blandly that the KSS "continued to commit some human rights abuses, particularly in dealing with Iraqis, Yemenis, Jordanians, Palestinians and Sudanese." This overlooks the extent to which patterns of arbitrary arrest, detention, torture, mistreatment and threats coincide with official policies to encourage persons of disfavored nationalities to depart.
There is a confusing presentation of the range of pressures exerted on the Bidoon population and vulnerable non-Kuwaitis to get them to "choose" to depart. To say that "less favorable economic, residence, and social conditions" led to long-term foreign workers' departures, as the report does at one point, is to indulge in euphemisms. On a later page, there is more specificity; it is acknowledged that non-Kuwaitis have been stripped of their essential civil identification cards and are denied the legal right to work, attend school or travel. Not mentioned is that, without their cards, non-Kuwaitis may not even marry. The report seems to credit the government's claims that internal security reasons justified its resort to setting up checkpoints on the roads and searching people. It is doubtful whether these served much of a security purpose (the checkpoints were generally set up well after an incident occurred that raised security con-
cerns), but they did afford the police further opportunity to harass and mistreat non-Kuwaitis, an opportunity that the police seem to have exploited.
The extent of the displacement of Palestinians pursuant to government policies of driving out non-Kuwaitis is obscured by the report's assertion that the Palestinians in Kuwait "dropped to approximately 27,000 from a postwar figure of 120,000 to 150,000." Omitted is the fact that the prewar figure was about 400,000; as there was a large outflow of Palestinians during the invasion, the postwar figure is not representative of the actual number of Palestinians living in Kuwait who were uprooted as a result of policies preventing their return to Kuwait and driving them out. Saying that the Palestinian writer Walid Abu Bakr had been deported after living in Kuwait for 30 years "appeared to underscore the Government's determination to reduce its Palestinian population" without some acknowledgement that the sudden, unexplained deportation of this well-known literary figure was totally arbitrary likewise seems inadequate.
Regarding the situation of the long-suffering Bidoon, the report seems disposed to minimize the unfairness of the treatment meted out to them and the scale of the problems they face. The language used in one part effectively prejudges a complicated factual issue that is far from resolution. It is asserted that "[wjhile some percentage of the bidoon have long standing ties to Kuwait, others immigrated to Kuwait in the 1960's and 1970's." No definitive survey and analysis has been done by anyone to ascertain the validity of the claims people have
211
Kuwait
made to Bidoon status. By saying that "some percentage" have ties to Kuwait, the report suggests that those who do are in a minority. Of course, if most Bidoon claims of Kuwaiti origins are fraudulent, there is less of a Bidoon problem than there would be if most of the claims were legitimate. It is doubtful whether the authors had the evidence to back up this innuendo.
The report misstates the problem of the Bidoon, presenting their plight as that of people "unable to document claims of Kuwaiti citizenship." In fact, the Bidoon do not claim that they have documents establishing their Kuwaiti citizenship; they simply allege that they can establish that they should be treated as Kuwaitis due to their birth in Kuwait, their family connections to Kuwait, and/or their having lived in Kuwait for many decades. Thus, although they lack proper citizenship papers, they assert that it is wrong to expel them to other countries simply because they or their relatives and ancestors failed to comply decades back with what were then the formalities necessary to obtain formal certification of Kuwaiti citizenship. Seemingly preoccupied with documents, the report says that the Kuwaiti government prevented the return of Bidoon who exited Kuwait during the Iraqi occupation by denying or delaying their entry visas. In fact, the government has simply decided not to allow back many of the Bidoon who wound up in Iraq during the occupation and the war. In mentioning that Bidoon "had left the country during the Iraqi invasion," the report neglects to mention that many only "left" as prisoners of war, forcibly carried off by the Iraqis. In one part, it confuses Bidoon with non-Kuwaitis who are applying for
residency, saying that Bidoon who met screening requirements got residency permits, whereas others were sent to their countries of origin. Persons with countries of origin other than Kuwait are not properly Bidoon.
There is not much about women in the report, and what is included is not always instructive. That the ruling family has reneged on its promise that women would gain the right to vote after liberation is not noted.
Stating that foreign nationals are subject to restrictive labor laws, as the report does in an early section, does not give the complete picture. A prime source of problems for Asian domestics is that they are not covered by the existing labor laws, which do not apply to workers in private homes. This is not mentioned until near the end of the report. Some of the tragic cases involving the physical and sexual abuse of expatriate Asian women are recounted. The report skirts several obvious deficiencies in the official response -- the government's failure to take steps to curb abuses or to prosecute and punish employers accused of the graver offenses, to monitor the activities of recruitment agencies, to provide effective arbitration and other means of redress for servants victimized and abused by their employers, or to provide assistance to Asian domestics forced to take refuge and squat in their countries' embassies, including the assistance they would need to obtain passports that have been confiscated and withheld by their employers. Evidence confirming the assertion made in the report that police have been arrested for raping one Sri Lankan maid does not appear to have
212
come to the attention of reporters and human rights organizations concerned with this problem.
It is misleading to assert, as the report does, that domestic servants may take legal recourse against their employers for abuse but do not do so out of fear. In fact, there is no realistic prospect for them to obtain redress via the judicial process; their circumstances and their lack of basic legal protections ensure that recourse to the courts will be futile.
The report slights the problem of the large number of naturalized male Kuwaiti citizens who must wait 30 years after qualifying for citizenship before they obtain the right to vote, mentioning their disenfranchisement in passing without noting the serious unfairness that this discriminatory treatment entails.
The repressive impact of the law of associations is not noted, nor is the arbitrariness with which the Ministry of Social Affairs decides what organizations qualify for legal recognition. Meanwhile, accounts suggest that perhaps 40 applications by non-governmental organizations for legal recognition have been denied by the same ministry.
In short, this is a report that downplays and dilutes the seriousness of the human rights problems facing Kuwaiti society in 1992 and portrays a kinder, gentler version of the Sabah family's rule. This is not an accurate picture of the monarchy that Kuwaitis have had to struggle against in their campaigns for human rights and democracy.
