Lebanon
The State Department's report on Lebanon maintains that "although there was some improvement in the human rights situation attributable to the consolidation of central government authority, normal constitutional and legal protections still did not apply in the large part of Lebanon outside government control." Such a generalization reduces the government to a hapless spectator over human rights violations occurring in the areas under the control of Israel and Syria, and ignores the issue of the extent of the Lebanese government's complicity in these violations. More importantly, the report glosses over the heavy-handed practices of the Hariri government in areas under its control, which led Lebanese at different ends of the political spectrum to complain of "too much State." For example, in a statement following the Annual Assembly of Catholic Patriarchs and Bishops in Lebanon, Catholic leaders strongly condemned "attacks against the freedom of individuals and the practice of arbitrary arrests followed by ill treatment," while Musta-pha Saad, the Nasserite leader from Si-don, declared that "freedom of opinion and of expression have been reduced to praising the State and its achievements."
The report's fundamental flaw lies in its failure to address the government's human rights practice in a coherent manner, seeming more concerned to give an outline of Lebanon's intricate political machinations. By glossing over serious infringements on civil liberties with statements lik§ "the Government does not formally interfere" and "Lebanese authorities generally evince no interest in con-
trolling personal life," the report often suggests the victim's culpability and characterizes these infringements as a function of the tenuous political situation in the country. While it is true that the Hariri government is grappling with the impact of 17 years of war on Lebanon's civil society and infrastructure, the evidence also indicates that it too has worked to stifle dissent and undermine basic rights.
The report is notable for the passive tone with which it represents a number of important violations of the Ta'if Agreement, which formally brought an end to the civil war in 1989, without mentioning that these violations have led a significant segment of the Lebanese population to challenge openly the legitimacy of the government.
The indefinite delay on the redeployment of Syrian troops to the western entrances of the Biqa' valley, which according to the Ta'if Agreement was to take place in September 1992, is described by the report as the result of a joint agreement by the Lebanese and Syrian governments. The report does not allude to the public uproar caused by the delay nor, in general, to the desire of many Lebanese to rid the country of what they consider foreign occupation by both Israeli and Syrian forces.
The report's discussion of the government's record on arbitrary arrest, detention and freedom of expression is a mere juxtaposition of news items, devoid of any analysis of the root causes of these violations. It fails to criticize the deten-
228
Lebanon
tion and ill-treatment of non-violent political opponents carried out ostensibly for "endangering the security of the state." Deputy Speaker of Parliament Elie Ferzali, in a press conference following the publication of Amnesty International's allegations of arbitrary arrests and torture against the government in December 1992, defended these actions as necessary for "political security" without acknowledging their illegality. He declared that "politics in the form of slogans is unacceptable aggression," showing the government's intolerance of dissent.
The report is misleading in its treatment of freedom of speech and the press. It states that Lebanon "has a strong heritage of freedom of . . . press" but fails to describe government imposed restrictions on the media. In a press conference on December 23,1992, Information Minister Michel Samaha announced: "In the absence of adequate legislation, an honor pact has been established for the audiovisual media which they will sign, it being understood that this document has been submitted to them and they have approved it."
According to observers, the pact required journalists to use political terminology acceptable to the government. The pact has been enforced for a transitional phase at the end of which it was to have been passed into law. The draft law would have also subjected the radio and television stations which proliferated during the war to strict government control, banning them from transmitting news bulletins and political commentary. Opposition to the government's attempts, however, was so great that the draft law was subsequently shelved, at least tem-
porarily.
The report also fails to mention, among other instances, the censorship of the Chansonniers de la Route troupe's review "Et ta soeur?" due to its criticism of the President and ministers and the holding by the government's Censorship Committee of a play by Ziad Rahbani.
In considering the independence of the judiciary, the report correctly notes that influential politicians continue to be able to intervene to protect supporters from detention and prosecution. However, it inaccurately places full blame for the delay in adjudication of the backload of cases which "developed during the war years ... on lawyers [who] stopped work in August and September [of 1991] to protest the kidnaping of an attorney in the south," failing to note the freeze on judicial appointments implemented by members of the National Assembly. The failure to fill vacant positions has resulted in there being only 2^0 active judges at a time when, according to Auguste Bakhos, chairman of the Parliamentary Committee on the Administration of Justice, there is a need for at least 600 judges.
The independence of the judiciary is also impaired by the government's ability to transfer judges to other posts and locations as well as to control their income. These powers are some of the most effective weapons to ensure judges' cooperation through patronage. The difficult financial circumstances of junior judges in particular either force them to obtain additional sources of income, thus interfering with their job performance, or place them under the influence of powerful politicians.
229
Lebanon
The report does not address the widespread discontent in the judiciary caused by systematic government intimidation and interference in the judicial process, which led to the resignation of many high ranking magistrates. Although Article 3(1) of the government's 1991 general amnesty law excludes the crimes of hijacking and sea piracy from its provisions, for instance, it is widely held that Decision 307/92 of the Criminal Court of the District of Mount Lebanon, which dismissed all charges against the hijackers of a December 7, 1991 Libyan Airlines flight, was arrived at under pressure from the Amal militia group to which the hijackers belong. Similarly, on January 16, 1992, the General Prosecutor of the Court of Appeal declared that the person responsible for the attempt to assassinate the late President Camille Chamoun with a car bomb on January 7, 1987, in which three persons were killed and 27 wounded, was covered by the amnesty law in contravention to Article 3 (section 3) of the amnesty law which excludes the crime of political assassinations. Indeed, Maroun Aziz, former President of the Commercial Court of the Court of Appeal of Beirut, asserts that the government considers the judiciary as just another part of the government's administrative operations, to be subjected to the whim and political exigencies of the executive branch of government. In support of his charge, Aziz cites recent appointments to fill vacant posts, which were effectively imposed by the executive branch in that the Higher Judicial Council was given only 24 hours in which to approve them.
The report's treatment of the Palestinian population in Lebanon is seriously deficient. Rather than using the Palestin-
ians to highlight human rights abuses in areas outside the effective authority of the Lebanese government, the report should have dealt with the Lebanese government's treatment of the Palestinian community in Lebanon in a comprehensive manner in the section on discrimination.
Palestinians in Lebanon face constant harassment by state security, Syrian secrity and certain militias. A pattern of reprisals and counter-reprisals among the various Palestinian factions in particular has created a state of increasing insecurity in the refugee camps. The government, while condemning violence on all sides, has failed to take serious action to stem its tide.
Studies on the conditions among the refugees abound. According to the U.S. Committee for Refugees, the United Nations Relief and Welfare Association (UNRWA) estimates that about 4,000 Palestinian families live in unsatisfactory, makeshift shelters, and need assistance for adequate housing. The proportion of refugees receiving special hardship assistance, 11.8%, is the highest for any of the areas in which UNRWA operates. The report, for instance, fails to mention that a decision by the Ministry of Labor to freeze the granting of work permits to foreigners has had negative impact on Palestinian employees, notably among those working as paramedics in hospitals throughout Lebanon.
The report contains some factual errors. These include: 1) the description of Basta, where a car exploded on December 30, 1992, as a Shi'a rather than a Sunni quarter; 2) the statement that
230
Lebanon
persons kidnapped in August 1992 in the UNIFIL zone were returning from an electoral meeting in the "security zone" which is under Israeli control, when they were actually returning from a rally held in a region controlled by the Lebanese Army; 3) the statement that Palestinians are permitted to organize their own unions when there is no legislation to permit this.
The report is weak in addressing the status of women and the condition of children. Lebanese society, albeit traditional as the report claims, is open enough for a more substantive investigation on abuses against women. Women's groups have been working assiduously to document abuses and to press the civil as well as the religious authorities for action to better protect women. Similarly, recent works by UNICEF and certain nongovernmental organizations highlighting the plight of the war and post-war generations of children could have been referred to.
The report is further weakened by a reluctance to address political issues like the 1992 elections seriously. Statements like the elections were held "in an atmosphere of acrimony and discord" and "the results do not reflect the full spectrum of the body politic in Lebanon" mask a schism in Lebanese society which was at the root of the civil war and may still lead to the unraveling of the country itself. Is the government fostering the creation of a strong civil society that will ultimately pull Lebanon out of the abyss to renewal, or merely relying on its police power to neutralize the opposition? This fundamental question, which goes to the heart of the government's commitment to human rights principles, is largely over-
looked in the report. If the Lebanese government is to be seen as sovereign in its own country, then its duties to uphold the human rights of its people should not be so easily explained away by reference to difficult circumstances.
231
