Liberia
The 1992 report is a generally accurate picture of the complicated situation in Liberia. There were several improvements over reports of prior years. For instance, there was a more thorough presentation of violations carried out by the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL), headed by Charles Taylor. Additional details, however, would have created an even clearer picture of the situation in Liberia. The inattention to details was especially noticeable in the coverage of the Economic Community of West African States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), which prompts a concern of bias in favor of that group. The lack of details is particularly unfortunate since the same complaint was made about last year's report.
The main improvement in the report is the more thorough coverage of the NPFL. Last year's report had limited coverage, even though the NPFL controlled approximately 50% of the population and 90% of the territory. In comparison, the 1992 report discusses the situation in NPFL-held territory in much greater detail.
Nonetheless, there were still gaps in the coverage of the NPFL. The principal omission was the failure to mention detention of ECOMOG soldiers by the NPFL in Buchanan, and that former U.S. President Carter intervened to secure the release of these soldiers. The report should have also mentioned that several NPFL soldiers had been arrested following the March demonstrations in Buchanan, which were protesting the execution of six people by the NPFL. In the section on violations of humanitarian law, the report
accurately states that all sides killed civilians and caused more harm to non-combatants than they did to each other's forces.
This year's report also expands briefly on the description of the history of ethnic tensions that were exacerbated by Samuel Doe's government in the 1980s. This background information is a continuing improvement.
Additional information would have made for a stronger introduction. Unlike prior reports, this year's introduction did not mention the refugee situation, specifically that there are still over a half-million Liberians in neighboring countries. In addition, the fact that nearly 100,000 Sierra Leonean refugees were trapped in the northern county of Lofa should have been mentioned. Although the body of the report adequately addresses this issue, the introduction could usefully have also mentioned the use of children fighters, who newspaper reports indicate were sometimes given drugs before being sent into battle.
The introduction should have also noted that the United Nations Security Council passed Resolution 788 in November, which condemned the violence in Liberia and requested that a UN special representative evaluate the situation. This resolution should also have been mentioned in the section on governmental attitudes towards human rights investigations, as required by the State Department's own instructions on the preparation of the reports. The involvement of the UN in the efforts to forge a cease-fire
232
Liberia
and a long-lasting agreement was a key event that also implied that ECOMOG alone could not end the war. This implication should have been identified and assessed by the State Department.
Finally, the introduction would have been strengthened if it had included additional details of the fighting that started in October in and near Monrovia, including: over 3,000 civilians were killed, and 200,000 fled to Monrovia from its suburbs; adequate water was scarce and there was a measles epidemic; and ECOMOG imposed a 14-hour curfew, threatening to shoot those who violated it on sight.
A keener eye for details would have created a clearer picture in the body of the report as well. For instance, several subsections of the civil liberties section have topic sentences that present a picture that is contradicted by information that follows. The freedom of speech and press subsection states that "with some limitations, [these freedoms] were generally exercised in Monrovia," and "[t]here was no official press censorship."
A different picture is presented in the paragraphs that followed these statements. Journalists were sometimes asked to meet with officials of the Interim Government of National Unity (IGNU) who had been offended by articles. In addition, journalists admitted being chilled by ~ as the report states, "constant public calls" -- for a more responsible press. The report also notes that IGNU impeded the distribution in Monrovia of newspapers published in NPFL-held territory. Finally, the report acknowledges that IGNU ordered the Information Ministry to
"edit" -- censor - articles concerning ECOMOG troop positions during the fighting in Monrovia. While there may have been a basis for such censorship, it was disingenuous to state in the prior paragraph that there had been no censorship.
Similarly, the freedom of association subsection starts out by stating that "political parties and other groups were able to organize and hold public meetings" in Monrovia. But the very next sentence states that the NPFL political affiliate was prevented from locating its headquarters in Monrovia. While acknowledging that ECOMOG had restricted certain demonstrations, the report should have also noted the restriction on the October peace demonstration.
These instances of failure to provide details prompt concern of a bias towards ECOMOG and IGNU. The report's discussion of civil liberties presents a picture that was more favorable to ECOMOG and IGNU than warranted. It also fails to mention that in February ECOMOG soldiers searched homes in Monrovia for weapons, apparently without obtaining warrants as required under Liberian law. In addition, there were reports - which were denied by ECOMOG -- that its soldiers were turning over suspected NPFL fighters to the Armed Forces of Liberia (AFL) without safeguards to prevent torture or extrajudicial killings. Other credible reports asserted that AFL troops acted as "scouts" for ECOMOG and helped target NPFL supporters, thereby fuelling ethnic hatred. The report fails to assess ECOMOG's transformation from a neutral peacekeeper to, as many in Liberia see it, an active participant in fighting the NPFL. Finally, there was only a limited
233
Liberia
mention of the air bombings carried out by ECOMOG. One such bombing reportedly resulted in' 38 civilian casualties. Another bombing hit a Catholic Relief Services warehouse in Buchanan, destroying a substantial amount of rice and blended food.
Additional details would have also made the rest of the report more thorough. For instance, while the report notes the murder of five American nuns, it fails to mention that four Liberian novices reportedly disappeared at the same time. Similarly, the secretary general of the Seamens and Dockworkers' Union, Emerson Kokullo, was reported to be missing.
The press subsection mentions that The Eye, a newspaper in Monrovia, had experienced two arson attempts in June. In fact, the arsonist was successful the second time; furniture, documents and equipment were destroyed. The report notes that Issac Bantu, the president of the Press Union of Liberia, and his colleague, Dan Brown, had been detained by Independent National Patriotic Front of Liberia (INPFL), headed by Prince Johnson. Although the report mentions the death threats against the two journalists, it should have noted that they were "tab-eyed" as well. This torture method involves tying the elbows behind the back.
234
