Sri Lanka
The report provides a generally accurate picture of human rights in Sri Lanka in 1992. It sums up the situation in the country by its statement that "[although the level of violence continued to decline somewhat from what it had been two years ago, there were still serious human rights abuses." The biggest failing of the report is its failure, particularly in the sections on torture and "disappearance," to provide examples to highlight its assertions. As a result, the report does not fully capture the horrific violations of human rights that continue to occur in Sri Lanka.
Overall, the report downplays threats and intimidation against those who would report human rights violations. This was one human rights problem that clearly worsened in 1992. According to domestic and international human rights organizations, a number of human rights lawyers, journalists, trade unionists and witnesses to human rights violations have received intimidating threats, including death threats, from government security forces. These threats have had their intended effect: witnesses to "disappearances" and other human rights violations have refused to come forward, and lawyers have refused to act in cases against security forces personnel for fear of retaliation.
The report states that 12,000 persons have "disappeared" in Sri Lanka since 1983 and that "it]he overall number of disappearances declined during 1992, from nearly 900 in 1991 to somewhat over 200 in 1992." The 12,000 figure is a very low estimate based on the 1991
report of the Working Group on Disappearances of the UN Commission on Human Rights. The Working Group reported that it received 12,000 reports and conceded that the actual number was higher. Although there is wide agreement that there was a decrease in reported disappearances in 1992, the extent and cause of that decrease remains unclear. Reliable reports have placed the number of disappearances at over 400 in the eastern province alone (over twice the State Department's estimate for the entire country), and have pointed to several instances in the south where individuals believed to have "disappeared" in 1992 were subsequently found in police custody.
The report's discussion of the use of torture is basically accurate, but understates the extent of its use. While noting that beating is routine, it should have stated that other forms of serious abuse are nearly as widespread. The discussion would have benefitted enormously from some case examples. Many cases were reported in the Sri Lankan media in 1992, as well as international human rights organizations.
In the section on arbitrary arrests, more attention should have been given to the rounding up of Tamil youths in Colombo. The discussion of excessive use of force in internal conflicts pointedly notes that "the Government's failure to punish appropriately those who commit such abuses creates a climate of impunity which permits them to continue." The report should have instead emphasized the responsibility of the government to
361
Sri Lanka
control groups that it arms, such as the Muslim home guards.
The report also understates the extent of the governmental restrictions on speech and the press. While noting that the Emergency Regulations and other laws currently in force "place clear restrictions on freedom of speech," the report states those laws are "infrequently invoked," proclaims that "a variety of independent newspapers and journals provide a range of viewpoints on foreign affairs and domestic issues, including human rights" and baldly asserts that "(m]any newspapers openly criticize the ruling party and Government."
Such statements distort the problems facing the press in Sri Lanka. There were an unprecedented number of attacks on journalists, photographers, printers and others representing or affiliated with the press in 1992. Although the report does state that there were "several incidents" in 1992 where "opposition journalists or journalists covering members of the opposition were assaulted," it fails to note the continuing, systematic nature of the public harassment and attacks, or the pervasive climate of tension and fear those attacks have created.
For example, it was reported throughout the year that the Criminal Investigation Division would appear at the offices of newspapers and journals to question reporters and staff members after the appearance of a controversial article. Reporters, editors and photographers affiliated with many of those same journals were also the subject of physical harassment and assaults during the year, in many cases by armed policemen.
In the same vein, the report asserts that "[tjhere were no prosecutions for distributing 'antigovernment' literature during 1992." It fails to report, however, the government's more subtle forms of suppression. In August, for example, it was reported that U.S. journalist John Colmey, a correspondent for Asiaweek, was subjected to questioning by the Criminal Investigation Division regarding "illustrated material" in his possession. Thereafter, government spokesperson Bradman Weerakoon stated that the material "if published, could have brought the government into disrepute and caused disaffection." Colmey left Sri Lanka after the incident.
The report's analysis of freedom of movement within the country is inaccurate. While correctly noting that curfews and checkpoints have inhibited travel in the war-torn northern and eastern provinces, the report states that constitutional guarantees of freedom of movement and the freedom to choose one's residence are "generally honored." According to Canada's Immigration and Refugee Board, since 1991 all citizens who wish to move from the normal residence have been required to register with the police in their new locality and provide a letter of reference from the police in their former neighborhood. All persons providing housing or shelter must see to it that they are registered with the police. Persons, particularly Tamils, who are unable to justify their presence in a particular locations are subject to arrest. These requirements are especially onerous to persons who have fled civil war-torn areas.
The section on governmental attitudes towards human rights groups notes
362
Sri Lanka
that two threatened lawyers received 24-hour police protection. The protection was not round-the-clock and threats continued when the guard went off duty. The report also mentions, accurately, that no human rights groups have come under the scrutiny of a politically motivated government commission investigating the activities of non-governmental organizations. This commission nonetheless poses a threat to the activities of the human rights community.
The section on worker rights should have stated that the Emergency Regulations have made it virtually impossible for independent labor unions to function. The report notes that some trade union leaders have argued that the Prevention of Terrorism Act is contrary to International Labor Organization Convention 29, but takes no position on the issue.

363
