Lithuania
The State Department's 1992 report continues its comprehensive coverage of Lithuania's progress toward full self-determination, rule of law and democratic reform, in an impressive recovery from the violence inflicted by Soviet forces in January to August 1 991 which exacted a toll of more than 20 dead and hundreds wounded. Lithuania first proclaimed independence on March 11, 1990. After the failed coup of August 1991, the USSR recognized Lithuania's regained independence on September 4, 1991. Lithuania then entered the United Nations and the 51-nation Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE).
Despite its restored independence, the report shows Lithuania retains troublesome remnants of the Soviet legacy. The disruption of Soviet trade patterns and the weakness of the new market sector brought on economic deterioration, unemployment, inflation and falling living standards. Judicial and legal reforms sped along, but the paucity of qualified registered attorneys, the report concludes, raises questions about the possibilities of guaranteeing a real right to counsel and fair trials. Findings of leading politicians' past collaboration with the Soviet state security committee, KGB, produced some bombshells such as evidence of the collaboration of former Prime Minister Kazimiera Prunskiene. Near the end of her deputy's term anyway, Prunskiene was not suspended. She did not stand for re-election on October 25. Other than some charges of collaboration thrown at one's political opponent, the process of exposing former collaborators appears to have been con-
tained short of a witch hunt and within bounds of due process then available.
Political reforms accelerated as a way out of political deadlock after Vytautas Landsbergis, Chairman of the Supreme Council, lost the May 25 referendum on his proposal for a strong presidency. Parliamentary elections of October 25 and November 15 were judged to be free and fair by CSCE observers. These brought also approval of a new constitution and a new parliament, with the traditional name of the Seimas. A majority of the 141 seats in parliament was won by the Lithuanian Democratic Labor Party (LDLP), successor to the Communist Party of Lithuania which had broken away from the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in 1989. The LDLP leader, Algiras Bra-zauskas, by then the most popular politician in Lithuania, became acting president and on February 14, 1993 was elected president in an easy Victory.
For all its merits, the State Department report pays insufficient attention to several important issues: the dangers of continued Russian troop presence; the human rights aspects of the treatment of minorities, beyond the generally enlightened policies encouraging their cultural and religious freedoms; and the controversy over the rehabilitation of war criminals.
Russia and Lithuania reached an agreement on September 8, 1992, near the end of the parliamentary presidency of Vytautas Landsbergis, requiring troops withdrawal by August 31, 1993. The September accord brought some hope of
235
Lithuania
greater tranquility and security and an end to such violent incidents as the bomb blast which damaged a Lithuanian armored vehicle and home guard building on May 11, 1992, set off perhaps by members of the former Soviet special forces, OMON black berets. These forces have been called responsible by the chief investigator of the Lithuanian Prosecutor General's Office for the cold-blooded killing of seven customs and police officers on the night of July 30-31, 1991. The officers were shot in the back of the head as they lay on the floor at the Medininkai checkpoint. The number of former Soviet troops was reduced from approximately 35,000 at the beginning of the year to approximately 1 9,000 by mid-December. Whether the withdrawal keeps up may depend on the fate of democratic government in Russia. It would be facilitated by foreign assistance in the re-settling of troops and their families.
In Lithuania the questions of citizenship and naturalization lack the saliency that they have in the other two Baltic republics of Latvia and Estonia. Unlike them, Lithuania has a strong indigenous majority, 80% of the population of 3,728,000 in 1989. The other 20% is made up of Russians (9%), Poles (7%) and smaller proportions of Belarussians, Jews and other ethnic groups. Some of these non-Lithuanians migrated to Lithuania as part of the massive population transfers organized by the Soviet Union, transfers which contravened Article 49 of the Geneva Convention as regards the rights of inhabitants of occupied territories. Because of their strong majority, ethnic Lithuanians did not fear extinction as did the smaller indigenous majority populations of Estonia and Latvia. As a
result, the Lithuanian Supreme Council passed an interim citizenship law of November 3, 1989, which gave the option of citizenship to all permanent residents of Lithuania, regardless of length of residency, who registered their assent to citizenship within a two-year period. Fewer than two percent of non-Lithuani-ans remained non-citizens.
The Supreme Council replaced the interim law with the law of December 10, 1991. The new law recognized as citizens those who had been citizens of Lithuania before June 1 5, 1 940 and their children and grandchildren, also those becoming residents from January 9, 1919 to June 15, 1940 and their children and grandchildren, as long as they were residing in Lithuania on December 10, 1991. Most children born of at least one Lithuanian citizen gained Lithuanian citizenship, as well as children born in Lithuania to stateless parents.
For other persons the new law stipulates a naturalization procedure which requires a residency of 10 years, knowledge of spoken and written Lithuanian; knowledge also of the basic provisions of the Constitution of Lithuania; being stateless or renouncing citizenship in another state; and taking an oath of allegiance to the republic. Because of the previous two-year opportunity for citizenship automatically upon registration, the quite long 10-year residency requirement has nowhere near the impact of even the three-year requirement in Estonia, or 16-year requirement under the draft law of Latvia. In those two countries, there has been no interim period of free choice; large numbers of non-indigenous people in those two countries are disenfranchised (Esto-
236
Lithuania
nia) or threatened with disenfranchise-ment. Given the relatively small number of non-citizens involved in Lithuania, the government would have risked little in omitting the language requirement and instead offering free courses in Lithuanian.
Among classes of people excluded from citizenship because they are ineligible for naturalization are those who have committed crimes against humanity or acts of genocide and those who took part in criminal activities against the Republic of Lithuania. The law's restrictions on eligibility for naturalization improperly exclude various classes of non-indigenous persons, the first class being those convicted of "deliberate" crimes -- in Lithuania, a crime punishable by imprisonment. By withholding citizenship from previously convicted criminals, Lithuania is effectively adding an additional ex post facto punishment to that imposed by the criminal law, in violation of Article 1 5 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) to~ which Lithuania acceded in 1991. Second, by withholding citizenship from those addicted to alcohol or drugs, Lithuania may be administering what Helsinki Watch has called "an especially cruel, arbitrary, and utterly unjustifiable" punishment, one which would violate Article 7 of the ICCPR. For the ban on addicts discourages them from seeking needed treatment. The same is true of the ban on those infected with "especially dangerous infectious diseases." To be stricken with the AIDS virus, for example, could mean not only loss of health and possibly life, but deprivation of citizenship and its attendant civil and political rights as well.
Finally, all those barred from citizenship also stand a good chance of exclusion from participation in much of the privatization proceeding in the country, an extra disability in addition to disenfran-chisement and the statelessness of waiting or excluded former Soviet citizens reluctant to apply for citizenship elsewhere. One is dealing here with a small fraction of the total non-ethnic Lithuanian population, most of whom have acquired citizenship. But the limited impact of exclusions does not remove the state's obligation to uphold international human rights standards.
Among non-ethnic Lithuanians, the situation of ethnic Poles living in areas incorporated into Lithuania in the shifted boundaries after World War II merits attention. The "Polish issue" moved toward a partial resolution in 1992. On September 4, 1991, in the name of political security and territorial integrity after the August 1991 coup attempt, the Lithuanian parliament suspended the popularly-elected local government councils in the city of Snieckus, a place of Russian settlement, and in the heavily Polish districts of Salcininkai and Vilnius. The government charged that the suspended local councils had been in league with Moscow coup plotters.
The State Department report mentions resulting "allegations that the democratic rights of these residents were being restricted at the local government level," but does not inquire into the realities behind the allegations. The residents' rights to non-discrimination and representation were in fact violated. All the administrators sent in to take over local government were Lithuanians. Inter-
237
Lithuania
viewed after the suspension, Deputy Romualdas Ozalas, head of the Commission on Affairs of East Lithuania, attempted to justify the takeover, saying: yes, the suspension of the local councils contained procedural irregularities, but: "We must first restore the state as it was under the law, and then relate to citizens according to standards of human rights."
Polish deputies protested this move as a breach of faith with them, supporters of Lithuanian independence, and an over-reaction instead of a selective set of removals of council leaders based on due process and evidence of real complicity. In a return to due process, elections were held on November 22, 1992. Because voter turnout was below the requisite 50%, a new round of elections was held on February 14, 1993, with some runoffs to follow.
The report omitted discussion of two other concerns of the Polish minority. Members of the Polish Union, and Polish deputies to parliament argued that the delay of the local council elections in the Vilnius region deprived Polish-Lithuanian citizens of the right to defend through the councils their interests in reclaiming the ownership of land once belonging to them and their families, and now at risk of being lost to them altogether in a planned expansion of the city limits of Vilnius into rural, Polish-inhabited areas.
The report states that "Government efforts to rehabilitate persons charged with anti-Soviet crimes led to reports in 1991 that some people alleged to have been involved in crimes against humanity during the Nazi occupation were also benefitting from this rehabilitation." This
passage misses altogether the need for considerable pressure from abroad to get the prosecutor's office and court to reconsider any of the rehabilitations. Two rehabilitations of persons suspected of crimes against humanity were overturned in 1992, with four more cases pending on appeal to the Supreme Court. Acting President Brazauskas told a delegation of Holocaust specialists from Israel at the end of the year that he is ready to review pardons issued to Nazi collaborators by the Landsbergis government, and to collaborate with Israeli Nazi-hunters in the effort to screen the over 50,000 pardons issued to persons convicted for resisting the Soviet occupation. In the rehabilitation process since 1991, 1,500 applications for pardons were originally turned down and another 1,500 were pending. The screening will proceed under the 1990 rehabilitation law which forbids the issuing of pardons to anyone who had been involved in killings and acts of genocide against Lithuanian Jews. An issue between the government and the Simon Wiesenthal Center, which tracks down Nazi war criminals, is whether or not to release to the Center the list of the 50,000 rehabilitated criminals tor the Center to check against its own lists of suspected war criminals. Officials carried over from the previous government resist the idea of a large scale review. Moreover, revealing the list, they say, will harm those on it. The prosecutor's office had revoked just one of 27,000 pardons it has issued: "We cannot review every pardon," said the official in charge of screening applications for pardon at the prosecutor's office. The Supreme Court has revoked five of the 25,000 pardons it issued. The apparent reluctance on the part of the court and prosecutor's office
238
Lithuania
remains to be overcome if the rehabilitations are not to include those guilty of collaboration in genocide.
To sum up, the State Department report describes in helpful detail Lithuania's rapid progress toward freedom despite a difficult legacy and grave economic decline. The report lacks analysis of remaining human rights issues, however, beyond its balanced analysis of legal reform. Questions about human rights remain for residents excluded from citizenship, for the ethnic minorities in matters of local self-government and accessibility of land once theirs, and for those regardless of ethnicity who seek the truth in the political rehabilitation proceedings.

239
