Latvia
The State Department's 1992 report continues its comprehensive coverage of Latvia's progress toward full independence and democratic reform, after a previous year of dramatic changes. During that year, Latvia rebounded from the Soviet use of force in January 1991 and from the failed August 1991 coup. Latvia's declaration of regained independence during the coup received Soviet recognition on September 4. Latvia became a member of the United Nations and the 51-nation Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE). The scope of the report this year, no less than last year, is particularly commendable in light of the difficulty of monitoring human rights violations due to the breakup of the former Soviet Union.
Last year's critique faulted the State Department report for vagueness about repressive and discriminatory policies "which threatened the human rights of the non-indigenous population of Latvia." This year's report remains vague on this subject by not analyzing the human rights aspects of controversial Latvian legislation on minorities. Absent also, therefore, is mention of potential remedies where human rights are at issue.
As the report mentions, a fact-finding delegation from the United Nations Commission on Human Rights visited Latvia. During its stay, October 27-30, on the invitation of Supreme Council Chair Ana-tolijs Gorbunovs, the commission determined Latvian laws on citizenship, language, property rights and freedom of movement to be generally in conformity with international law, and the procedure
for granting citizenship to be essentially non-discriminatory. The delegation noted, however, that a sense of insecurity existed among some of the national minorities. This stemmed from concern over the future status and the civil, political and economic rights of the non-native population of Latvia; the present draft law on citizenship; the application of the language law; and the registration of Latvia's inhabitants, about which there had been more than 300 complaints of arbitrary practice.
The language law in Latvia protects multilingualism in education and culture. It requires the mastery of Latvian in all schools. If carried out to the letter in the near term, this could result in staff cutbacks in Russian schools or in closing down these schools altogether, because only five to seven percent of school principals and their deputies can meet the demand of fluency ir Latvian.
Previous law guaranteed the right to education in the Russian language. On March 31, Parliament amended the Latvian Law on Languages to eliminate that guarantee, and simply to say that citizens of non-Latvian origin "have the right to education in their native language" but without a guarantee of state support for this. The amendment prompted the Russian Foreign Ministry to express its dissatisfaction on the demotion of the Russian language.
The draft citizenship law of October 15, 1991 seeks to "liquidate the consequences of the Soviet Union's occupation and annexation of Latvia," and to renew
223
Latvia
the legal rights of citizens of the Republic of Latvia. The withdrawal of one consequence, foreign troops, is one thing, but setting stiff requirements for already resident immigrants from the occupation, is another. Non-indigenous persons who do not qualify for, or who refuse, Latvian citizenship may be granted Russian citizenship, with which they would still be allowed to live in Latvia. Yet the potential availability of alternative citizenship and continued residence has not stilled criticism of the law by nongovernmental organizations such as Helsinki Watch because of the law's stiff residence and language requirements and list of exclusions.
The draft law automatically extends Latvian citizenship to Latvians who were citizens on the date of the Soviet invasion --June 17, 1940 -- and their direct descendants who registered before July 1, 1992. All others, the non-indigenous inhabitants, may be naturalized. Some applicants grumble about being singled out to be tested on the basic provisions of the 1922 Latvian Constitution and to swear an oath of loyalty to the republic, and renounce citizenship and loyalty to all others as preconditions for naturalization. The 16-year residence requirement is stiff, especially for the over 20% of Russians who do not meet it. The residence requirement has been criticized by some human rights groups and by a European Community commission as excessive and out-of-step with modern citizenship requirements.
The requirement of knowledge of Latvian is for non-Latvians the most difficult obstacle to naturalization. The 1989 census reports that only a quarter of non-
Latvians in the republic speak Latvian. Hence the wide anxiety over the language requirement and the possibility that the language exam will be administered unfairly. Helsinki Watch suggests that a better way for Latvia to revive the Latvian language might be to offer free language instruction to its non-indigenous population, thus removing obstacles of both the limited availability and the cost of language instruction.
If the draft citizenship law is passed in its present form under present conditions, it will leave a substantial proportion of non-indigenous inhabitants on a "second class" footing: disenfranchised, potentially excluded from privatization proceedings depending on how the laws and practices proceed, and in a stateless limbo between the complexities of acquiring Latvian citizenship and the fateful step of opting out of Latvian citizenship altogether by applying for Russian or other foreign citizenship.
The draft citizenship law bars the naturalization of persons convicted for attempting to undermine or overthrow by unconstitutional means the independent and democratic Republic of Latvia; persons who now serve in the ranks of the Soviet military, MVD (police and special) or KGB forces; and persons convicted of crimes against humanity.
The report does not analyze the human rights issues created by the draft law's other exclusions from naturalization of certain classes of non-indigenous persons. These include non-residents settling in Latvia after 1940 upon retirement from the Soviet armed forces, KGB and MVD; common criminals; persons sent to
224
Latvia
Latvia under the occupation as officials of the Communist Party and Komsomol; registered alcoholics and drug addicts; persons without legal sources of income; and persons who have been sentenced for "spreading chauvinism, fascism, communism, and other totalitarian as well as social class dictatorial ideas or [those] inflaming national disorder and hatred."
By categorically excluding from citizenship retired former non-resident Soviet military personnel or Communist Party or Komsomol officials, Latvia appears to be punishing individuals for their political associations in violation of Article 22 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), to which Latvia acceded in 1992. Further, by withholding citizenship from previously convicted common criminals, Latvia is effectively adding an additional ex post facto punishment, which would violate Article 15 of the ICCPR. Similarly, by withholding citizenship from drug addicts and chronic alcoholics, Latvia metes out what Helsinki Watch has called "an especially cruel, arbitrary, and utterly unjustifiable" punishment in violation of Article 7 (barring cruel and degrading treatment or punishment), since the ban both discourages them from seeking needed treatment and taints them with criminal status.
Finally, the exclusion for doctrinal reasons listed above violates the right to freedom of expression (Article 19 of the ICCPR) by setting narrower limits of permissible expression than does Article 20 of the ICCPR. That article supports the banning of "any propaganda of war," and "any advocacy of national, religious or racial hatred" when it "constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or vio-
lence." The Latvian exclusion punishes the dissemination of a broader spectrum of expression than does Article 20. Also it does not require incitement to create a bar to naturalization. In these two ways the draft law far outreaches the prohibitions of Article 20 of the ICCPR.
The UN October mission to Latvia recommended in the interest of neighborly relations that the law on citizenship be passed as promptly as possible, that the residence qualification be lowered from 16 to five years, that criteria for registration as residents be clearly worded so as to avoid their being arbitrarily applied, that non-Latvians should not be excluded from the privatization process, that all incitement to ethnic strife should be banned, and that persons over 50 be exempted from the language requirement for naturalization. The UN mission found that "no segment of the population has been disfranchised." How long that holds depends on whether Russian-speakers will be allowed to vot% in any referendum impending on citizenship law or on a new constitution to replace the makeshift adaptation of the 1922 Constitution and whether they will be able to receive citizenship in substantial numbers before the elections of a new parliament.
Rising tensions during the year were reflected in demonstrations by Russian-speaking advocacy groups and by irate Soviet war veterans facing exclusion from citizenship and former privileges, as well as by episodes of confrontation between Latvian and Russian forces. The political challenge will be to find a reasonable middle ground between Latvian nationalist desires to put the occupation and its legacy behind them and the fulfillment of
225
Latvia
Russian-speakers' reasonable expectations of citizenship ¿nd full equality. A Russian-conducted poll in Latvia showed 69% of Russians there wanting Latvian citizenship.
Coupled with the deteriorating economic situation which hits especially hard the Soviet-implanted industrial sector where Russian speakers work, the potential for more protests and rising tensions is considerable. These tensions are augmented by the continued presence of Russian forces in Latvia, though the forces have fallen from 58,000 troops in the spring to less than 30,000 by the fall. The lack of housing and other facilities in Russia for officers and their families appears to be one of the obstacles to withdrawal. Foreign assistance in this regard would at once facilitate the withdrawal, gain stronger armed forces support for it, and defuse what could be a dangerous pretext for ultra-nationalist revanchism in Russia.
Individual rights have been respected by and large in 1992, the report notes in useful detail. Prison conditions continued to be seriously sub-standard. Pending constitutional reforms and the resolution of various policy disputes, the government continues to function under the usable fragments of the 1922 Constitution of the Republic of Latvia. But no constitution alone can alter the fact that, as in former communist countries generally, a shortage of operating funds and costs spiralling faster than income, rather than censorship, threatens the survival of private newspapers. Private TV and radio broadcasting add to the diversity of information sources.
Last year these pages continued mention of the banning of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Interfront, and other organizations for their support of the failed August 1991 coup. This year's report mentions the ban as well as the detention in 1991 and prosecution of the former first secretary chief of the Latvian Communist Party, Alfred Rubiks and six associates. They were detained on August 23, 1991 on charges of alleged participation in the attempted coup. As of late 1992, the Latvian Chief Prosecutor, Janis Skrastins, had refused to release Rubiks. He stated that Rubiks was being held not just for his association with the Communist Party, but for his links to the National Salvation Committee which allegedly attempted to seize power in January 1991, and to the Interior Ministry, the agency responsible for most of the deaths during Latvia's struggle for independence. The report omits all questions about the conformity of such proceedings with the accused conspirators' rights of due process, among them the right, under Article 9-3 of the ICCPR which states that "anyone arrested or detained on a criminal charge shall be . . . entitled to trial within a reasonable time or to release."
The death penalty goes unmentioned in the report. Capital punishment exists in the three Baltic states -- Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. Twenty people were executed there in the years 1989-1992. Though each of the countries' criminal codes has been amended to reduce the number of capital offenses, Amnesty International is pressing those states to eliminate the death penalty as a violation of the right to life and "the ultimate form of cruel, inhuman and degrading punish-
226
Latvia
merit, as well as not a provable deterrent."
To sum up, the State Department's report describes the rights situation in helpful detail. On the other hand, it falls short on analysis of some disturbing implications, for human rights, national unity and social peace, of the direction being taken in citizenship law, the application of the language law and resident registration procedures. The potential for infringements of the rights of the non-indigenous population of Latvia results from the struggle of a well-intentioned democratic government to shake off the trappings of occupation and to protect Latvian ethnicity and statehood from extinction.
There has been remarkable progress toward democracy since 1987. But groups such as Freedom House and Helsinki Watch continue to express concerns because of the apparent obstacles to full
democratic participation for minorities	t
posed by the impasse on citizenship. These obstacles are not fully described by the report. The past year did not see the country succeed in reconciling the goal of equal rights for all with the goal of reasserting and protecting Latvian nationhood.
227
