Mexico
The State Department's report on human rights in Mexico accurately states that human rights violations related to personal freedoms, electoral processes, prisoners' rights, press freedoms and judicial processes are widespread in Mexico, and that many such violations go unpunished "... owing to the culture of impunity that has traditionally surrounded human rights violators' (emphasis added). However, the report fails to provide a context that would explain why such a "culture of impunity" continues to exist. It also fails to state in unequivocal terms that the government of Mexico bears full legal responsibility for human rights violations which occur in Mexico and the continuing failure to prosecute violators. The report barely mentions certain topics, such as human rights violations against women and workers and the continuing impact of a flourishing drug trade on official corruption and human rights violations.
The structure of the report -- its emphasis on certain subjects, its omissions and its failure to directly criticize the Mexican government and the administration of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari -- appears to reflect the Bush administration's policy toward Mexico, which included restraining criticism of the Mexican government to avoid potential harm to the bilateral relationship and the pending North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). The report's inappropriately neutral tone and uneven substantive emphasis fail to convey the full dimensions of the human rights problem in a nation with over 400 reported cases of torture, institutionalized violence by secu-
rity forces, near-total official impunity, routine electoral fraud and a litany of other serious derogations from the rule of law.
The Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) has governed Mexico and controlled the resources of the Mexican state, without interruption or significant competition, since the late 1920s. While the report mentions the "dominance" of Mexico's government by the PRI during the party's 70-year existence, it fails to clarify the degree to which the PRI and the Mexican state are, in practice, virtually indistinguishable. The report discusses some human rights improvement, but it still fails to explain the link between human rights abuse and a failure of commitment by PRI leaders in government to promote the exercise of rights and punish violators. Not surprisingly, the recent challenge of the left-of-center Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD) has generated, in addition to earnest political rivalry, increased assassinations, "disappearances," electoral fraud and other human rights violations directed at the PRD and its followers. The older and right-of-center National Action Party (PAN) and several other smaller political parties have been similarly affected in specific cities and states where they pose a threat to the PRI.
According to novelist and former conservative candidate for the presidency of Peru, Mario Vargas Llosa, Mexico is the "perfect dictatorship" because
it is a camouflaged dictatorship.
It . . . has all the characteristics
250
Mexico
of dictatorship: the perpetuation ... of an irremovable party, a party that allows sufficient space for criticism, provided such criticism serves to maintain the appearance of a democratic party, but which suppresses by all means, including the worst, whatever criticism may threaten its perpetuation in power.
Vargas Llosa's particular characterization of the PRI's rule is open to debate; however, the government's authoritarianism and responsibility for human rights violations are not. Historically, the PRI has sought to incorporate all significant social, political and labor organizations into its pyramid of affiliated organizations. Traditionally, emerging independent groups and outspoken critics have been co-opted or literally bought off by the PRI or, as a last resort, repressed out of existence. In each case, the actions taken have been supported by the power and resources of the Mexican government.
This pattern began to change somewhat in the 1980s, as the debt crisis drastically diminished the government's capacity to meet the basic needs of the Mexican people and the PRI's ability to reward its followers and co-opt the opposition. Toward the end of the decade, in unprecedented developments, Mexicans began to establish grassroots organizations independent of the PRI and to question "business as usual" in Mexico, which has often included human rights violations. In the late 1980s, growing disaffection with the PRI led small leftist parties and independent citizen organizations to coalesce around Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, who had left the ranks of the PRI in
1987, to form the opposition PRD after the 1988 presidential elections. Similarly, the PAN also grew stronger in traditionally conservative areas, such as the states of Guanajuato, San Luis Potosí, Sinaloa, Durango, Yucatan, the northern border states of Chihuahua and Baja California Norte and certain cities in other parts of the country.
Popular discontent in the 1980s culminated in the presidential election of 1988 in which the PRI faced a strong challenge by the presidential candidacies of the PRD's Cardenas and the PAN's Manuel Clothier. Salinas was officially declared the winner with slightly over 50% of the popular vote, amid credible claims of widespread fraud. Many Mexicans still believe that Cardenas actually won. The 1988 election set the pattern for virtually every subsequent election (state, federal and local): hotly contested electoral races, political violence and electoral fraud.
For the first time in its history, the PRI's hold on political power is being seriously threatened, which explains why opposition parties, especially the PRD and the PAN, and their followers have been targets of violence and electoral fraud. The report acknowledges the persistence of such violations in 1992, but fails to examine the government's failure to take adequate measures to curb the violence, eliminate the fraud and prosecute crimes committed against the political opposition. Such inaction compels the conclusion that the Salinas administration lacks the will to ensure the protection of human rights in Mexico for all persons, without regard to political affiliation. Indeed, a long shadow is cast on the legitimacy of
251
Mexico
the electoral process throughout Mexico. The number of relatively "clean" elections which took place in 1992, as in Chihuahua where the PAN won its third governorship, is low compared to the number of elections plagued by violence and gross irregularities.
In 1992, two newly elected PRI governors stepped down from their posts at the request of President Salinas after credible allegations of fraud and significant public protests. Two other governors were similarly removed in 1991. The report only mentions the case of Michoacan in 1992, but the governor of Tabasco also resigned in January after Mexico City's central plaza filled with thousands of peasants from Tabasco who protested what they said was widespread fraud in elections the previous November. These removals from office of newly elected governors took place without admissions of fraud by the outgoing official, without findings of fraud by the relevant electoral commission and curiously, without protests from PRI voters who presumably had the expression of their political will annulled. As long as elections are resolved or doctored in such an authoritarian and irregular manner, the Mexican electorate will be justified in questioning the outcomes of virtually any election. Events in 1992 demonstrated once again that the voters do not have the last say at the ballot box in determining who their government leaders will be.
The report accurately states that electoral fraud, torture, unlawful detention and imprisonment, extrajudicial killings, prison corruption and judicial abuse are widespread and committed with impunity. However, the report fails to state
unequivocally that the Mexican government bears full responsibility for all such violations and the failure to prosecute the violators. The report implies that the government, led by President Salinas, does not bear such responsibility. It largely faults the "culture of impunity," almost as if no one in a high level position were responsible for it. Civilian governments sometimes lack sufficient power to confront security forces on human rights matters, but the entrenched PRI cannot credibly make such a claim. Such failure on the part of the Mexican government and the ruling PRI is the result of design or omission, but not incapacity. The report avoids such a conclusion despite a recital of facts which make it readily apparent.
The report cites President Salinas' support of the National Human Rights Commission (Commission), which he created in 1990, as evidence of the President's stated commitment to reform human rights practices. However, the Commission, at best, is of limited effectiveness in combatting human rights violations and prosecuting violators. The report acknowledges that the Commission possesses no prosecutorial powers, forcing it to rely on "the pressure of public opinion and the accuracy of its investigations to induce compliance with its recommendations to state and federal authorities to investigate and prosecute transgressors." Notwithstanding expressions of presidential support, the report admits that many of the Commission's recommendations have been only partially implemented. The report cites Commission statistics which show that since the Commission's inception in 1990 through November 1992, only 160, or less than
252
Mexico
39%, of the Commission's total of 412 recommendations were fully implemented. During the same period, criminal charges were brought against only 246 employees, which is an extremely low number given widespread violations. Furthermore, the report neither reveals the severity of the charges, nor the conviction rate. The report does not describe adequately government success in prosecuting and convicting human rights violators, especially when compared to the long list of violations which it acknowledges. Moreover, the report fails to explain the contradiction between President Salinas' stated commitment to prosecute human rights violators and a dismal prosecution record.
The failure to prosecute human rights violators rests with state prosecutors and the federal Attorney General, a cabinet officer appointed by the President. The report does not mention this fact and fails to explain the failure of prosecutors across Mexico to execute the Commission's recommendations. The report's failure to address these issues is inexcusable, because the repeated failure to prosecute human rights violators at all levels in Mexico substantially explains why the "culture of impunity" persists.
The report implies that police torture and brutality declined because allegations of such violations declined in 1992, according to the Commission. The report attributes such a decline, in part, to the work of the Commission and the President's commitment to prosecute offenders. Non-governmental human rights organizations in Mexico believe the alleged decline is merely statistical, attributable to restrictive criteria which the
Commission now applies in defining cases of torture. In fact, in November the UN Committee Against Torture (CAT), the body that oversees compliance with the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, to which Mexico is a State Party, criticized the Mexican government's failure to curb torture, prosecute human rights violators and compensate victims. Governments are required to submit reports to the CAT every four years to demonstrate compliance with the Torture Convention. In the case of Mexico, the CAT considered violations of the Torture Convention to be egregious; therefore, it directed the government to report again in 1993, and suggested that Mexico seek United Nations assistance in achieving compliance. The State Department report is entirely silent concerning the CAT'S findings.
Following the Committee's session, in December 1992, the government amended existing legislation to impose longer jail terms for convicted human rights violators and compensate victims. In January 1993, President Salinas removed the president of the Commission, Dr. Jorge Carpizo, and appointed him as the federal Attorney General. The prior legislation may have been weaker than the new amendments but the chief problem was, and continues to be, lack of enforcement. With respect to Carpizo, President Salinas frequently made public affirmations of strong support of him and the Commission, yet such support, to date, has proved insufficient to reduce impunity. The new measures will be, in the end, purely cosmetic unless they are accompanied with a real commitment to prosecute human rights violators.
253
Mexico
The same can be said of the constitutional amendment the Congress enacted in January 1 992, at the request of President Salinas, which accorded constitutional status to the Commission and directed the States to create their own state human rights commissions by January 1993. The amendment confirmed the exclusion of labor and political rights from the Commission's mandate, and limited its authority to the appellate review of the decisions of the new state commissions. The report states that the Commission, thereby, was made independent, and generally discusses the constitutional changes in a positive tone. This interpretation follows the lead of the Salinas administration, which touted these new measures as proof of the government's commitment to protect human rights.
Substantial reasons for skepticism exist. In effect, the government replicated a weak national institution at the state level and further weakened the original Commission by removing its original jurisdiction. Moreover, instead of taking effective measures to end police and military abuse, ensure that prosecutors do their jobs and guarantee that the courts dispense justice, the government chose to expand a bureaucratic structure which has to date ineffectively protected human rights, and which constitutes a parallel appendage to the justice system, but without prosecutorial power or the ability to compel the system to act on its findings.
Finally with respect to the Commission, the report also fails to mention a controversy which arose in 1992 as a result of a draft investigative report leaked to the press which is on the sub-
ject of "disappearances" during the 1970s in the state of Guerrero. The unofficial draft report concluded that security forces had engaged in torture, forced "disappearances" and summary executions, but declined to identify any living violators for prosecution. Nongovernmental human rights organizations and relatives of victims criticized the draft report as incomplete or worse, as a whitewash motivated by the fact that some of the alleged human rights violators of the 1970s hold high office in the Salinas government. The Commission has not yet issued its final report and has said little on the subject. The manner in which the Commission deals with this report will say much about its willingness to deal forthrightly with the issue of impunity.
In the 20 paragraphs devoted to the subject of worker rights, the report primarily repeats last year's recitation of provisions of Mexican labor law, but does not acknowledge the widely recognized gap between generous labor legislation and actual practice. The report fails to clearly identify a single human rights violation or the extent to which the government and the PRI control organized labor. It creates the overall impression that the government does not merit criticism for human rights practices in the labor area. In fact, Mexican workers continue to face the risk of physical violence when they attempt to exercise their rights of free speech and association during labor disputes. The omission fuels suspicion that the report's analysis is subordinate to the determined pro-NAFTA stance of the Bush administration. Regardless of its merits and/or defects, NAFTA policy should have no role in the
254
Mexico
reporting of human rights abuses.
The government's control over organized labor, via union affiliation with the PRI and authority to certify the legal status of unions and labor strikes, is much tighter than the report implies. Human rights are violated by the limitation of workers' rights to freely and democratically choose their unions and their leaders. Also, dissident workers often encounter violence from the government-ally-recognized unions or from the police, especially in the case of a strike that has been declared illegal. Prosecutions are rarely pursued.
The report does not mention any cases of labor disputes which led to human rights violations against workers at the hands of Mexican police in 1992. It should have cited one case, at least, that received considerable notoriety in Mexico which concerned the striking Volkswagen workers in Puebla who sought to block a reorganization and the adoption of higher productivity standards. The government's Conciliation and Arbitration Board supported Volkswagen's management and cancelled the collective contract, which led to the firing of 1-4,000 workers and a selective rehiring under terms more favorable to the company. On August 20, police attacked dissident workers, who were peacefully demonstrating near the manufacturing plant, with clubs and dogs. Twelve protesters were injured in the confrontation.
Corrupt union leaders have been tolerated and encouraged by the government, as long as they prevent wildcat strikes and efforts to form rival democratic unions. Recently, labor leaders who
have presented problems or outlived their usefulness have run into legal problems which conveniently removes them from the scene. The case of Agapito Gonzalez mentioned in the report is only the latest example. The pattern began in 1989 with the removal of the powerful leader of Mexico's petroleum workers' union.
The report accurately identifies human rights violations which chilled freedom of speech and the press, but fails to assign responsibility or offer an explanation for the violations. It does accurately state that there are significant restrictions on press freedom which stem from fundamental problems with government-press relations. Government reforms mentioned by the report have been meager and have not led to significant changes. The State Department appears to overstate the impact of these reforms.
The report also fails to mention the government's control of the press through the placing of government-paid articles. Most newspapers run such articles without informing their readers of their origin. More than 20 daily newspapers in Mexico City create the appearance of a vigorous press, while in fact, many are largely dependent on government subsidies. So indebted, many newspapers are eager to print coverage favorable to the government. Self-censorship resulting from awareness of this dependence is an even greater pressure on the media and individual journalists. For example, Mexico City's only English-lan-guage daily, The News, fired a reporter for filing a story in the United States critical of the PRI, which the reporter had not been permitted to publish in The News.
255
Mexico
Self-censorship is worst in television journalism, probably, in large measure, because almost 90% of Mexicans get their news from television. The massive radio and television conglomerate, Tele-visa, controls an overwhelming proportion of audience share and is the most guilty of self-censorship, especially in newscast editing. PRI candidates and government spokesmen are heavily covered, while opposition candidates are rarely seen or heard on any Televisa station, as noted by the report.
The report largely attributes the underreporting of violence against women to "social tradition." While this may play an important role, the failure of police to intervene, noted matter of factly by the report, is in all likelihood an important reason for this as well. "Social tradition" rooted in a futile experience at the hands of the justice system is a government responsibility, one which the Salinas administration did not tackle effectively in 1992.
The report minimizes the control state governments exert over indigenous peoples throughout the country. For example, the criminal code of the state of Chiapas permits the prosecution for sedition of anyone who "gathered tumultously, but without arms" and impeded government functions. The definitions for "rioting" and "insurrection" are similarly broad and refer to the interruption of governmental functions. These provisions in the Chiapas criminal code have been used to prosecute individuals involved in takeovers of public buildings to protest electoral fraud and other official abuses.
One blatant example of how the state government of Chiapas has abused its criminal code and police power to maintain control over the indigenous population occurred on December 28, 1991. Eight people suffered serious injuries and 103 were arrested when 200 policemen violently removed from the central square in Palenque 300 peaceful demonstrators seeking basic municipal services. After three days of alleged torture, 94 of the detainees were set free. Eight of the remaining nine were suspected of being the leaders and were charged with sedition and rioting, among other crimes. All were released after a month in detention, but only through the intercession of the Commission, which found no prima facie evidence against any of the detainees for any of the charged crimes.
The report is largely silent concerning the role of the drug trade in contributing to corruption of officials and human rights violations in Mexico. U.S. officials' accusations that Mexican efforts to control the drug trade are insufficient often have angered Mexican officials and strained U.S.-Mexico relations. The Salinas administration has devoted greater resources to combating drugs and cooperating with the U.S.'s Drug Enforcement Agency, which has helped reduce U.S. criticism. However, the government's war on drugs also has led to an increase in human rights violations committed by the police and the military, who lead the antidrug effort. According to non-governmental human rights organizations in Mexico, respect for human rights is often accorded less importance than making an arrest or obtaining a confession.
A well-documented and widely-publi-
256
Mexico
cized case originated in Baborigame, an isolated village in the mountainous region of the state of Chihuahua. Thirty Tepe-huan Indians accused the Mexican Army of unlawful arrest, torture, theft of personal property and destruction of homes in the course of an anti-drug raid. The Army admitted to some of the charges, but sought to justify their actions on the grounds that the detained individuals were involved in the cultivation of marihuana. Only after considerable pressure from human rights groups and the media, the Army agreed to investigate whether any soldiers had committed crimes. According to human rights groups, such violations as occurred in Baborigame are common throughout Mexico.
Human rights activists also allege that the failure to undertake drug raids against certain known drug traffickers or in drug-producing regions can only be explained by the illicit cooperation between drug barons, the police and the military. Such cooperation was further revealed by the press, human rights groups and the government in 1992, in the cases concerning the investigation of the 1990 murder of human rights activist Norma Corona Sapi6n and the November 1991 killings of seven judicial police by the Army in a shootout in Tlalixcoyan, Veracruz. Allegations of links between traffickers, the police and/or the Army abound in both cases, but neither case has been resolved.
The persistence of widespread human rights violations in Mexico and the impunity with which such violations are committed contradict the stated commitment of the government and President Salinas to improve human rights practices. Re-
spect for human rights will improve in Mexico only with stronger measures backed by the requisite will at all levels of the Mexican government, beginning at the highest. The record demonstrates that despite substantial international attention to Mexico's human rights practices in connection with debate over NAFTA, such will was largely lacking in 1992. Consistent with U.S. domestic legal obligations and the Clinton administration's stated commitment to human rights, the State Department should sharpen the focus of its human rights reporting on Mexico in the coming year.
257
