Burma (Myanmar)
The State Department report on Burma is excellent. The first sentence of the report - "Burma is a military dictatorship and major human rights violator" -- is right to the point. The report addresses all the significant human rights concerns in Burma in 1992, provides case examples to illustrate points, and shows evidence of State Department efforts to independently confirm unsubstantiated incidents.
The report is especially careful to note the sources of information and assess their credibility. This is particularly important in Burma, where there is no free press or human rights organizations, making allegations of abuse especially difficult to confirm. Through use of phrases such as "credible reports from multiple sources" or "numerous reports which were highly consistent but difficult to verify," the report includes information that may be impossible to prove but nonetheless warrants inclusion in the report. The report also states that the government restricts access and investigations, thereby making confirmation difficult; this observation should be reiterated in many other country reports. At the same time, the State Department does not shy away from directly criticizing the ruling State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC) for violations of human rights. It also takes issue with SLORC claims of an improved human rights situation in the country in 1992.
The following points should be corrected in next year's report. The report's introduction, as did last year's, states that the SLORC "seized power in Septem-
ber 1988," which suggests that a new group of leaders came to power at this time. General Ne Win has remained the ultimate source of power in Burma -- if behind the scenes -- ever since the 1962 military coup. Ostensible civilian governments in place since that time were merely a facade for continued military rule. The "seizure of power" in 1988 merely put an end to the facade.
In discussing narcotics trafficking by some ethnic minority groups, the report is more careful in its description than last year. However, it should be specific as to which groups it believes are involved in trafficking -- otherwise all get tarnished with the same broad stroke. (Last year, the report specifically stated that the Karen National Union was not involved in the drug trade, but they are not the only group with clean hands in this regard.) Numerous observers believe that in 1992 the Kachin made important strides in eradicating narcotics production in areas under their control. The report states that the SLORC has reached "accommodations" with several former insurgent groups involved in narcotics, but neither names them nor discusses the SLORC's own role in the narcotics trade. If the report is to make note of these issues, it should do so accurately and completely.
The introduction states that the SLORC reaffirmed its intention to rule until a constitution and a civilian government acceptable to the SLORC are in place. As was clear in SLORC statements made during the year (and confirmed during the January 1 993 constitutional convention), the military intends to
53
Burma
play a major political role in Burma even after the establishment of a civilian government.
The report discusses forced labor in terms of the use of common criminals, corvee labor in Arakan state and the ill-treatment of porters by the army generally. It should have indicated that in addition to the Rohingyas in Arakan state, members of a number of ethnic minority groups in border areas have been targeted for use as porters by the Burmese army and have suffered tremendously as a result.
The discussion of women's rights erroneously states that "there was no nationwide pattern of violence directed specifically against women." However, the report later in the same paragraph states that there were "widespread unverified reports of rapes committed in 1992 by Burmese soldiers against Muslim women in Arakan State and against ethnic minority women elsewhere in the country." The rape of Muslim and ethnic minority women by Burmese soldiers certainly should be considered a gross pattern of violations for which the SLORC should be held responsible.
Like last year, the report states that the SLORC "was only selectively willing to discuss human rights problems with foreign governments or non-governmental organizations concerned with human rights." We are not aware of any official SLORC contact with human rights groups; in fact Burmese officials abroad routinely avoided forums, such as conferences, where human rights in Burma would be discussed.
54
