Mozambique
The State Department's 1992 report provides a generally accurate description Of the human rights situation in Mozambique. It recounts the violations committed by each of the principal groups engaged in the 16-year-old civil war: the ruling National Front for the Liberation of Mozambique (FRELIMO) and the insurgent Mozambique National Resistance (RE-NAMO). As a result of the civil waf, Mozambique produced more refugees than any other country in Africa. The report reflects perhaps the single most significant change in Mozambique in 1992: the peace accord between FRELIMO and RENAMO, an accord that has apparently reduced somewhat the hostilities between the two groups. However, while stating more clearly and fully the many abuses by RENAMO, the report understates the violations committed by the FRELIMO government and fails to assess adequately its role as a perpetrator of human rights abuses and obstructor of aid relief in Mozambique. Furthermore, in various sections, the report lacks specific examples to support its conclusions, as required by the State Department's own instructions which state that "the most important and relevant cases, including all egregious abuses should be cited to illustrate the general description and conclusions in each section."
The report documents adequately the many human rights abuses committed by RENAMO during 1992. It accurately reaches the conclusion that RENAMO interacts with the population by attempting to show its strength through torture and general intimidation. In the discussion on violations of humanitarian law in
internal conflicts, the report appropriately quotes Africa Watch (without attribution) which described RENAMO's attacks on Mozambican citizens as a strategy of "terrorizing the local population." The report also mentions the fact that RENAMO continues to be guilty of kidnapping and holding civilians, including children, against their will and often forces them to act as porters or impresses them into military service.
While the report describes well certain abuses by RENAMO, its discussion is flawed in several areas: freedom of the press, torture, interference with relief efforts through violence and corruption, the right to a fair trial, and forced recruitment into the army.
The report minimizes the government's violation of freedom of the press by failing to describe reported threats to journalists for covering stories relating to military corruption. Some journalists allege that they have received death threats from the military, while others say that they fear that reporting on military corruption would cost them their jobs.
While the report accurately notes that freedom of the press in general continued to improve in 1992 with the appearance of an independent daily media bulletin and more coverage of other political parties, it fails to provide sufficient examples of government restraint on the press. As a result, a complaint by the president of the Mozambican National Union (UNAMO), a recently formed political party, seems unduly isolated and unfounded as it is portrayed in the report. The president
262
Mozambique
claimed that the media sabotaged one of UNAMO's press conferences by failing to attend or cover the event. In the absence of other similar instances in the report, this claim is made to appear atypical.
In fact, the UNAMO president was not alone in making the claim that the media is still controlled and manipulated by the FRELIMO government. The leader of the Mozambique Nationalist Movement (MONAMO), another new political party, in an interview in May, asserted that while the press prints speeches by government ministers in their entirety, it ignores completely those given by other political parties. The MONAMO leader attributed this bias to the media's dependence on the sponsoring ministry for funds, as a result of which it is still effectively controlled by the government. MONAMO's claim is reinforced by a party secretary of FRELIMO with whom an interview was printed on the same day. The secretary asserted that FRELIMO controls every branch of the government, including the Ministry of Information, the branch regulating the media. He went on to state that such branches exercise "enormous influence" over their respective governing areas. Coverage of these examples in the report would have provided a more accurate picture of the limitations on press freedom imposed by FRELIMO.
Interestingly, in contrast to the underreporting of FRELIMO violations of freedom of the press set forth above, the report omits a small positive change in the government-controlled Maputo daily newspaper Notfcias; while the report appropriately mentions that the newspaper began to be critical of the govern-
ment, it does not mention that in March, it stopped running the "Viva Presidente Chissano" slogan on its front page, thereby symbolically indicating a greater degree of independence from the government.
The report shows a bias in favor of FRELIMO in its discussion of humanitarian relief efforts. The continuing hostilities between FRELIMO and RENAMO, the related atrocities and the worst drought on record have created a dire situation in Mozambique. As a result, according to the U.S. Committee for Refugees, there are estimates of 3.5 million internally displaced people and approximately 1.7 million refugees, and projections for 1992 indicated that more than three million Mozambicans would need daily food relief to survive. The report accurately states that both RENAMO and FRELIMO are responsible for preventing the delivery of humanitarian relief to the population. However, the report further states, twice, that as compared to RENAMO "... to a lesser extent, elements within the government" were responsible for impeding humanitarian relief efforts. The vague reference to "elements within the government" implies that in some way the government itself is not fully responsible for its role in preventing aid from reaching the population. In addition, although the government abuses in this area may be fewer than those of RENAMO, they are significant abuses of state power, abuses that increase the suffering of the Mozam-bican people.
Moreover, while the report accurately describes the attacks on aid convoys by RENAMO, it fails to recognize the abuses perpetrated by sanctioned and unsanc-
263
Mozambique
tioned government forces. For example, the report fails to note that, early in 1992, the government started charging relief agencies $ 150 for every ton of food that was flown into certain rural areas. This policy halted delivery of food relief for two months in the Sofala province. In addition, Africa Watch cites various reports by diverse groups estimating that anywhere from 50% to 75% of food relief entering Mozambique is diverted. This diversion is perpetrated by government soldiers and officials, government-authorized distributors and retailers and transportation workers. The substantial amount of U.S. assistance that pours into Mozambique may account for the limited discussion of this subject in the report.
While the report describes a serious problem created by the government regarding the distribution of food relief, it does not adequately address the lack of serious government response to the corruption of government officials and the violent actions of government soldiers. As the report describes, government nonpayment of the army and militia in 1992 created numerous violent, uncontrolled riots involving food. As stated in the report, "the failure of government to pay" the salaries of soldiers and retired/disabled former soldiers led to riots and looting of food trains by off-duty soldiers and also by soldiers assigned to guard the very same aid trains. According to the report, "several soldiers were convicted of such crimes in 1992 and sentenced to prison terms, fines, and expulsion from the armed services." While this statement may be correct (and we have seen no information to contradict it), the State Department should have illustrated its finding with a specific ex-
ample or examples, as required by its instructions for the preparation of the reports. This is more important given the statement's implication that the government is taking responsibility and punishing soldiers for looting, stealing food and generally terrorizing the hungry population.
Indeed, another shortcoming of the report is the failure to provide specific examples where appropriate. For example, the report concisely states that RE-NAMO "forced family members to witness or participate in the torture of their relatives." It does not, however, provide any examples of this treatment nor of other reported RENAMO atrocities against civilians. According to the State Department's instructions for the preparation of the reports, it would be appropriate to give at least one example of these reported abuses, such as that cited by Africa Watch relating the story of a chief who was forced by RENAMO to crush his own son's head in a vise while the whole village was made by RENAMO to watch. Such examples not only add to the report's credibility, but more accurately convey the nature of the violations.
With respect to the right to a fair trial, the report acknowledges that there is a large backlog of pending cases partly as a result of the lack of trained legal personnel. However, here the report again reaches a conclusion without citing relevant statistics, and in so doing fails to capture the magnitude of the problem. According to Africa Watch, as of mid-1992 there were between 100 and 200 lawyers in all of Mozambique. This number can be compared with the projections made in 1991 with respect to the number
264
Mozambique
of pending cases for 1 992: more than 606,783.
In addition, the report states that forced recruitment "diminished in 1 992" without giving any information to substantiate such an improvement on the part of FRELIMO. In fact, in 1992, there continued to be reports in the media about forced recruitment and the brutality with which young men are recruited by the army. Because the report does not give the basis for its conclusion, it is difficult to determine the extent to which forced recruitment actually diminished.
The report's discussion of political and extrajudicial killing provides a more accurate picture. It states that "there were no known or suspected cases of the Government targeting persons for political killings in 1992." It also describes the surprisingly candid public admission by President Chissano that persons accused of treason had been privately executed in the 1970s. Calls by opposition parties to name those executed and to accurately explain what happened to them and why are also mentioned. In addition, in the report's discussion of disappearances, the State Department correctly asserts that although there were no reports of "government-perpetrated disappearances" in 1992, there are thousands missing due to the internal conflict.
In conclusion, the State Department report has touched upon the important aspects of the human rights situation in Mozambique, especially those relating to the abuses committed by RENAMO and FRELIMO in the continuing internal conflict. However, it fails to convey fully the pervasiveness of human rights violations
committed by the FRELIMO government, and, in various sections, does not provide specific examples to support its conclusions.
265
