Mauritania
The 1992 State Department report on human rights in Mauritania is accurate and comprehensive. The report accurately documents human rights violations by the Mauritanian government, and emphasizes the government's continuing lack of accountability for the events between November 1990 and February 1991 in which 500 black Mauritanians of the Hal Pulaar ethnic group were extrajudicially executed and many more were tortured while in military detention.
Though the report accurately portrays the human rights abuses under the regime of President Mohamed Sid'Ahmed Ould Taya, it fails to highlight the systematic practice of racially-based exclusion and segregation which permeates all areas of national life, including employment. The government operates under a hierarchy of unwritten rules where constitutional and other legally-mandated rights, protections and benefits are accorded on the basis of a person's race, political influence, and other factors such as tribal and regional affiliations. Numerous reports by Amnesty International and Africa Watch document a consistent pattern of abuses directed against the country's largest black African ethnic group, the Hal Pulaar. The State Department report provides evidence that confirms this pattern, yet fails to highlight the racial and ethnic biases of the government in plain terms or to state directly how the insidious racial discrimination against black Mauritians is at the core of the country's human rights violations.
In its discussion of government respect for the integrity of the person, the
report correctly notes that extrajudicial killings from past years remained uninvestigated and unresolved and no accounting has ever been made of those who died. The report states that several high-placed military officials who were involved in many extrajudicial killings from past years remain in their posts and in some cases were promoted, but it fails to mention their names: Colonel Sid'Ahmed Ould Boilil, Colonel Cheikh Ould Mohamed Salah, Captain Mohamed Cheikh Ould El Hadi and Captain Ely Fall. Colonel Sid'Ahmed Ould Boilil, who was commandant of the military region of Nouadibou during the widespread arrests and extrajudicial killings of late 1990, is now in training in France and it is expected that after he returns to Mauritania he will be promoted to a higher military rank.
The report's discussion of torture and other cruel or degrading treatment or punishment correctly states that despite the government's stated opposition to torture and the legal prohibition against its use, the security forcQ£ routinely mistreat persons in custody, particularly political dissidents and black Africans. But the report fails to mention that following the 1992 presidential elections, when police cracked down upon a mixed-race gathering in front of the Nouadhibou headquarters of the principal opposition party, the Union des Forces Democrati-ques (UDF), they specifically targeted members of the Hal Pulaar ethnic group. Three Hal Pulaar died in this encounter, Ousmane Traore, Samba Diallo and Ab-doulaye Mbery Sarr.
In the section on fair trials, the report
247
Mauritania
mentions that the government today is slowly eliminating a number of unqualified Shari'a judges, but fails to cite specific cases or the basis for the statement. Other information available does not support this conclusion.
Regarding discrimination based on race, sex, religion, language or social status, the report makes no mention of the fact that the majority of the Arabic schools that have been created to carry out the government's Arabization program in education are located in the northern part of the country and are therefore inaccessible to the non-Hassaniya speaking black ethnic groups of the South. In addition, the government devotes more resources to the Arabic schools than the French schools. Without adequate preparation in their country's official language, the non-Hassaniya speaking, black ethnic groups are at a severe disadvantage in finding employment in the paid labor force. This denial of equal access to education could become a major component of the government's program of racial discrimination as the Arabization process unfolds and deserves serious treatment by the State Department.
The report should have provided more detail on discrimination in employment against non-Hassaniya speaking blacks. Since 1989, the government has pursued a systematic program to remove non-Hassaniya speaking blacks from government employ; hundreds of civil servants, teachers and others have been dismissed from their jobs and Arabization efforts in employment and education have created a virtual impasse for non-Hassaniya speaking workers and students. In addition,
over 1,000 blacks from sectors represented by labor unions such as the postal service, banking, mining and government administration have been arrested on race-based grounds. While serving their sentences without trials, these workers are denied legal wages. Upon completion of their sentences, those who survive are not reinstated to their jobs and are unable to collect lost wages to which they are legally entitled.
The worker rights section of the report understates the pervasiveness and severity of the abuses that many workers in Mauritania face on a day-to-day basis. These abuses are largely sponsored by the government as part of a systematic program of racial discrimination. The nature and severity of the government's anti-black agenda began to take discernible shape in 1989 when the government forcefully expelled approximately 100,000 non-Hassaniya speaking blacks from their native homelands in the south into neighboring Senegal and Mali. The government expropriated the land and other properties of those they expelled.
Labor rights and trade unions, as all facets of life in Mauritania, are governed first and foremost by the government's race-based exclusionary programs. It is only appropriate to view worker rights in this larger context. There are two legal systems in Mauritania: civil law, based largely on the French system, and Shari'a law which is based on Islamic law. Trade unions in Mauritania are governed by civil law. However, the labor courts are controlled by the government's race-based political program which permeates the legal system from the national to the local level. Therefore, the legitimate function
248
Mauritania
of unions and ordinary protections legally mandated for working citizens are nonexistent. Since 1989, existing workers' (agricultural) cooperatives have been forbidden from organizing and the formation of new cooperatives is de facto outlawed in the south of Mauritania.
The report's discussion of workers' right of association is much improved from prior years. The 1989 report failed I to mention that two prominent black I members of the central trade union's (UTM) national bureau (Sarr Mamadou and Diouf Ibrahima) were expelled from the country; the 1991 report failed to note the government's discharge of UTM's General Secretary Mohamed Mah-moud who was at the time organizing members of the UTM to go on strike. The report's discussion regarding 1992 makes clear that such actions and others against high-ranking union representatives exemplify the reach of the government's political influence and the extent to which government power remains unchecked.
In its section on right of association, the report fails to mention that since 1989 the government has instituted a state of emergency that applies only in the non-Hassaniya speaking regions inhabited by the Hal Pulaar in the south. Personal movement is restricted for several hours each day, varying by locality. Generally, the state of emergency severely restricts non-Hassaniya speaking black workers' ability to move about freely or to perform personal or compensated labor in the agricultural, artisanal, manual labor and other sectors.
While the report mentions the approximately 30,000 refugees from Mali in
camps in southeastern Mauritania, it fails to describe the conditions in which they are living, other than to state that they are "largely supported by an international effort led by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees." The U.S. Committee for Refugees (USCR) has reported that conditions in the camps are "difficult," due to their remote location, and that bad weather severely damaged what shelter was available. Unsanitary conditions and the refugees' malnourished state produced a measles epidemic and many deaths, peaking at 50 per week in early 1992, which USCR states was twice the normal rate.
249
