Malawi
The State Department's report on Malawi is accurate and comprehensive. The main criticism of this report is that in its quest to be objective, it unnecessarily downplays various events and their effects that would more accurately depict the actual climate for human rights in the country. All three of the major human rights events of the year are deempha-sized in the report: the Roman Catholic bishops' annual pastoral letter circulated in March; Chakufwa Chihana's arrest and detention in April; and the worker strikes in May.
The report also underemphasizes the role of major government players, like the Malawi Young Pioneers and John Tembo. Tembo, the Minister of the State in the President's Office, is considered to be the heir apparent to Life President H. Kamuzu Banda's rule; he is the person who allegedly runs the government on a daily basis, and is considered the person who give the orders resulting in the human rights violations attributed to the government. Tembo is one of the few people with direct access to the Life President (through his niece, the Official Hostess, Cecelia Tamanda Kazamira). However, his name is not mentioned in the report at all.
The report also slights the October death of Orton Chirwa. Chirwa, the first attorney general of Malawi and founder of the sole legal political party, the Malawi Congress Party (MCP), was kidnapped and arrested by Malawian security forces in 1981 along with his wife, Vera (and son who was later released). Both Chir-was were tried and convicted of treason and sentenced to death. The sentence
was commuted to life imprisonment in 1984 after pressure from international legal and human rights groups. The report accurately notes that Chirwa's death was officially determined to be for natural causes, but does not assess the numerous reports of torture and abuse suffered by him in prison, and their possible relationship to his death.
In its discussion of torture, the report omits the reports from several international human rights organizations of prison conditions which effectively constitute inhumane treatment. Sources indicate that the use of leg irons is common in Malawian prisons, especially as a form of punishment for political prisoners. In January 1992, Amnesty International called for a ban on the export to Malawi of all instruments of torture, including leg irons, gallows and electronic torture chambers. In addition, prison overcrowding is a serious problem. Ex-prisoners report being confined in a 20 square meter cell (designed to accommodate 60 prisoners) with 178 to 285 other prisoners. This overcrowding necessitated standing all the time or sitting back to back, as there was not adequate room for lying down. Prisoners also report that on average one prisoner died every two nights. Further reports on prison conditions claim that prisoners were detained in cells smeared with human excrement and were required to clean such cells with their bare hands. Reports of beatings and rape by the prison authorities were routine, as indicated in the report.
The report inaccurately states that the right of appeal under the August 20
240
Malawi
amendment to the Preservation of Public Security Act applied only to those detainees who have been denied the right to appear publicly in court due to a perceived threat to national security. The amendment actually creates a Detention Review Tribunal (DRT) and gives the right to every person "detained, arrested, or awaiting trial" to appeal their detention to a high court judge. The amendment also provides for the right to legal representation. While it is unclear whether legal representation is a prerequisite to appeal before the DRT, many Malawian activists feel that the few numbers of people who can actually afford legal representation make the protection supposedly afforded by this amendment illusory. Further, they share concerns about the impartiality of the DRT, all of the members of which are appointed by the Life President.
While the report highlights the notable political prisoners who were released during the year, it does not give sufficient information on their arrest and detention. For example, both Aleke Banda and Martin Mwachapisa Munthali, former government officials, were arrested after a disagreement with the Life President's policies. Banda was arrested in 1980, and as the report states, was never charged. Munthali was initially arrested for possession of firearms in 1965 (not 1974 as indicated in the report) and sentenced to five years' imprisonment; after 26 years, he was the longest serving political prisoner in Malawi. The report is silent on how Munthali's original five-year sentence grew to 26 years.
The report does not provide enough detail on the arrest and detention of Cha-kufwa Chihana, secretary-general of the
Southern African Trade Union Coordinating Council, and a former MCP member. At one time, Chihana was widely regarded to have been the heir apparent to Life President Banda. After a disagreement with Banda (and the Parliament), he fled the country to Zambia where he helped to form the Interim Committee for a Democratic Alliance. This opposition group supported his return to Malawi on April 6, when as indicated in the report, he was arrested immediately when he attempted to make a pro-democracy speech at the airport. Chihana was released on bail on July 10, only to be rearrested on July 13 because of a interview he had given to the British Broadcasting Corporation shortly after his release. He was re-released on September 8 on condition that he would not give any statements to the press. On December 14, Chihana was convicted of sedition-related charges and sentenced to 18 to 24 months hard labor. This conviction spurred great unrest, as had hearings of his case in May and August. At least two people, both policemen, were killed in the demonstrations that broke out following the Chihana verdict. The report fails to mention that among the hundreds arrested following the conviction, was Harry Chiume, a member of Chihana's legal defense team.
The report understates the number of arrests of members of the newly formed political groupings, the Alliance for Democracy (AFORD) and the United Democratic Front (UDF). The report places the number of AFORD and UDF members arrested at 30, but the Malawian government itself confirmed reports of at least 100 AFORD members arrested. Further, the arrests were due not only to selling
241
Malawi
and possessing membership cards as the report indicates, but also for "behaving like a political group." AFORD withdrew from the pro-democracy group (Political Affairs Committee) talks with the Life President as a result of the government's refusal to release 64 of its members.
The report accurately states that use of forced exile is not a means of political control, but there are numerous reports that the government has targeted exiles for threats and foul play, especially in Zambia, where a large number resides. The United Front for Multiparty Democracy, exiled in Zambia, reports that exiles live in perpetual fear of "elimination" by the Malawi government. There were also reports that members of the African National Congress of South Africa were harassed because of their support for Malawi exile groups in Zambia.
The report gives an adequate account of the traditional and modern court systems. However, it does not provide concrete examples which would support its assertion that the modern courts experienced "unprecedented independence" during the year.
Students at the University of Malawi were among the first to publicly endorse the criticism of the government contained in the bishops' pastoral letter. In March, there were demonstrations at all three branches of the University: Chancellor College in Zomba, Polytechnic College in Blantyre and Bunda Agricultural College in Lilongwe. Demonstrations at Chancellor College on March 15 caused the government to close the school on March 16. In support of the Chancellor students, the students at Blantyre Polytechnic demon-
strated on March 17. The police responded to the demonstrations by raiding dormitories, arresting as many as 70 students. Most were released, but at least 12 students were charged with disruption of public order. Students reported being tortured while in custody, and six in-custody deaths (identity not established) were reported.
Contrary to the report, both Polytechnic in Blantyre and Chancellor College in Zomba were closed due to the March riots. Chancellor was reopened at the end of April, but immediately closed again as riots continued. Students attempting to return to the colleges in the fall were not allowed to reenter school until they signed an undertaking that they would not engage in political activities.
Although the deportation of the clergy is mentioned, the report's description of these deportations is isolated from the events which caused them. For example, Monsignor Roche was deported because he had signed the pastoral letter. Father Leahy was deported following the government's thwarting of an August 30 demonstration proposed by the Council of Churches to protest one-party rule. It is therefore misleading when the report asserts in its discussion of peaceful assembly that "clergy members were arrested and questioned, detained for a few days and eventually released."
As with the Chihana arrest and conviction, the report understates the overwhelming effect of the bishops' pastoral letter. The annual letter, delivered at a mass and distributed throughout the country, sparked student demonstrations in seven cities. Door-to-door searches for
242
Malawi
the banned letter led to numerous arrests; possessing the letter was made a criminal offense. The Montfort Mission Press, responsible for the publication of the letter, was destroyed by members of the Malawi Young Pioneers (MYP), the MCP's youth section, according to one of the bishops who witnessed the raid.
While the report refers to the deportation of two of the bishops, it does not address their harassment at the hands of the MYP. For example, all eight of the bishops who signed the pastoral letter were arrested on March 10, and interrogated for eight hours. The churches were frequently barricaded by the MYP. On several occasions, the MYP strewed tree branches at the entrances of the churches, representing the traditional Malawian symbol for a funeral. Church services became subject to harsh and repressive monitoring by the MYP, chilling the free expression of religion and dissent in the church. A cassette tape, smuggled out of the country, and independently verified by unnamed sources of The Independent in October, revealed that at an MCP meeting held soon after the issuance of the pastoral address, the killing of the bishops was discussed.
In its discussion of arbitrary interference with privacy, family and home, the report does not emphasize the repressive authority of the MYP. The MYP, or the Red Army as they are known because of their red shirts, have the authority to make arrests. They cannot be prosecuted except by personal authorization of the Life President. In reports of police brutality, the use of excessive force in demonstrations and house and university raids, the MYP is invariably mentioned.
The report also does not mention the extensive house to house search by the police and MYP after the May strikes and unrest in Blantyre, looking for copies of the bishops' pastoral letter, the World Alliance of Reformed Churches open letter to the Life President and goods obtained in the May riots. Hundreds were arrested, with some reports indicating as many as 2,000.
The report gives an accurate and thorough discussion of freedom of movement, although it could have given examples of denials of passports on political grounds. Revocation of passports on political grounds is also common, as was the case with Bazuka Mhango, whose passport was impounded immediately after he agreed to be Chihana's attorney.
With regard to the elections and respect for political rights, the report correctly concludes that the June parliamentary elections were not fair and free, but fails to mention among the many restrictions that only those persons holding MCP membership were, allowed to vote. MCP membership carried with it a financial requirement, which although small, is as a burden to the masses of Malawians living a subsistence existence. The Interim Committee for a Democratic Alliance, a political focus group started in Zambia by Chihana and others, reported on the BBC "Network Africa" newspro-gram that MCP members were using their access to humanitarian aid to Malawi, specifically maize, to control voter registration prior to the June elections - only cardholding MCP members or those registering with MCP were given maize. While the government put voter turnout at the parliamentary elections at 80%, other
243
Malawi
sources estimated between 20% and 40%.
The report correctly points out that human rights groups, including Amnesty International, are banned from entering the country to do human rights investigations. However, the government did allow in groups to investigate the impact of the drought and the refugee situation in the country. Further, a team of British lawyers was allowed to visit the Chirwas in September, shortly before the death of Orton Chirwa. These groups documented human rights violations.
The report does not describe adequately the worker strikes from May 5 to May 8. Some accounts allege that as many as 40 people were killed and as many as 2,000 arrested in the unrest (which lasted three days, not two as the report indicates). All shops and businesses in Blantyre were closed as the police used tear gas and bullets to control the unrest. Although it should be clear that the police force was excessive, the MYP justified their action by alleging that the strikers attacked MYP, burned MCP headquarters in Lilongwe and destroyed stores that they believed were owned by the Life President.
The worker strikes coincided with the postponed bail hearing of Chakufwa Chihana, when the government failed to present him for the hearing. The thousands who had gathered to witness the hearing, and the thousands of striking workers combined to form the greatest post-independence demonstration in Malawi. The sheer magnitude and anger of the demonstrators led to many reports (none confirmed) that the unrest was an
attempted coup. The report's failure to connect the worker strikes and the Chihana arrest and detention ignores his position as a major trade unionist. Indeed, immediately following the unrest, on May 13, the government allowed a delegation from the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions to speak with Chihana, who had not been seen since his arrest.
244
