Malaysia
The report on Malaysia provides a good historical overview of human rights developments in the country as well as a useful discussion of laws that infringe on basic rights. It fails, however, to cover adequately the key human rights incidents of 1992. Moreover, as in the past, it neglects the broader political context of government repression in the country.
The introduction to the report states that Malaysia's human rights record "continued to be mixed in 1992." It is unclear what this means, since the overall situation remained relatively static and there were no major positive developments. The total number of persons detained under the Internal Security Act (ISA) declined in 1992, but no changes have been made in the law, which allows long term detention without charge or trial.
The introduction also notes the rising standard of living in the country and concludes that this has ^[led] to reduced tensions between races." Here the State Department has again accepted the official government line on economic development without providing contrary views. The report ignores compelling arguments by others that the government's economic policies have hurt non-Malay ethnic groups, particularly ethnic Indians, and that the benefits to the targeted population, the bumiputras (Malays and other indigenous peoples), have disproportionately improved the livelihoods of those who were already well-off.
The discussion of the ISA is good and includes a useful discussion of restrictions placed on former members of the Com-
munist Party of Malaysia. However, in its brief history of the ISA, the report once again makes no mention of the 1987 Operation Lallang arrests, in which more than 100 persons, including opposition politicians and political and social activists, were detained and in many cases held for long periods without charge or trial. These arrests have had an important lasting impact on all forms of political activity in Malaysia.
The report fails to convey the full extent of repression by the ruling National Front coalition, which is dominated by the United Malays National Organization (UMNO). As we have noted in the past, the report makes no mention of UMNO control over large facets of the Malaysian economy, in large part possible because of UMNO political domination.
While the report discusses electoral restrictions on opposition parties, it says little about restraints on opposition members in the parliament, where the ruling coalition has long maintained a greater than two-thirds majority. Opposition members of parliament have very little opportunity to raise issues before the parliament, pose questions to cabinet-level ministers or have legislation considered.
There are indications that the opposition's opportunities to participate in the work of parliament decreased in 1992. As a sign of the opposition's diminishing role, on May 14, the parliament suspended opposition leader Lim Kit Siang for the remainder of the year. This was the first time in Malaysia that the leader of the
245
Malaysia
opposition had ever been suspended.
The section on torture provides detail on the legally sanctioned punishment of whipping. It is unfortunate that U.S. government support for the death penalty results in its exclusion from discussion in the State Department reports. As we have noted in the past, in Malaysia the death penalty is mandatory under the ISA for unauthorized possession of firearms, ammunition or explosives and under the Dangerous Drugs Act for drug trafficking. Capital punishment as carried out in Malaysia does not meet the standards set out in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which permits the death penalty only for the "most serious crimes."
Malaysian constitution to permit Kelantan to establish an Islamic criminal code.
The section on freedom of the press misses the most important press story of the year. In September, the government-controlled Radio Television Malaysia aired a foreign news report that showed documentary footage of Indonesian troops shooting on demonstrators in East Timor in November 1991. After the Indonesian government requested an explanation for the broadcast, the Malaysian Minister of Information apologized to Indonesia for what it termed an editorial mistake and took unspecified disciplinary action against the staff responsible.
The report's discussion of freedom of religion ignores efforts by the state government in Kelantan, ruled by Malaysia's Islamic Party (Pas), to introduce an Islamic criminal code. This would mandate the amputation of limbs of convicted persons for certain offenses. Prime Minister Mahathir stated that the federal government would not oppose efforts to amend the
246
