Niger
The State Department's report on the human rights situation in Niger during 1992 is substantially complete and comprehensive. It correctly reports that in 1992 there was continued violence by Tuareg rebels (the Front de Libération de l'Air et de l'Azaouagh or FLAA), and against Tuareg civilians by the government's armed forces. The report appropriately provides specific details of torture by government agents, discrimination against Tuaregs and women and religious--based discrimination. The report, however, does not fully describe the extent to which the government condones certain acts of abuse by the military.
As reported by the State Department, a National Conference was held in 1991 to convert Niger from a one-party state to a multi-party democracy. In November 1992, a new constitution was adopted by the transition government which formally introduced a multi-party system to Niger. Several new parties were organized under the new constitution. Elections were scheduled for late 1992, but by year's end they had been postponed several times. The transition period, which was scheduled to end in January 1993, was extended by two months. Elections began in February and were expected to continue into March 1993.
As Niger's political transition slowed, political violence erupted and there were serious human rights violations. Members of the Tuareg ethnic group, a minority which has historically been subject to discrimination in Niger, were victims of much of the military violence and arrests which occurred during the year. Howev-
er, the Tuareg were also responsible for violence and human rights abuses.
The report includes detailed accounts of the many significant incidents involving the army and the Tuaregs in 1992. It fails, however, to explain adequately the human rights abuses that followed the killing of police inspector Oumarou Toune. First, while the report correctly criticizes the government for failing to take any action against the military for its human rights abuses against the Tuareg minority, it fails to mention that the government has sometimes even complimented and encouraged the military to engage in such abuses. For example, while the report accurately notes that the military arbitrarily detained up to 180 persons, it fails to mention that on August 29, the Minister of the Interior issued a communiqué stating that the military "in a show of sympathy and compassion for the police, who have just tragically lost one of their officials, a devoted servant of the nation, decided to arrest a number of persons, including the prefect of the department." The report also fails to mention that on September 11, the Prime Minister, Amadou Cheiffou, granted the security forces "all means at their disposal to safeguard security." In general, the report fails to discuss sufficiently the extent to which the government has not only failed to condemn, but actually approved and encouraged the military's illegal activities.
The State Department reports that although "the civilian Government did not arrest persons for their views or opinions in 1992 . . . (ajcting independently from the Government . . . elements of the
270
Nigeria
security forces (gendarmerie, police and customs) detained at length and without formal charge at least 180 citizens . . . mostly Tuareg." The fact that government security forces carried out the arrests and violence without formal government orders to do so is significant and should be included in future reports. However, this subject should be approached cautiously -- the absence of formal orders for military action from the government does not mean that the military acted independently from the government or that the government is not responsible for the actions of its agents. The report should have included information from a September Amnesty International report which stated that "it appears that those arrested ... do not have any links with the (FLAA)," the Tuareg rebel group believed to be responsible for Mr. Toune's assassination. The Amnesty International report indicates that the Tuareg were detained and ill-treated because of ethnic tension and long-standing hatred of the Tuareg, and not because they were believed by the military to be threatening or dangerous.
The report should have also discussed more fully the extent to which the Tua-regs themselves are responsible for certain human rights abuses. For example, while the report mentions that a Tuareg "slave-caste" exists, it should have discussed the extent to which the Tuareg still hold slaves in defiance of a governmental prohibition of slavery and numerous international treaties outlawing this grotesque practice.
The State Department correctly reports that women are ill-treated in Niger, that they do not enjoy positions in univer-
sities or as professionals, that the law prohibiting women from being married until age 14 is not followed in many cases and that while wife beating is common, women are reluctant to make any formal allegations of domestic violence because of the stigma attached to violence in the home. The section on minorities also mentions that female genital mutilation occurs in some areas, and is not considered a problem by the government.
In its discussion of discrimination, the report points out that only two percent of Nigerien women possessed the identification documents required to vote in the November referendum adopting the constitution. The report does not say how the lack of proper identification may affect the voting rights of women in the 1993 elections. The fact that only two percent of women were able to vote on the new constitution is significant, and should have been highlighted at the beginning of the report, where the State Department asserts that "a new Constitution was elected by popular vote."
In the section dealing with respect for political rights and the right of citizens to change their government, the report states that "by year's end, municipal, legislative, and presidential elections had been postponed three times." The report, however, neglects to include information on why elections were postponed, or who was responsible.
In its introduction, the report states that the transition government failed to implement an effective economic program in 1992. To the extent that this is a criticism of the transition government, it
271
Nigeria
seems unfair given that the transition government's focus was political, not economic reform. Also, the State Department's own instructions on the preparation of the reports direct that the state of the economy should be discussed briefly only in order to set the stage for human rights reporting, not to criticize particular economic policies.
In a number of sections of the report, the State Department correctly points out that although certain rights may be protected by Nigerien law, such laws are not always respected by authorities or understood by citizens. For example, in the section on arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home or correspondence, the report notes that although the law requires the police to conduct searches only between the hours of 6 a.m. and 9 p.m., "[w]hen the police are in hot pursuit of a suspected criminal, these limits on searches are often lifted. In practice . . . routine searches are frequently conducted without warrants and at all hours." This section speaks directly to a criticism of last year's critique in which we stated that the report "should have discussed overall police compliance with the warrant requirement."
This year's report also adequately responds to last year's critique regarding insufficient consideration of the issue of uranium mine workers exposed to radiation. The 1992 report specifically discusses what the government is doing to protect workers from radiation and states that the unions have conceded that "more could be done."
The 1992 report also discusses the status of constitutional developments of
the 1991 National Conference, reporting that "some of the advances of 1991 were maintained" but that progress with regard to respecting and safeguarding human rights was mixed. This kind of follow-up information allows current events to be put in perspective and adds to the report's accuracy and completeness.
As the report correctly states, Niger-iens endured political violence and human rights abuses in 1992. With the few exceptions mentioned above, the State Department's report is comprehensive and complete, offering detailed accounts of violations where appropriate. The 1992 report is not unduly optimistic for political reform, which was a main criticism last year.
272
Nigeria
Nigeria
The State Department has again delivered a commendable report on the state of human rights in Nigeria. The report, however, is overly cautious in its unwillingness to criticize the military government's "firmly controlled" transition to an elected civilian government. Part of the reason for the lack of emphasis on the problems inherent in the transition program instituted by President Ibrahim Babangida is the manner in which the report's various sections deal separately with fundamental political liberties. This serves to diffuse criticism of the transition program.
The Babangida government has exerted absolute control over its proposed transition to civilian rule. The only two political parties permitted to operate in Nigeria, the Social Democratic Party (SDP) and the National Republic Convention (NRC), were set up by the military government in 1989, as the report recognizes. The government wrote the two parties' constitutions and manifestoes. In 1992, as has been the case throughout the transition program, the government insisted on approving candidates for office from both parties, prohibited certain people from running for any office (including all 23 of the presidential aspirants), annulled primary elections, removed party officers from their posts and postponed the date of handing over the government to elected civilians. Clearly, the State Department wishes to promote the progress being made towards a democratic, civilian government; however, it fails to excoriate the inherently undemocratic nature of the process itself. At times, the report's use of the passive
voice (i.e., "[t]he local, state, and national executive bodies of the two political parties were disbanded") tends to downplay the fact that the military government retains absolute authority over every aspect of the transition program and played an active role in these dissolutions.
One other irony apparent in the report is that there are several references to rights guaranteed by the 1989 Constitution, such as the right to freedom of speech and freedom of peaceful assembly. The report also recognizes, however, that the effective date of the 1989 Constitution was postponed, along with the handover to civilian rule, to August 1993. Thus, these rights guaranteed by the 1989 Constitution remain effectively unenforceable. Whether any of the fundamental liberties guaranteed by the 1979 Constitution are still enforceable is doubtful due to Decree One of 1984 which suspended much of that Constitution. The frequent references to the 1989 Constitution in the report lend the impression that these rights are entrenched, respected or enforceable. Of course, it remains to be seen in 1993 whether a civilian government will take office and, if so, whether it will respect the rights guaranteed by the 1989 Constitution imposed upon the country by an unelected military government.
With regard to the alarming problem of extrajudicial killings by Nigerian police, this year's report includes even more detail than did the 1991 report. Although much of the credit for this detail is due to local human rights organizations and the
273
Nigeria
press which have focused more attention on these abuses, the State Department's extensive analysis of this topic clearly evidences the concern that police killings have generated. The seriousness of the numbers of police killings is revealed in the report's description of the Delta state police commissioner's admission that from January to July 1992 his officers had killed more armed robbery suspects (53) than they had arrested (41). Equally alarming is the statement of Nigerian Labour Congress President Paschal Baf-yau that the police are responsible for more killings in Nigeria than are armed robbers. One statistic not noted in the report is that, according to the human rights group the Committee for the Defence of Human Rights (CDHR), Police Commissioner Yemi Odubela of Lagos State and Deputy Commissioner of Police Sunday Ehindero confirmed that at least 76 robbery suspects were killed in Lagos, Edo and Delta states between January and July. ,
This year's report also scrutinizes more carefully the Nigerian government's commitment to prosecuting police officers accused of extrajudicial killings. In last year's critique, we pointed out that the 1991 report gave an "unrealistically favorable impression" of this commitment. This year, the report readily admits that "many policemen guilty of extrajudicial killings go unpunished and unquestioned" and that "few police are ever arrested or even disciplined for such offenses [as excessive force, murder, illegal discharge of weapons or extortion]." The report details several instances in which police officers were questioned or even arrested, but cites only one example of a policeman actually being convicted of mur-
der.
Admittedly, one reason for the lack of evidence of the government's commitment to prosecuting extrajudicial killings is the incredibly slow pace of the Nigerian criminal justice system. Accused persons may wait years, usually in prison, before their cases are called to trial. In fact, the murder for which the one police officer was convicted actually occurred in 1987. The report points out the magnitude of the problem of pre-trial detention, citing the Minister of Interior's own estimate that one-third of the prison population is awaiting trial. Nevertheless, the report once again fails to recognize the manner in which this abuse violates an accused person's fundamental liberties. Lengthy pretrial detention threatens the presumption of innocence in criminal cases and infringes on the right to a fair trial. The right to bail in many cases is violated when it is "underutilized." Finally, given the deplorable conditions of Nigerian prisons, which even the report describes as "life-threatening," lengthy pretrial detention is particularly inexcusable, essentially resulting in death sentences for persons who have not been convicted of any crime. The government is responsible for delays and should allocate more resources so that detainees are guaranteed a speedy and fair trial.
The report properly reviews the use of Decree Two of 1984 by the Nigerian government to detain persons without charge or trial. This decree permits the military government complete discretion in detaining Nigerian citizens without review by the courts and therefore without resort to any internationally-recognized civil liberties. Last year, we pointed
274
Nigeria
out the State Department's failure to include Jennifer Madike in its list of Decree Two detainees, despite the large amount of publicity surrounding her case. This year, the report notes that Ms. Madike, a "prominent Decree Two detainee," was released in August 1992. It is important that the State Department recognize and report all Decree Two detainees while they are being detained, not just after they are released. Otherwise, the Nigerian government will insist, as it has done repeatedly in the past, that the number of detainees is small or non-existent and that this proves their commitment to upholding human rights.
In last year's critique, we pointed out that the 1991 report failed to note instances in which the military government refused to abide by orders of the judiciary. Several such examples are included this year in the sections on arbitrary arrest and denial of fair public trial, such as orders to produce or release detainees. Another such incident occurred in July when the federal government disobeyed an order by the Ikeja High Court to produce 50 persons held since the May riots. The report, however, fails to recognize the government's refusal to obey court orders as a significant human rights concern as well as a compelling factor in the eradication of judicial independence. It is difficult for non-government lawyers to convince judges to issue orders which the government in all likelihood will not obey. Not only does this refusal to cooperate with the judiciary render that branch of the government powerless, but it also does not set a good precedent for an incoming civilian administration.
Another significant concern noted
only tangentially in the report is that some children born in prison remain there with their mothers. This practice violates basic human rights standards, such as those set in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.
The report once again recognizes the "considerable fear of government retribution" faced by the Nigerian media as a constraint on freedom of the press. The clearest example of the Babangida government's intimidation in 1992 was the two-week closure of the Concord Group, a newspaper and magazine publisher. The report neglects to mention that Dr. Yemi Ogunbiyi, managing editor of the government-owned Daily Times, was fired in January 1992, apparently due to a December 31, 1991 page one story in which Nobel laureate Wole Soyinka criticized the open ballot system used in transition elections. Ogunbiyi's two deputy editors, Ndaeyo Uko and Soji Omotunde, were either fired (Uko) or reassigned (Omotunde) by his government-appointed replacement. Chief Tola Adeniyi. In addition, although the report notes that editor Fola Olamiti was arrested in March along with a deputy editor from the Nigerian Tribune based in Iba-dan, the report does not mention that the article which displeased the authorities, entitled "Ibadan under Police Siege," alleged that Ibadan police were making random arrests and releasing victims only after they had paid off the police.
Furthermore, on March 25, Mayor Akinpelu and Biodun Azeez, editors of Fame and Vintage magazines were summoned to the Miscellaneous Offences
275
Nigeria
Tribunal for allegedly commenting on the case of a drug suspect. The same week, copies of Champion newspaper were impounded by police in Lagos due to an article that reported the death of a suspect in police custody. Finally, on December 7, police raided Quality magazine and confiscated copies of an interview with Femi Falana, an active leader of CDHR and the Campaign for Democracy (CD), a coalition of opposition groups, in which Falana criticized the transition program.
The report includes a few incidents in which persons were arrested for printing or possession of pamphlets critical of the military government. In fact, according to local human rights organizations, there were numerous such incidents not mentioned in the report. On November 29, several persons were arrested, including Sanni Mohammed and another student at Obafemi Awolowo University, lle-lfe, for challenging a policeman who was removing a CD poster. The arrested men were released on December 3. Also in November, Lekan Akinoso and another person were arrested in Aba, Abia State for possessing pro-democracy materials. The two were released on December 11 and scheduled for trial on December 21. On December 5, Dr. Taiwo Fagdeli was arrested for possession of CD materials at the University of llorin. Dr. Fagdeli was released on December 9.
In the report's discussion of freedom of peaceful assembly, at least two significant events of 1992 are omitted. Following a demonstration in Kano in December at which President Babangida was called upon to resign, three of the leading demonstrators were arrested. The arrested
men were former deputy governor of Kano, Wada Abubakar, former president of the SDP in Kano, Inuana Ammam, and a former trade union leader, Wada Waziri. In addition, in July, approximately 5,000 women staging a protest over the detention of citizens held in connection with the Zango-Kataf riots were dispersed by police in Kaduna.
With regard to its description of freedom of association, the report remains delicately understated by noting simply that the military government "still permits only two political parties, which it organized and founded in 1989." As noted later in the report, 1992 saw President Babangida remove the entire executive committees of both parties at the local, state and national levels. Furthermore, as the report correctly notes, in May the government banned several political groups which it argued had been formed along religious or tribal lines to sponsor political candidates. The fact is that in Nigeria there is no freedom to associate with a political organization of one's choice. There is the government-sponsored SDP, the NRC, or nothing else. The government retains absolute authority over both of these two parties. The State Department should recognize these facts explicitly.
The report also fails to take seriously the arrests and harassment of Nigerian human rights monitors. The report notes in an earlier section the arrests following the May riots of leading activists such as Beko Ransome-Kuti, Femi Falana and Gani Fawehinmi; however, it fails to reference these arrests in its section on the government's attitude towards non-governmen-tal investigation of human rights viola-
276
Nigeria
tions. Furthermore, the report briefly comments on the arrests of other human rights activists and the disruption of their planned meetings following the government's November announcement of the postponement of the handover to civilian rule. It is clear from the timing of the arrests (after the May riots and the November postponement of the transition) that the Babangida government is quick to clamp down on its critics and to point the blame towards them when government programs fail and criticism of the current regime intensifies. The report ignores the Nigerian government's intolerance of criticism by its neighbors. In February, Alphonse Sossou, secretary of the Committee for the Defense of Human Rights in Benin, was arrested in Lagos at a lecture delivered by Benin's President Nicephore Soglo.
The State Department provides a commendable analysis of discrimination and worker rights given the limited data available in those fields. In particular, discrimination against women is rampant both in the working environment and in the recognition of fundamental liberties such as the right to travel. The report does not note the demonstration by students in January at Edo State University over sexual harassment by teachers. That demonstration led to the closing of the university by authorities. With regards to worker rights, the report fails to mention the reported firing of 700 NASCO workers in Jos for striking in January.
277
