Venezuela
The 1992 State Department report on human rights practices in Venezuela is accurate and well-documented, with appropriate references to the reports of local non-governmental human rights groups. However, the report is at times too general, with only a sentence in passing on important events relating to the country's constitutional crisis and thus, human rights conditions.
As a practical matter, the report, which was published in January 1993, lacks a good deal of information on human rights practices in the aftermath of the November 27, 1992 coup attempt. In contrast, the analysis of the February 4, 1992 coup attempt is much more detailed. Although this disparity is likely due to the State Department's publishing deadlines, it is hoped that the 1993 report on Venezuela will focus particular attention on the human rights situation in December 1992, when military trials began of those allegedly involved in the November coup attempt.
Although the report states that "instances of extrajudicial killings continued in 1992," according to the Caracas-based human rights group PROVEA (Venezuelan Program of Education and Action for Human Rights), a frequently cited source in the report, abuses by security forces not only continued but jumped sharply in 1992 in what the group alleged was part of a government campaign to suppress social unrest. Protests by students appear to have been a specific target.
Additionally, the report neglects to follow up on the progress of the judicial
investigation into the case of a clandestine mass grave at "La Peste" cemetery in Caracas, which was officially ordered stopped in November 1991, and which was included in the 1991 report. The State Department should have updated this section by reporting that after the promotion and transfer in April 1991 of the civilian judge originally in charge of the case, the UN Special Rapporteur on Summary or Arbitrary Executions reported in January 1 992 fears that the investigation would be slowed down. By the end of November 1992, Judge Eduardo Guzman Perez stated publicly that the exhumations at La Peste were to end. Venezuelan human rights groups continue to insist on a thorough investigation and regard the La Peste case as confirmation of the government's tendency toward impunity where state agents are accused of human rights abuses.
The report gives a good account of the killings that occurred at the Reten La Catia prison in the wake of the November coup attempt. On December 2, the group Cofavfc (Committee of relatives of victims of the February-March 1989 events) petitioned the Attorney General to conduct an exhaustive investigation into the killings to determine responsibility and to consider measures which would help identify the unidentified dead, including the use of experts in photographing the bodies. As a follow-up for next year's report, the State Department should critically review the government's investigation into the massacre.
Although the report does provide some updated information on the shoot-
427
Venezuela
ing deaths in the town of El Amparo of 14 fishermen by a joint police-military unit on October 29, 1988, it only reports a decision by the Permanent Council of War and fails to assess the action to be taken by the Martial Court. In the interim period since the killings four years ago, the military courts have issued a series of contradictory rulings and ignored the reports of forensic scientists and experts which contradicted the official version that the deaths occurred in an armed confrontation. According to Amnesty International, Military Judge Major Ri-cardo Perez Gutierrez, who conducted the initial investigations, also allowed the bodies of the 14 fishermen to be removed without first carrying out the usual crime-scene inquiries. A July 1992 call by Venezuela's own Attorney General for the case to be reinvestigated based on Judge Gutierrez's serious errors went unheeded (and unreported by the State Department). In February 1993, a Military Appeals Court ruled that 11 police officers and four soldiers were guilty of "excessive force," sentencing them to seven years in prison. By way of mitigation, however, the Appeals Court reduced the sentence by half, holding that the officers had fulfilled their duty by "resisting the attack they had come under from the individuals who died."
The report's discussion of "disappearances" in 1992 further exemplifies the lack of adequate information regarding abuses committed following the November 27 coup attempt. For example, in its analysis of post-November 27 events, PROVEA reported the disappearances of two military personnel: Augusto Gonzalez Gonzalez was registered at the José Fleix Ribas School of Professional Troops
in La Victoria and since his disappearance on the date of the attempted coup, the authorities have offered no satisfactory information as to his whereabouts. Alexander Alvarez Hernandez of the Venezuelan Navy disappeared around November 12. According to Hernandez's family, civilian government officials as well as the naval authorities questioned have provided nothing more than constant contradictions. Also, the Latin American Federation of Associations of Relatives of the Detained-Disappeared (FEDEFAM) reported the disappearances of three student leaders who were reportedly detained by security forces while on a fishing trip; another reported case by FEDEFAM concerned an individual who had reportedly had a quarrel on a personal matter with a police officer and subsequently disappeared.
Although the report adequately describes the torture methods used by the government and is statistically sound, the State Department should have considered other factors contributing to the problem. For instance, the use of torture in Venezuela is reportedly facilitated by the police's ability to keep an individual in custody for eight days before charging the suspect with a crime, a point the State Department refers to in its discussion on arbitrary arrest, and to use any confessions obtained during that time in judicial proceedings. Also, according to the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture, "the use of judicial remedies by victims is discouraged by the fact that very few complaints result in the conviction of the torturers." The report should have discussed the lack of independence by the Institute of Forensic Medicine (Instituto Médico Forense), which is part of the Technical Judicial
428
Venezuela
Police (Policía Técnica Judicial -- PTJ), a force that is actually cited in the report for 11 cases of torture tabulated by PROVEA. Both domestic and international human rights groups have reported that forensic doctors often do not certify injuries or other evidence of torture that may incriminate the police.
Also, the report makes no mention of the use of torture by the security forces in the poor neighborhoods of Caracas. During January-April 1992, Amnesty International reported five cases of torture in the neighborhood of Petare. The cases report that members of the PTJ and the Metropolitan Police regularly beat individuals after their arrest without warrants. Ramon Yaguaramay was detained on February 3 by the Metropolitan Police, who presented no arrest warrant. He was taken to police headquarters in the Sucre District where he was repeatedly beaten with a plastic tube. The following day, he was accused of involvement in the coup attempt and hung by his wrists and beaten again. On February 5, Yaguaramay was transferred to the security police, the DISIP, where he was tortured with electric shock to his genitals and feet. Following more transfers, throughout which he was denied medical attention, on February 15 Yaguaranay was ordered released by a judge for lack of evidence.
The report's discussion of arbitrary arrest, detention or exile is merely narrative in that it essentially recites the Venezuelan arrest law. Given the suspension of constitutional guarantees on two occasions during 1992, the State Department should have examined the actual application of legal safeguards, particularly that
of habeas corpus. The report should have noted that although certain constitutional rights may be suspended upon the government's declaration of a state of emergency, habeas corpus is a non-derogable right under the American Convention, to which Venezuela is a State Party. The Venezuelan judiciary as well as the Attorney General's office reportedly interpreted habeas corpus as if it were a derogable right following the February 4 coup attempt. In addition to such limitations on the suspension of non-derogable rights, the report should have considered that the principle of proportionality must also be respected under such circumstances. According to PROVEA, many individuals were arrested for merely criticizing the government's policies after constitutional guarantees were suspended. These cases included the arrests of various political and social leaders as well as human rights monitors, including a staff member of PROVEA.
There was a statistical correlation between the rise in popular protest and the increase in the number of arrests. For instance, during the months of March, April and June when social protest was at its height, a larger number of arrests (753) occurred than in any other comparable period. In June, which had the highest monthly total of reported arrests (341 ), the majority of those arrested were minors who were held for more than 12 hours. These arrests violated the police guidelines set out under the Ley Tutelar del Menor regarding the rights of minors. The report should have stated that the arbitrary arrests that occurred in 1992 in response to protests violated Article 115 of the Venezuelan Constitution, which guarantees the right to peaceful demon-
429
Venezuela
stration.
Student protests in particular were frequently met by arbitrary arrests. For example, on January 23, police reportedly raided the Venezuelan Central University as students were protesting against an increase in transportation fares. According to reports, the police arrested 13 students without warrants, including one minor. Among those detained was Mark Flavio Zucchelli, a U.S. citizen, who was released a few hours later. A similar event, also on January 23, at the University of Carabobo caused human rights groups, including PROVEA, to call for investigations. Neither incident has been investigated. The State Department should have noted that this lack of serious attention has led many to believe that there exists a high level of impunity where government authorities are concerned.
The report presents a good critical review of the institutional problems of an inefficient and corrupt judiciary in Venezuela and notes that the influence of the political parties has resulted in a lack of public credibility in the administration of justice.
Although the report states that "[c]iv-ilians charged with armed subversion can be tried by military courts as insurgents," nothing more is stated. Apparently, it is referring here only to the ordinary military courts, not the special tribunals set up to try those arrested for involvement in the November 27 coup attempt.
Following the November 27 attempt, President Perez issued Decree 2.669, ordering that those arrested for insurrec-
tion be tried by a special military court under the Code of Military Justice. The decree applied to both rebels in the armed forces, as well as civilians accused of involvement in the attempt. The Military Code provides for secret summary trials, curtailing a variety of rights normally available to the defense, including choice of counsel and an opportunity to prepare a defense and rebut the prosecution's case. In December, attorneys for the accused individuals and groups appealed to the Venezuelan Supreme Court to annul the decree on constitutional grounds. Among the defendants' arguments were the claims that the special military courts violated the constitutional rights to due process and the right to be tried by one's "natural judges."
On March 11, 1993, the Supreme Court ruled President Carlos Andres Perez's Decree 2.669 unconstitutional because the use of the special military tribunals violated the constitutional guarantees of a fair trial established in Articles 68 and 69, rights which had not been suspended by Perez in his declaration of a state of emergency. Those civilians convicted by the military tribunals will be retried following the reissuance of arrest warrants. Even without the updated information at the time of publication, the State Department should have addressed Decree 2.669's restrictions on due process rights guaranteed under the Venezuelan Constitution and international law.
The report generally presents accusations of human rights abuse against the press by the security forces, including the extraordinary case of a journalist who suffered a skull fracture from the impact of a tear gas canister during a public
430
Venezuela
demonstration. Though the report notes a speech by the president of the journalists' union on December 10, international human rights day, calling attacks on the press "deplorable," it does not address killings and shootings of the press during the November 27 coup attempt.
Virgilio Fernandez and Carmen Carrillo of the newspaper El Universal were shot as they drove in a clearly marked vehicle near Carlota airport during the November coup attempt. Fernandez was killed and Carrillo was wounded. Johnny Burgera Vergara, a TV production assistant, and Enrique Key of 2001 were also killed. One report suggests that Burgera and Key were shot after being detained by DISIP agents. Reports also suggest that Fernandez was delayed in getting to the hospital by presidential guards.
Though the government did exercise censorship powers pursuant to its declaration of a state of emergency after the November coup attempt, it exceeded its authority when agents of the DISIP occupied the office of Radio Rumbos, roughed up the station's employees and suspended all programming.
The State Department reports that the government did not impose censorship in the wake of the November 27 coup attempt, indicating that one radio station was temporarily closed during the attempt for allegedly inciting the population. However, the Committee to Protect Journalists reported that the reason for the raid was said to have been that the station did not take part in a national broadcasting hookup ordered by the government. The report should have noted this discrepancy. The State De-
partment should also have critically reported that although journalists may not have been censored as they were after the February 4 coup attempt, they were attacked and harassed by government agents.
The Andean Commission of Jurists also reported that several individuals who were charged as "coup plotters" were actually arrested for no more than expressing their political opinions and criticism of the Perez government. José Antonio Cova, a member of the group "Los Notables," known for its opposition to the government, was reportedly detained for his political views opposing the government. Manuel Quijada, a government minister during the Campins administration and a member of the Patriotic Front Organization, was detained after calling for the replacement of the Perez government. In addition to Cova and Quijada, several other political candidates were reportedly detained in the fallout from the coup attempt.
The government also acted to suppress free expression by threatening organizations not to reveal accurate statistics as to the number of victims of human rights violations estimated during the November coup attempt. Employees of the Bello Monte morgue were reportedly threatened with disciplinary sanctions from their "direct superiors" if they released to journalists the number of those killed or injured or admitted for treatment.
The report fails to address serious allegations of electoral fraud in 1992. Following the state and municipal elections held on December 6, a week after the November coup attempt, opposition
431
Venezuela
parties questioned election returns in the states of Nueva Esparta, Barinas, Lara and Sucre. The results from voting center committees, ballot tabulating boards and municipal and district boards were all challenged. Although these groups include representatives of Venezuela's opposition political parties, they are often denied access or their credentials are delayed so that cannot actually witness the ballot counting. Several opposition groups have called upon the electoral commissions of the states to investigate possible irregularities and accusations of fraud in the December 6 elections. By the end of the year, these commissions had yet to address to the accusations.
As a result of the delay in responding to the public outcry against fraud, members of the Socialism Movement led a protest outside the office of the Supreme Elections Council. The protest reportedly met with an excessive police response that left several individuals injured, including senators, congressmen and council members. The president of the Supreme Elections Council stated that unless the Universal Suffrage Law is modified, the same electoral system will continue in Venezuela.
The State Department report for 1993 should not only inquire into the calls for investigation and the response of the Elections Council, if any, during 1993, but should also address the institutional deficiencies of Venezuela's electoral system described above.
In its discussion of worker rights, the State Department asserts that Venezuelans earn a living wage "though the perception of the average worker, as enunci-
ated by the labor unions, is that purchasing power has declined significantly over the last several years." The claim that the minimum wage, plus benefits, provides Venezuelans a living wage is grossly exaggerated. The minimum salary for an urban household is estimated at 9,000 Bolivars (approximately US$100) and 6,000 Bolivars (approximately US$67) for a rural one. Even with mandatory fringe benefits included, the amount does not come close to a "living wage."
432
