South Africa
The 1992 State Department report on South Africa documents the ongoing human rights abuses and denial of civil and political rights to black South Africans on the basis of their skin color against an increasingly bloody backdrop of political violence. Over 7,000 people were killed in political violence between January 1990 and March 1992, with the spiral of violence setting a grim stage for negotiations about South Africa's future. The report sheds a benevolent light on government reforms instead of assessing government responsibility for and detailing the reign of terror experienced by the majority of South Africans in their struggle for equal political rights and the dismantling of an entire system of discriminatory laws.
In 1992, the opening up of the political process through negotiations (between the government, its allies and its main rival, the African National Congress (ANC) was accompanied by increasing violence, destabilization and repression, yet the report does not scrutinize official inaction or complicity. It lacks evaluation of and softens criticism of government security laws and "mini states of emergencies," and no mention is made of prison conditions or that an estimated 12,000 children were held in adult prisons during 1 992.
The report again neglects to analyze the principal and profound failure of the government and the system of justice to end the impunity of human rights violators. South Africa signed the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
(and other conventions, including the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) in 1992, and the report should have held the government accountable to these international standards.
The report offers no comment on vigilantism (the largest cause of deaths in political violence), on the 123 recorded deaths in police custody, or on the government's ineffective response. The report also chooses not to comment on the high level of repression in the so-called "homelands," contrary to the 1991 report. Repression of free political expression and activity is illustrated by the Bophuthatswana Internal Security Act, which prohibits gatherings of more than two persons unless authorized by the Minister of Law and Order (who is also the President -- Lucas Mangope). The report does not comment on government treatment of refugees; on hunger strikes by detainees; or on the passage, over parliamentary objections, of the most sweeping indemnity law (the Further Indemnity Act of 1992) ever passed in South Africa, protecting human rights violators from prosecution under a blanket of secrecy. In contrast to the 1991 report, this year the report omits the fact that political surveillance increased, aided by the Interception and Monitoring Prohibition Act of 1992 (see below), which has the hallmark of police state methods used by the government in the past.
Positive developments in multilateral negotiations about the future of South Africa are retarded by vestiges of apartheid. The apartheid laws mentioned in
345
South Africa
the 1991 critique remain on the statute books along with laws restricting free political activity (including a law that allows the government to expel from the country any person unable to read and write). Although the report refers to the repeal of some apartheid laws (quoting the 1991 report, rather than reviewing remaining apartheid laws), the report fails to point to the necessity for a new democratic constitution and a bill of rights as paramount preconditions for safeguarding human rights. The Interception and Monitoring Prohibition Act (IMPA) allows South African Police (SAP) and South African Defence Force (SADF) officers, and National Intelligence Service (NIS) agents to do exactly the opposite: to obtain verbally from a retired judge drastically wide powers to tap telephones, bug rooms, and intercept mail (for three months) if they suspect an offense has or is being committed for crimes ranging from treason, public violence, murder, arson, and theft to sodomy, indecent assault, bestiality, kidnapping, child stealing or any other offense which carries punishment of greater than six months' imprisonment. The report accepts the government's justification that this law was required in fighting drugs, without closer examination.
The report should have described and evaluated the government's reform promises against the extraordinary powers which President F.W. de Klerk and the security forces have at their disposal, unsolved cases of torture and "disappearances," assassinations of government opponents, and deaths in police custody. Instead, the report softens scrutiny of extra security measures, including the IMPA and the Further Indemnity Act,
which harken back to the authoritarian measures adopted during prior years' States of Emergency. It creates the impression that government involvement in the violence and the disruption of a negotiated transition to democracy is limited to government agents acting as "lone rangers." The report does not refer to the increase in government repression of political activity evidenced by the 1,724 recorded injuries inflicted by the security forces (over double the 1991 figure of 699 injuries), or the arrest of 10,467 people in political circumstances.
The report asserts that President de Klerk strengthened civilian control and granted amnesty to political offenders, despite growing evidence to the contrary, including continuing covert funding and secret activities by the government, and the incapacity of civilians to seek justice against human rights violators. It favorably describes de Klerk's response to ongoing disclosures of police brutality, covert activities, and murder, referring to "a number of steps" which de Klerk took "in an attempt to restore confidence in the neutrality of the security forces" -including the compulsory retirement in December of 23 SADF officers and 19 SAP officials (from logistics and administrative and not line command positions); the creation of a "nominally independent body to investigate criminal allegations against the SAP"; the implementation of new police training methods; and the granting of amnesty to persons committing political crimes. The report fails to disclose de Klerk's reluctance and slowness to uphold the rule of law; to prosecute human rights offenders in the security forces; to respond properly to criticism from the judiciary about police miscon-
346
South Africa
duct and cover-ups, and to the ongoing deaths in police custody. As human rights groups like Amnesty International have pointed out, the inadequacy of the government's reliance on internal investigations into complaints about the conduct of the security forces is highlighted by continuing reports of police abuses (such as those in the Khutsong/Carltonville area) and the slow progress in prosecuting those responsible for deaths in police custody and other killings since early 1990.
The report does not state that the Internal Security Act and the Public Safety Act are inconsistent with accepted human rights standards (through the authorization of detention for up to 10 days without trial and preventive detention of up to 14 days, periods which can be extended by application to the Supreme Court). The report again refers to amendments to the Internal Security Act on June 21, 1991, instead of reporting and evaluating the draconian measures which the government still enforces. For example, under the Internal Security Act, relatives need not be notified of the detention if "the commissioner has reason to believe that it will hamper any investigation by the police." A detainee does not have an automatic right to legal counsel during the first 10 days of detention and the right to legal advice is strictly limited to the preparation of opposition to an application by the government extending the period of detention. Government repression is further evidenced by 451 detentions in 1992. The government continues to utilize the Public Safety Act to declare "unrest areas" (or "mini states of emergencies") and to authorize detention without trial, curfews and other
restrictions on movement; the dispersal of gatherings by force; entry, search and seizure without warrants; and indemnity from prosecution for the security forces. In 1992, 58 such unrest areas were declared -- more than during the 1985/86 State of Emergency -- with 33 unrest areas with curfews in December 1992 alone.
The report refers to (but tends to downplay) findings by nongovernmental human rights groups and government-appointed judicial commissions of inquiry into the violence. It accepts certain findings (e.g. those of the Goldstone Commission (see below)) about the causes of the violence. The report fails to link the violence with the negotiations process (or with the disruption of a peaceful transition to democratic rule), despite court rulings (and even internal SADF investigations) revealing government "dirty tricks" and participation by the security forces in the violence in black communities.
The violence in 1992 was unprecedented; 3,499 people were reported dead and 5,685 people were reported injured in political violence -- an increase of 35% over 1991. The report does not refer to the large scale displacements of tens of thousands of people caused by the violence in black communities, or to the unlawful occupation of victims' homes and properties (like the displacement of residents in Alexandra township by vigilantes and supporters of the Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) during a bloody civil war in the Johannesburg township last year). Some 50,000 people have been driven from their homes in Natal alone since mid-1990.
347
South Africa
The report does not comment on the indiscriminate and changing nature of the violence in black townships, aimed at sowing fear and frustrating political stability in these communities. More people have been assassinated since the unbanning of the ANC than during the previous 10 years. In 1992, 97 political leaders were assassinated. Between January
I	991 and April 1 992, the nongovernmental Human Rights Commission recorded
II	9 political assassinations -- over five times the number of assassinations during the years under the States of Emergency. Over 100 of these victims were anti-apartheid activists and at least 45 were assassinated in Natal. Direct evidence exists of security force involvement in attempted assassinations as late as April 1992, as provided by British Intelligence (and confirmed by the SADF and de Klerk), when two SADF agents were arrested in a plot to kill former police captain Dirk Coetzee (who disclosed the existence of police death squads in 1988). One of the SADF agents previously worked as secretary to SADF head, Christoffel van der Westhuizen, who was allegedly personally involved in the 1985 murders of Eastern Cape activists Matthew Goniwe, Fort Calata, Sparrow Mkhonto and Mbulelo Goniwe ("the Goniwe murders"). In May, documentary evidence linking the SADF to assassinations of anti-apartheid activists emerged -- a document sent from General van der Westhuizen (head of the SADF Eastern Cape Command in 1985) proposed the "immediate and permanent removal from society" of Matthew Goniwe, who was murdered with the other activists three weeks later.
The report does not comment on the
effect of the violence in destabilizing black communities and preventing meaningful political organization. Trends in repression have shifted to an alarming increase in informal repression, particularly by vigilantes, and in the homelands and black local authorities. Vigilantes cause the majority of deaths and injuries, often randomly aimed at residents not affiliated to any political group.
Allegations of collusion between the security forces and vigilantes persist, ranging from a failure to act impartially to covert involvement in the violence and the training of IFP members. In March, the New Nation newspaper reported that investigations in the Western Transvaal uncovered the involvement of the National Intelligence Service in training paramilitary units aligned to Inkatha. The Gold-stone Commission investigating the Imbali killings found that the security forces acted with bias in favor of the IFP. Amnesty International and the International Commission of Jurists issued reports confirming that the security forces colluded with the IFP in the violence.
The government maintains its covert activities, revealed by covert funding of the security forces (R4,380 million (about US$1.46 million) were allocated to secret special defense projects in the 1992 financial year, two thirds of which were reported spent). The report does not refer to ongoing government sponsoring of and links to "dirty tricks" and covert activities, including the continuing existence of secret Military Intelligence (Ml) front organizations (mostly businesses) set up to promote township violence and attack organizations sympathetic to the ANC after the ANC and other political
348
South Africa
organizations were unbanned two years ago. Part of the activities of these businesses involved paramilitary training at secret rural camps for homeland security forces, hiring gangsters and vigilantes for certain operations, and destabilizing township communities. Further examples include the Ml Directorate of Covert Collection front company "Africa Risk Analysis Consultancy," a spy network investigated by the Goldstone Commission.
Reports by international human rights and labor monitors (like Amnesty International and the International Commission of Jurists) confirm the failure by the government and the prosecutorial system to respond to compelling, prima facie evidence against members of the security forces during the past two years.
The report does not comment on political trials and imprisonment, even though the Human Rights Commission reported an unabated rise of the number of accused, with 4,298 accused involved in 220 political trials in 1992. The high number of accused per trial (about 20, compared with six during 1991) indicates that the focus of prosecution is shifting from individuals or small groups to "mass action." In 1992, the number of convictions leading to imprisonment was only 11, with the balance of sentences involving suspended sentences, fines and whipping. Fundamental rights such as freedom of association and movement were transgressed by political arrests by the security forces and should have received greater scrutiny in the report. In 1992, 10,467 people were arrested, mostly after or during demonstrations. By year's end, 1,333 accused were involved in
ongoing political trials with 715 accused charged with participation in illegal gatherings, demonstrations, pickets or marches. Bannings of gatherings appear to be particularly frequent in remote rural areas like the Northern Cape, the homelands, and the Orange Free State. The government's refusal to allow public meetings and protests is not evaluated. Permission was refused, for example, for a picket protest in front of the local security police office in Cradock demanding an inquest into the Goniwe murders.
Although the report regularly refers to the findings of the Commission of Inquiry into Violence and Intimidation chaired by Judge Richard Goldstone (the Goldstone Commission) -- often citing the Commission's findings as undisputed fact -- the report does not disclose the fundamental limitations on the powers and terms of reference of the Commission. It was established in July, 1991 with a brief to investigate matters related to current violence and intimidation (outside the homelands). Events which took place before June 21. 1991 fall outside the jurisdiction of the Commission's terms of reference. Like the Harms Commission of Inquiry into security force death squads, the Goldstone Commission advises President de Klerk of its findings and can only recommend prosecution to the State.
Several judges, including Judge Goldstone and Judge Andrew Wilson (who presided over the Trust Feed case) have criticized official inaction, disinterest and obstruction. Judge Goldstone criticized the government for ignoring his urgent recommendations or failing to act upon them -- including those related to the hostels; policing in the volatile Mooiriver
349
South Africa
area in Natal; ending the deployment of 32 Battalion in violence torn areas; failing to prosecute police in an unsuccessful conspiracy to murder an ANC leader in Schweizer-Reneke; and partially implementing measures restricting the bearing of weapons in public.
The Trust Feed controversy underscores fundamental problems with the administration of justice in South Africa, yet the report fails to identify this issue and does not refer to the government's inadequate response to Judge Wilson's quest for exposure of a police cover-up. Judge Wilson called for a public inquiry into evidence of a police coverup of police complicity in the massacre. Evidence pointed to a conspiracy linking local, regional and national level SAP officers in what could be construed as "obstruction of justice or accessory [to such destruction] after the fact." The government merely appointed a former magistrate to oversee an internal police investigation into the coverup (rather than authorizing an independent inquiry) to report to the Minister of Law and Order, Hernus Kriel.
Although 123 deaths in police custody were recorded in 1992, the report neither considers the institutional contempt for human life suggested by the deaths, nor the government's superficial response thereto. The report does not comment on the disclosures by independent pathologist, Dr. Jonathan Gluckman (who had conducted the 1977 post mortem examination of Steven Biko on behalf of the Biko family) regarding police responsibility for deaths in custody or on the daily harassment which Gluckman has experienced since he went public. On November 20, 1991, Gluckman reported
to de Klerk (but received no reply) his findings that the police were responsible for 90% of the 200 deaths where he had conducted post mortem examinations; that the deaths were covered up; that persons taken into police custody were later found dead outside jails or lockups without explanation of how they left custody; and that inquest findings did not accord with his pathological findings. He made public his findings on July 26, 1992 after examining the body of Simon Mth-imkulu (19) of Sebokeng, whose body was found in an open field 12 hours after his arrest by the SAP. Gluckman was horrified by the injuries which were consistent with eyewitness allegations that Mthimkulu was brutally beaten, his fingers repeatedly being struck with rifles and his chest pounded with a large rock.
President De Klerk promised an investigation into deaths in custody only after Dr. Gluckman made his findings public. He appointed a retired magistrate to oversee internal police investigations, ignoring public calls for independent investigations into these deaths. Minister of Law and Order Kriel concluded, after a cursory look involving no new investigations of the cases reported by Gluckman, that Gluckman's findings were "false" and "most unfortunate." In several cases where Kriel asserted no police accountability for deaths, his office nonetheless paid thousands of dollars in damages to the families of those victims.
In the case of 31-year-old Bethuel Maphumalo (who died two days after surrendering into police custody), a magistrate found a police officer criminally liable for strangling to death Maphumalo. Police had asserted that Maphumalo had
350
South Africa
attacked a police officer twice his size, and then "jumped through a window," fallen into a swimming pool and drowned, still handcuffed.
The report does not identify patterns of police incompetence or cover-ups, or the effect thereof on the criminal justice system. Dr. Peter Waddington, a senior British criminologist appointed by the Goldstone Commission to investigate police conduct during the brutal Boipat-ong massacre, found the SAP response to the massacre "woefully inadequate" and characterized the SAP investigation as "incompetent and inefficient." SAP investigative procedures were so unstructured that they inhibited gathering evidence. Waddington's report advocates a complete overhaul of the police, their methods, systems, procedures and equipment, and it portrays a total collapse of the policing system.
The report does not refer to disclosures of the disappearance or destruction of evidence, documents and background information collected by the SAP for prosecution of political court cases (despite the existence of the Archives Act which prohibits the destruction of such documents). In the Harms Commission investigation into security force hit squads, official dossiers were destroyed or disappeared, but to date, members of the SADF Civil Cooperation Bureau (CCB) who flouted the law have not been prosecuted.
The legal, administrative, and political structures of the homelands remain untouched by de Klerk's announced political reform initiatives (and unaddressed by the report), despite fundamental demands for
reincorporation of these homelands into South Africa and the restoration of their citizens' political, civil and labor rights. The report merely repeats the section on the homelands from previous years, including the reference to military coups in the Transkei, Venda and Ciskei. (No coups took place in these homelands during 1992, and the homelands all are effectively ruled by one party or military regimes.) Cases of gross abuses by the homeland security forces are not sufficiently reported. In 1992, the government conferred full police powers (including search and arrest) on police in "independent" and "self-governing" homelands, but the report omits this significant increase in police powers. Despite growing evidence detailing the involvement of the KwaZulu Police (KZP) in the violence, the government appears intent on extending the powers and life of the KZP. Map-utoland was handed over to KZP control and the government appears reluctant to bring the SAP, KZP and other homeland security forces under a single command structure.
The Bisho massacre illustrates the violent repression by the homeland security forces of political and civil activities. In May 1993, the Ciskei government granted "unconditional indemnity" to all those involved in the massacre of 47 people, days after the Ciskei Attorney General announced that charges were being prepared against 70 of those who allegedly participated. The report omits the fact that homeland security forces are funded by the de Klerk government and largely run by members of the SAP and SADF seconded to the homelands by the government. The Ciskei Defense Force (CDF) command consists of seconded
351
South Africa
SADF officers and others under contract to the Ciskei. Law and order and the administration and finances of the homeland are controlled by a large contingent of South Africans under treaty with the Ciskei, concluded on February 2, 1991. South African government officials occupy key positions of the CDF, with the Commander in Chief a seconded SADF Brigadier Marius Oelsching (from Ml); Chief of Staff (Finance) Colonel Raymond Williams (whose last post was under Christoffel van der Merwe, now head of SADF Ml); and CDF Ml head Colonel Ockert Swanepoel (a former member of 32 Battalion linked (with his deputy) to the SADF covert hit squad, the CCB). The founder of 32 Battalion, Colonel Jan Breytenbach, trains CDF paratroopers. The Ciskei Commissioner of Police, Major-General Johan Viktor, is the former commander of the SAP Covert operations unit of Askaris ("turned" former ANC cadres) at Vlakplaas, the alleged base of the SAP hit squads.
The report does not refer to the Parsons Commission of Inquiry which found evidence that the police in KwaNdebele were responsible for serious mismanagement, malpractices and irregularities, or to its recommendations for an impartial investigation into charges against the police and the independent monitoring of detention conditions.
The 1992 report does not refer to a sharp increase of racial attacks by whites against blacks since 1990, or to the unequal treatment meted out to white assailants in the administration of justice. One example includes the disparate treatment of Frank Mokwati (16) and the farmer, Johan van der Westhuizen, who
doused Mokwati in petrol and set him alight. Mokwati was convicted of stealing a TV set (on the basis of SAP evidence that his fingerprints had been found near the scene of the robbery, even though the TV set had not been found and Mokwati pleaded not guilty). The length of his sentence was reportedly left to the discretion of the juvenile prison authorities. Van der Westhuizen was found guilty of attempted murder, after admitting to assaulting Mokwati, welding his feet and hands to a steel table, dousing him with petrol and setting him alight with sparks from the welder. A policeman called to the scene reportedly assaulted Mokwati before handcuffing him and detaining him for several hours before taking him to the hospital. The policeman was not charged and van der Westhuizen was freed after paying a R5,000 (about US$1,888) fine and promising to pay R40,000 (about US$13,333) in damages.
South Africa ranks second to the United States in terms of prisoners per capita (with 311 prisoners per 100,000 in South Africa and 455 per 100,000 in the U.S. in the same year). The report makes no mention of prison conditions, despite pervasive and extensive breach of prisoners' civil rights -- particularly those of children. An average of 96,540 prisoners were in jail in December, 1991 with a further 23,694 unsentenced prisoners --13,000 more prisoners than overcrowded cells were designed to hold.
Thousands of black children under 18 are detained in adult prisons across South Africa while awaiting trial. According to human rights lawyers, only five percent of the estimated 12,000 children held in adult prisons in 1992 were arrested on
352
South Africa
serious crimes. (White children are released into the custody of their parents or sent to halfway houses. Halfway houses reserved for black children are overcrowded and understaffed.) The Weekly Mail reported that less than 10% of the 40,000 children convicted in juvenile courts have legal representation. After conviction and sentence, the children are moved to juvenile detention centers.
The 1992 report is less critical of issues related to land rights, insufficiently or inaccurately describing serious rights disputes related to land and to the government's land policy. The report tends to describe benevolently government actions related to land problems, and to create the impression that difficulties and evictions facing squatters stem from the squatters themselves rather than from the repressive land policies of the last 45 years. Government plans to transfer administrative control of 2.2 million acres of land to six non-independent homelands were halted, and the National Land Committee, which acts for dispossessed communities, called for a moratorium on the transfer of all state-owned land until a legitimate allocation process has been established. In 1991 (after first refusing to do so) the government created an Advisory Commission on Land Allocations to which victims of removals could present compensation claims in terms of the Abolition of Racially Based Land Measures Act, after 13 dispossessed communities representing 50,000 people gave evidence before a parliamentary committee on land reform. The commission promised to issue policy and procedural guidelines for land claims, but has failed to do so to date.
Although squatter communities suffered serious attacks from vigilantes and members of the security forces in 1992, the report makes no reference thereto. In Umgabagaba on October 18, 11 people were killed and eight injured, and 40 homes were burned down, when "impis" (armed groups of "warriors"), allegedly including white men in camouflage uniform and one in an SADF uniform, attacked the community.
The education system receives little coverage, despite fundamental and pervasive discrimination and the abject failure of the education system as indicated by black matriculation results for 1992. Sixty percent of the black matriculants failed their 1992 final exams, compared with a 97.8% pass rate for white matriculants. At university level, seven out of 10 students are white. Disruption of black education in urban areas like Sow-eto was devastating, with students and teachers continuing their protests at the inadequate education system, lack of books and facilities, overcrowding, and government education policies. Per capita expenditure on black education (excluding the homelands) was one-third of that for white education during 1991/92. (The gap in resource provision in urban black schools and those in the 10 homelands widened.) In 1992, an estimated 1.7 million children of school age, almost all of them black, were not in school.
Continuing discrimination in health care and pensions is not reported, even though treatment in these areas of blacks, especially in the homelands, continued to significantly lag that of whites, "coloreds" and Indians. For example, whereas 70% of whites are covered by
353
South Africa
medical aid schemes, only five percent of blacks are. In 1990, the infant mortality rates per 1,000 live births were as follows: blacks 52.8 outside the homelands; 54.4 in the Transkei, Bop-huthatswana, Venda and Ciskei; and 59.8 in the other homelands -- compared with "coloreds" 28; Indians 13.5; and whites 7.3.
The report creates the impression of increased government tolerance of the press and focuses more on left and right wing opposition to journalists. The report does not refer to the harassment faced by John Carlin, correspondent of the British newspaper, The Independent, who was subjected to surveillance and whose office was burgled after he started investigating connections between the security forces and the endemic violence. The United Nations Secretary-General confirmed that journalists and newspapers continued to face considerable difficulties in publishing material which they considered in the public interest. The SAP applied for injunctions against the Weekly Mail and Vrye Weekblad from publishing new allegations of secret operations against anti-apartheid activists. The injunction against Vrye Weekblad was granted and the Weekly Mail settled on the basis that the newspaper would not publish the names of persons involved or the precise locations of secret police bases. Although the Campaign for an Open Media called for the scrapping of 11 prominent censorship laws and for replacing the Information Act (the official secrets act) with a Freedom of Information Act in early 1991, the report makes no mention thereof. The government continued with prosecutions of journalists (to reveal their sources) using Section 205 of
the Criminal Procedure Act (under which two out of seven subpoenas have resulted in prison terms since September 1990).
The report's coverage of gender discrimination should have been more extensive. For example, there is only one woman judge on the 150-member Supreme Court (excluding the homelands). In 1990, of the 720 advocates, only 65 were women and fewer than 10 were black. No mention is made of the historic formation of the Women's National Coalition which will work towards the inclusion of a women's bill of rights under the new constitution. The legal status of women was profoundly influenced by the Domicile Act which came into force in August 1992 - married women now no longer follow the domicile of their husbands or fathers, but may legally establish their domicile of choice.
The report does not refer to discrimination against South Africans with AIDS, evidenced by the enforcement of pre-employment testing for HIV by the Pretoria and Germiston Municipalities. An estimated 350,000 people are HIV positive and 400 new cases are reported daily. Homosexuality remains a criminal offense in South Africa.
The report does not refer to the government's continued call-up for compulsory military service of whites only. The SADF's crackdown on "draft dodgers" should have been reported, especially in view of the important Supreme Court decision last year that the failure to register for military service did not constitute a crime. Parliament passed the Defence Amendment Act in May 1992, closing
354
South Africa
this loophole.
During 1992, the Department of Home Affairs arrested 16,000 aliens under the Aliens Control Act of 1991, which grants officials vast and unchecked powers of search, arrest, detention and deportation. The Act excludes the jurisdiction of courts to review, quash, reverse, interdict or otherwise interfere with any act, order or warrant from the Minister of Home Affairs. The report should have investigated and reported the government's application of this law and its treatment of alleged illegal aliens.
The report tends to repeat information from previous years rather than reporting trends and developments in labor rights in South Africa. International labor monitors reported that the government continued to use the statutory crime of "intimidation" and other laws restricting trade union activity and infringing on the rights to organize and to picket. Industrial action has also become legally circumscribed. Blatant collusion between some employers and the security forces and violent repression of strikes and labor disputes should have been reported. Since 1.3 million agricultural and one million domestic workers continue to work in a near-feudal system of labor, the report should pay closer attention to their plight and to the government's reluctance to fulfill its commitment in August 1990 of labor reform. The exclusion of farm, domestic and 700,000 public sector employees from the Labour Relations Act and protective labor laws illustrates the government's reluctance to accord all workers in South Africa equal labor rights. Although the government promised that farm workers would be brought
under the Basic Conditions of Employment Act and the Unemployment Insurance Act, the provisions would only be applied once the government had decided to do so.
Although union members and officials, particularly from the National Union of Metalworkers of SA (NUMSA), were subject to assassinations and violent attacks, this is not reported. In August, NUMSA reported that at least 21 union members and officials had been killed since May. Bloody conflict continued between COSATU affiliates (the largest trade union federation with 1.26 million members --or 11 % of the employees countrywide) and the United Workers Union of SA (UWUSA, the Inkatha union funded by the SAP and government). Moreover, while the president of the second largest trade union federation NACTU, James Mndaweni, was detained and questioned by the SAP for eight hours without charge and General Secretary Cunningham Ngcukana was repeatedly threatened and subjected to armed police raids of his house in Soweto, such harassment of trade union leaders is not reported. According to the International Confederation of Trade Unions, 47 unionists were murdered in South Africa in the year ending in March 1992 - almost one quarter of the 200 unionists reported killed around the world.
The regressive and oppressive labor laws and practices in the homelands are not scrutinized, even though frequent and flagrant violations of trade union rights were sustained during 1992. South African unions are banned from Bophu-thatswana and Gazankulu, and in Kwa-Zulu endemic violence severely restricted
355
South Africa
the exercise of labor rights. The Ciskei security forces frequently harassed striking workers and union activities were met with intimidation and violence.
The report does not assess basic health and safety rights, even though 40,000 (mostly black) miners are injured and an average of 700 miners die each year in mines in South Africa. In 1991, 9,000 accidents in mines claimed 553 lives. About 70% of the accidents occurred in gold mines, where 407 miners were killed. The Minerals Act replaced the Mines and Works Act which contained safety regulations for the mining industry.
The Occupational Diseases in Mines and Works Bill published in November 1992 aims at removing overt racial discrimination in the compensation of miners who suffer occupational diseases in the mining industry, where white miners receive 13 times greater compensation than their black colleagues. The new bill, however, significantly reduces benefits.
356
