Zimbabwe
The 1992 report on Zimbabwe is a fairly accurate and comprehensive account of human rights practices in Zimbabwe. But while the State Department has done a generally commendable job of documenting human rights violations, the report fails to highlight adequately the government's obstinate refusal to permit official or unofficial scrutiny of its actions. Moreover, the report sometimes does not provide details necessary to understand the severity of incidents of human rights abuse, or to place the incidents in proper context.
One of the most prevalent manifestations of the government's intolerance of criticism of its actions is its unwillingness to investigate fully or impartially political killings and disappearances; this has prevented independent and public inquiries. The report provides a rote description of the government's failure to respond adequately to human rights abuses; it does not place this failure in the larger context of a pattern of conduct designed to insulate the government from scrutiny and to permit perpetrators to escape accountability for their actions.
Perhaps the most disturbing instance of the report's myopic analysis is the brief discussion accorded to the discovery of mass graves in four different regions of Zimbabwe's southwestern Matabeleland province. The discovery of mass graves is described merely as one of "human remains." The report's cursory treatment of the matter omits details and key background information that are crucial to understanding the full import of the discoveries.
The mass graves were discovered when the prolonged drought of 1992 caused a lowering of the water table and a search for new water resources. The report does not mention that coins and other personal items found with the bodies have established that the bodies were probably buried or dumped during the period of operations of the notorious Fifth Brigade in 1983 to 1987.
The North Korean-trained Fifth Brigade was formed in 1982 to subdue disgruntled former independence fighters, who were members of the Nbedele-domi-nated Zimbabwe African People's Union (ZAPU). Purportedly created to preserve internal security, the Fifth Brigade was deployed in Matabeleland in February 1983. Numerous experts have estimated that the Shona-dominated Fifth Brigade killed between 1,500 and 20,000 civilians, and that thousands more civilians were beaten, tortured and detained without charge. Whatever the actual numbers may be, the existence of the reign of terror has been well-substantiated by voluminous eyewitness testimony and physical evidence. This campaign of violence and intimidation was directed primarily against the minority Ndebele tribe. The Fifth Brigade's reign of terror ended upon the merger of Zimbabwe National Union-Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF) and ZAPU in 1987 and the subsequent declaration of a general amnesty.
The report does not convey how the discovery of the mass graves has brought to the fore once again the government's steadfast refusal to make public the results of investigations into allegations of
441
Zimbabwe
abuses committed by government security.forces. Nor has the government accepted any responsibility or made apology for the killings. There are economic consequences to the government's inaction: families of victims have not received compensation because the government does not recognize the victims as dead, forcing them to go through a difficult process of obtaining a death certificate. There is also no discussion in the report of how the government has yet to make public the findings of a commission of inquiry, chaired by Simplicius Chiham-bakwe, established in 1983 to investigate allegations of atrocities committed by the Fifth Brigade in Matabeleland. The government has also never released the report of an earlier commission of inquiry, chaired by Justice Dumbutshena, into violent disturbances by former guerrillas awaiting integration into the national army shortly after independence.
The report omits other instances of the government's suppression of public scrutiny, including its prevention on July 3, 1992 of the national broadcast of a television documentary entitled "Outreach" which investigated the killings in Matabeleland. Also not mentioned is the fact that the founder and former commander of the Fifth Brigade during the Brigade's operations in Matabeleland, Perence Shiri, was promoted to commander of the air force in August 1992. Although the government has declared a general amnesty, the promotion of individuals responsible for some of the most horrendous atrocities would appear to signify that members of the government security forces may not only act with full impunity, but will in fact be rewarded for implementing government policy no mat-
ter how atrocious.
The government's willingness to resort to violence to forestall criticism of its actions is also demonstrated by its brutal suppression of political opposition figures and individuals who threaten to expose official corruption. The report includes a number of incidents where critics of the government have died in suspicious traffic accidents: Mthandazo Ndema Ngwenya, a Forum for Democratic Reform (FDR) official, and a university colleague who were forced off the road by an army vehicle; and Shepard Chisan-go, a lieutenant in the Zimbabwe National Army (ZNA) who had implicated the army in wildlife poaching and smuggling, who died following a June 1991 traffic accident in which, the report notes, he was "probably" pushed off an army vehicle while in custody. While the report discusses these incidents, it does not address the significance of the deaths and omits other incidents, such as the death of Christopher Giza, an FDR member who died in June 1992 when his car is claimed to have driven into the back of an unlit stationary army vehicle left in the middle of a main road at night. No mention is made of the widely held belief among human rights organizations and opposition leaders that the government systematically uses deliberately induced "traffic accidents" to silence perceived threats to the political order. Moreover, the report fails to note the lack of thorough, independent investigations into the deaths of Ngwenya and Giza.
The omission of significant details is also evident in the report's failure to disclose that an inquest found that Edwin Nyela, a captain in the ZNA who sought
442
Zimbabwe
to expose corruption in the army, had been murdered in 1988. The report merely mentions that the government closed the Nyela case in 1992 because of "insufficient evidence." Moreover, while the report notes that two Central Intelligence Organization (CIO) officers were charged with the March 1990 shooting of candidate for Parliament Patrick Kombayi, it does not disclose that the docket has been recalled by the Attorney-General's Office, even though it took two years for the docket to be brought to court. It is widely believed that the government recalled the docket because of the sensitive nature of the case.
Although the report correctly describes a relatively independent judiciary, it fails to address adequately the lack of effective government action aimed at apprehending and punishing those responsible for political killings and disappearances. The report fails to confront a key issue explaining why there have been relatively few prosecutions of human rights violators: the police either do not have the will themselves to investigate human rights violations or their investigations are interfered with by politicians. The establishment of independent and public commissions of inquiry, therefore, is a crucial prerequisite to any effective investigation of human rights abuses by government security forces.
Apart from a few significant omissions, the report accurately states the government's control of the press and the existence of a "modest" independent press. The report, however, neglects to mention explicitly the nexus between the government's obsessive secretiveness about its actions and the fact that editori-
al independence of the media is not assured. While, as the report points out, the government did not take punitive measures against independent newspapers in 1992, the press continued to be hampered in its efforts to report on matters of public interest. For instance, the report does not mention the harassment of Mathew Takana, a reporter for the Daily Gazette, who covered an opposition party's campaign, nor the detention of Maxie Matavire and Moses Mudviti, two Daily Gazette reporters, and Kaddie Kam-ashu, a photographer, in connection with their attempt to interview Haile Mengitsu Mariam, the deposed dictator of Ethiopia who was granted political asylum by President Mugabe.
The report does not disclose in specific detail the frequent verbal attacks from the government to which the independent press has been subjected. What the report terms a "public condemnation" by the Minister of State for National Security, Sidney Sekeremayi, was actually a direct threat of action against the independent press, which he claimed sowed the seeds of national despondency and racial and ethnic hatred and conflict. Furthermore, other cabinet ministers have publicly delivered scathing attacks on the independent press, and privately discussed methods to frustrate the operations of the independent press. President Mugabe himself delivered a hard-hitting speech against what he termed the "yellow press" in January 1992. The report is silent on the effects of these systematic threats against and harassment of the media and the extent to which they have resulted in self-censorship.
Other curbs on free expression which
443
Zimbabwe
the report does not cite include the government's banning of public Moslem prayers for rain organized by the Iranian Embassy. Also, the Zimbabwe Writers' Union has complained of growing harassment of writers by the government. For instance, in early 1992, playwright Den-ford Magora was temporarily abducted and his passport seized by men claiming to be security officials. His play Doctor Government, which criticized alleged government incompetence, had been staged in Harare. Security officials questioned Sibongile Mkanda, a Bulawayo writer, about research she had conducted into rape cases. They tried to make her divulge confidential information about rape victims. Also, unidentified men tore up the manuscript of a play by Norman Takawira and warned him that he was under surveillance. None of these incidents appear in the report.
The section on worker rights in the report provides a good general overview of developments in the area, but neglects to mention some significant details necessary to place the developments in their proper context. The report correctly states that labor leaders view the Labor Relations Amendment Act (the Act) as an attempt to weaken the power of unions and minimize the threat of political opposition led by labor. It does not, however, discuss the impact of the Act's grant of broad powers to individual shop floor "workers' councils" to negotiate collec-tiveagreements, retrenchment regulations and codes of conduct, and to override industry-wide agreements reached by employment councils. This legislation effectively marginalizes trade unions in the collective bargaining process; thereby undermining the report's claim that the
1985 Labor Relations Act implicitly provides to workers the right to bargain collectively. The report also does not discuss the implications of the legislation's designation of certain workers as "managerial employees." Such designation excludes them from participation in workers' councils, in effect placing workers such as foremen and supervisors on the side of employers. The report fails to specify the nature of the government's "refusal to permit" the Zimbabwe Congress Trade Union to demonstrate against the Act. This refusal consisted of an eleventh-hour countrywide ban of organized marches, a massive police mobilization, the sealing off of seven towns, including Harare, and the arrest of trade union members. The government's policy towards labor unions must be viewed in the light of Labor Minister John Nkomo's statement in January 1992 that the government was not prepared to accommodate unions that acted as an opposition political party, and the government would only work with labor unions whose leadership was prepared to cooperate with the government.
The report's account of "police campaigns against prostitution which affect innocent women as well" fails to convey fully the indiscriminate process by which the police round up unaccompanied women and throw them in jail on charges of prostitution.
While the report correctly states that the government has enacted many laws to foster the legal capacity of women, it should have noted that discrimination on the basis of gender is not prohibited by the Constitution. As a consequence, laws remain which discriminate on the
444
Zimbabwe
basis of gender. For instance, a foreign woman married to a Zimbabwean man automatically gains Zimbabwean citizenship but the same is not true for a foreign man married to a Zimbabwean woman. This discrepancy makes it difficult for Zimbabwean women married to foreigners to return to Zimbabwe.
445
