	ALBANIA
The State Department's 1994 report provides a thorough, largely accurate chronicle of human rights abuses in Albania during the past year. Like the 1993 report, this year's effort provides an expanded level of detail concerning many aspects of the evolving human rights situation in Albania. Given that Albania's information infrastructure poses continuing obstacles to documenting the human rights situation, the report's attempt to give a comprehensive catalogue of human rights violations is of fundamental importance. In addition, the report avoids the practice prevalent in previous years of relying on third-party reports to distance the State Department from some of its more troubling findings. For example, the 1994 report concludes outright that "[t]he arrest, investigation, and trial of the five ethnic Greek members of [the political organization] Omonia did not conform to internationally recognized standards."
The report's oversights and factual discrepancies are largely of the sort that are difficult to avoid in compiling a thorough listing of violations. The most significant weakness of the report, however, is not found in those errors but rather in the laundry-list approach itself The report concludes that "significant human rights abuses remain" in Albania but does not provide any real perspective on the ongoing stagnation in the Albanian human rights climate during 1994. By reporting disconnected facts without providing appropriate context or attempting to link the facts together and draw necessary conclusions, the report obscures the impact of its own findings. The report provides a troubling list of symptoms but refuses to reach the diagnosis that the symptoms dictate. Albania's prognosis is not overly optimistic: threats to basic human rights principles remain and the fledgling Albanian legal system does not yet provide an appropriate check to abuse. This lack of progress is all the more disturbing given the approach of national elections in early 1996.
Rather than submit a draft Constitution to Parliament, where a two-thirds vote was necessary for ratification, the Albanian government chose instead to hold a public constitutional referendum. This strategy backfired, however, when the draft Constitution was rejected by Albanian voters in
CRITIQUE 1994
November. The report notes this development and summarily states that "the Law on Major Constitutional Provisions supplemented by the Law on Fundamental Freedoms and Human Rights serve in [the proposed Constitution's] place." Neither the Law on Major Constitutional Provisions, a makeshift statute passed in 1991, nor the Law on Fundamental Freedoms is an adequate substitute for a new Constitution. While the Law on Fundamental Freedoms and Human Rights represents a significant step toward the protection of human rights in Albania, such protection remains largely an aspiration at this point, given the absence of effective mechanisms for enforcement. Legislation restricting freedom of speech, passed in 1993, has apparently been incorporated in the new Albanian Penal Code, scheduled to go into effect this June. Adoption of a formal Constitution, coupled with proper enforcement mechanisms, remains essential to the protection of human rights in Albania.
Continuing shortcomings in the Albanian legal system present an equally fundamental impediment to human rights protection. The 1993 State Department report noted that "the rule of law and the principle of an independent judiciary are not yet firmly established" in Albania. Despite substantial additional support for this conclusion in 1994, this year's report omits any such observation. Instead, it recognizes that the failure to adopt a new Penal Code and Constitution has "resulted in continued reliance on a patchwork of changes to Communist-era laws, in uneven application of laws, and, together with procedural irregularities, sometimes in denial of a fair trial."
This conclusion follows directly from the much-publicized inadequacies of the legal system in the arrest, investigation and trial of five ethnic Greeks charged with treason by espionage (the "Omonia trial"). The report, with one exception, accurately records the many procedural shortcomings documented in the Omonia trial. The exception is the report's reluctance to conclude that the searches of the defendants' homes were conducted without proper warrants. Prosecutors both in the trial court and before the Court of Cassation in February conceded that warrants were not obtained but contended that the searches were permissible under the provision of the Albanian law allowing searches without warrants in
_ALBANIA
"emergency" situations. Although this provision can be legitimately read to provide what amounts to a "hot pursuit" exception to the search-warrant obligation, the broad interpretation urged by Albania's top prosecutors would decimate the requirement that an Albanian court authorize searches in all but the most exigent circumstances. The search-warrant requirement is just one of many provisions new to Albanian law which lack the procedural supports necessary to ensure effective implementation.
The report correctly acknowledges that the "serious procedural defects noticed in the Omonia trial case may well reflect a pattern of judicial weakness which affects ethnic Albanians as well." In fact, there is ample evidence to support that conclusion. Reports of procedural shortcomings in the Albanian courts are commonplace, including accounts of corruption and bribery. The report does not comment on a second prominent trial in 1994, in which Socialist Party leader Fatos Nano was convicted and sentenced to 12 years in prison. According to Human Rights Watch, the "proceedings before and during the [Nano] trial contained many irregularities, suggesting political motives for his conviction and harsh sentence."
The Albanian judiciary itself has come under attack in the past year, culminating in a parliamentary debate over whether to lift the immunity of the Chief Justice of the Court of Cassation, Zef Brozi, so that criminal charges could be brought against him. The turbulence that infected the judicial system in 1994 raises important questions concerning the separation of powers in the Albanian polity. Three members of the Constitutional Court resigned prior to the national referendum concerning the draft Constitution. Their resignations were reportedly prompted by the failure of the Constitutional Court to consider the question of whether the president's decision to hold a public referendum on the draft Constitution, rather than submit the draft to Parliament, was valid under Albanian law. Before the resignations, the Constitutional Court issued an opinion strongly critical of the High Council of Justice's decisions regarding the transfer and dismissal of a district court judge. The year closed with the attempt to remove the immunity of Chief Justice Brozi underway. (In February 1995,
CRITIQUE 1994
by a narrow margin in a secret ballot. Parliament voted against lifting Judge Brozi's immunity.)
While a ftill analysis of these cases is beyond the scope of both the State Department report and this Critique, the report's failure to address the ongoing challenges to the judiciary is a glaring omission. As noted last year, the High Council of Justice, which is headed by the president, has been accused of removing judges without due process for political reasons. The Constitutional Court's November 1994 decision in fact found that the High Council's decision to remove one judge violated the right to "a proper legal proceeding" afforded by the Law on Fundamental Freedoms. This decision prompted the High Council of Justice to adopt guidelines for its operations in early 1995. However, the judge who brought the case has not been reinstated, nor have any of the other judges removed by the High Council.
Putting aside the substance of the charges against Chief Justice Brozi, the case threw the Albanian judicial system into a crisis of unparalleled proportions. Brozi was accused of issuing an improper order permitting the release of a Greek businessman after a three-member panel of the Court of Cassation had overturned his conviction by a lower court. The Constitutional Court found in January that Chief Justice Brozi's immunity did not extend to acts contrary to law because such acts could not be considered to be within the scope of his duties. This narrow reading of judicial immunity, under which little beyond actually authoring opinions is protected, portends future threats to the independence of the Albanian judiciary. Six members of the Cassation Court issued a public statement criticizing the release order signed by the Chief Justice, thereby inserting themselves into an ongoing legal controversy.
The problems in the judiciary are magnified by the number of inexperienced and ill-trained legal professionals who have assumed high-level positions in the judicial system. A number of the graduates of a six-month legal training course — all of whom subsequently passed their law faculty examinations, despite a failure rate of one in three among students completing the regular four-year academic course — have been appointed
_ALBANIA
as prosecutors and judges. They include two members of the three-judge panel that heard the Omonia case. Given concerns that enrollment in the six-month course was largely controlled by the ruling Democratic Party, the appointment of those who obtained their positions as a result adds further cause for concern about judicial independence.
The upheaval in the judicial system during 1994 was accompanied by continuing concerns over abuses of authority by Albanian police. The report recognizes that "instances of police abuse continued" in 1994 and that "[pjolice continue to beat detainees, sometimes causing deaths." Human Rights Watch has reported that "a number of people died as a result of police violence, while many other complained of abuse during detention" in 1994.
The most notorious example of police violence was the arrest and beating of three gay activists in October 1994. The report records this event, as well as the Ministry of the Interior's claim that no investigation of the incident had been initiated because no complaint had been filed. The Ministry of the Interior echoed this response with regard to another incident of police violence, in which six members of a family were mistreated by police in Fushe-Kruja. The ministry's response in these cases is wholly inadequate: the reluctance of those already beaten by police to return to the scene of their abuse in order to complain is not sufficient basis for police authorities to fail to investigate abuses of which they are clearly aware.
The authority exercised by the National Intelligence Service (ShIK) is also of great concern. The report notes that "[tjhere are rumors, but no evidence, that ShIK exceeded its mandate." In fact, plainclothes police who identified themselves as the "criminal police" but were most probably members of ShIK, were responsible for detaining and harassing Journalists, spectators and an ethnic Greek Member of Parliament in conjunction with the Omonia trial. Minnesota Advocates for Human Rights found that "[s]ecurity measures in and outside the courthouse, including numerous searches, detentions and arrests, fostered an atmosphere incompatible with a truly accessible, public proceeding."
CRITIQUE 1994
The fact that ShIK continues to hold the files maintained by the Sigurimi, its notorious predecessor, adds to concern over the excessive, largely unchecked authority enjoyed by ShIK. The report again notes this year that, according to senior government officials, the files are not intact and "may have been tampered with in the final days of the Communist regime." The report adds that the Albanian Helsinki Committee "is concerned that information from the files may have been used for political purposes." ShIK's control over the files, never an acceptable solution, has now continued for more than four years. The government's failure to address this problem lends credence to reports that the files are being maintained and used to further political objectives. According to Human Rights Watch, "opponents of the government occasionally found that portions of [the Sigunmi's] files were selectively used against them and published in the pro-governmental newspapers." Legislation mandating a more neutral depository for the files, at a minimum, is long overdue.
The report also fails to convey fully the continuing threat to the fundamental rights of freedom of speech and association in Albania. While acknowledging that journalists were arrested and tried under slander and libel laws, the report contends that "none was prosecuted under the 1993 press law." In fact, in two cases cited in the report's next paragraph, two journalists were charged as publishers under the press law: Illyrian Zhupa of the opposition paper Populli Po and Shyqyri Meka of the opposition paper Zeri i Popullit (misidentified in the report as working for Aleanca). The author of the letter Meka was cited for publishing, Luftar Matohiti, was himself sentenced to a two-month prison sentence and was also pardoned by President Berisha on May 1, 1994. In addition, in a case not mentioned by the report, Fatmir Zanaj of Zeri i Popullit was convicted and given a suspended sentence of three months in jail and one year's probation for writing an article critical of the Albanian armed forces. More insidious threats to freedom of the press in 1994 included the frequent investigations of opposition newspapers by the financial police, the sealing of Koha Jone's offices for alleged failure to make payments due to the state-owned printing facility, and physical attacks on journalists Gjergj Zefi and Theodor Keko of Aleanca by unidentified persons.
_ALBANIA
As the report notes, a large number of journalists were detained on August 15, 1994, the opening day of the Omonia trial. The police, who alleged that an illegal demonstration was being held, moved on to the scene in large numbers and took more than 20 journalists and spectators from the scene in police vans. According to a report on the trial by Minnesota Advocates for Human Rights, which sent a delegation to monitor the proceedings, [pjolice used excessive force "in breaking up the demonstration." The report states that "international human rights observers witnessed police severely beating at least one person who was offering no resistance." The person in question, who was surrounded by six members of the Albanian police, forced to the ground, and repeatedly kicked, was holding a camera.
In addition to the arrests on August 15, numerous journalists, both foreign and domestic, were harassed and questioned while attempting to cover the Omonia trial. Plainclothes police who identified themselves as members of the "criminal police" stopped numerous Greek observers and at least one foreign journalist. So-called "criminal police" also detained three Greek and Cypriot journalists on August 24; a number of other Greek journalists were reportedly detained on September 6 and 8.
While it appears that the government's eagerness to prosecute journalists under the press law and the Albanian Penal Code has lessened in the past year, the fact that journalists still face penalties undoubtedly has a chilling effect upon freedom of the press in Albania. Of particular concern is the selective enforcement of existing laws: every prosecution to date has involved journalists opposing or criticizing the government. Until the onerous provisions of the Penal Code and press law are repealed, freedom of speech in Albania remains provisional, regardless of the number of people prosecuted under those laws.
The report notes that "only state-run radio and television provide domestic programming, but many municipalities offer locally fed international programs via satellite." While international programming is available in many areas, this fact does nothing to alleviate the ongoing
CRITIQUE 1994
government monopoly on the only source for domestic news: Albanian radio and television. According to the report, "[ojpposition critics of the Government continued to allege that television serves the interest of the ruling Democratic Party." The State Department's resort to a third-person source for this finding is indefensible. In the very next sentence, the report records an example of misleading television coverage which promoted the government's position. Even a casual observer of the Albanian nightly news is easily able to ascertain the ruling party's continued dominance of state television; a simple survey of the time spent on "pro-government" stories compared with coverage of opposition parties would undoubtedly confirm that conclusion. The report fails entirely to discuss the impact of this monopoly on coverage of domestic events, given Albania's enduring legacy of state control and recent attacks upon freedom of expression in the print media. It also fails to mention the fact that Albanian police quickly squelched two attempts to establish private radio stations during 1994, despite the fact that the programming of the private stations concentrated on music and not politics.
Freedom of association was also routinely assailed in Albania during the past year. Human Rights Watch/Helsinki "observed the continual harassment of the political opposition." Opposition parties were sometimes denied permission to hold public meetings. Excessive force was used to disperse unauthorized public meetings, such as the demonstration outside the Omonia trial.
On balance, however, there has been a substantial improvement in Albania's human rights record since 1990. This improvement has also benefited ethnic Greeks, Albania's largest minority group. However, there are still significant human rights issues in the area of minority rights protection. The report's summary of continuing concerns in the area of Greek-language education is largely accurate. In addition, the impact of the inadequacies in the Albanian legal system described above is particularly harsh upon members of the Greek minority who are, according to Human Rights Watch, "particularly vulnerable to government abuse."
As the report accurately notes, "[ejthnic tensions were exacerbated"
_ALBANIA
by the arrest and convictions of five members of the ethnic Greek political organization Omonia on charges of treason and illegal weapons possession. Police harassment of Greek observers and journalists in connection with the Omonia trial also contributed to concerns by ethnic Greeks over their treatment by Albanian authorities. The Omonia defendants were arrested in the wake of an attack on an Albanian military post near the Greek border. While a Greek extremist group calling itself the Northern Epirus Liberation Front claimed responsibility for the incident, Albania blamed the attack on a "Greek terrorist commando." The Omonia trial also led to a marked deterioration in relations between Greece and Albania, capped by Greece's expulsion of about 70,000 Albanian emigrants. According to Human Rights Watch, many of those expelled complained of brutal treatment by Greek authorities and the "Greek minority in the south of Albania complained of a strong presence by the Albanian secret police, which contributed to an atmosphere of fear."
In general, while the 1994 State Department report provides a largely accurate snapshot of the Albanian human rights situation, it underemphasizes Albania's lack of headway in human rights protection by failing to "connect the dots" between the many instances of abuse reported. Although Albania has made significant progress since democratic reforms began in 1990, the promise of Albania's initial efforts has given way to stagnation in the human rights field. Albania continues to reform its laws to conform to international standards, but implementation of newly adopted provisions protecting human rights remains questionable. Continuing police abuse, restrictions on freedom of the press and of association, and threats to the independence of the judiciary all point to Albania's need to renew its efforts to ensure the protection of fundamental human rights.
CRITIQUE 1994
10
