ARGENTINA
The State Department's 1994 report on human rights practices in Argentina is a significant improvement over reports from prior years. Instead of relying solely on the formal existence of democratic institutions, the report addresses whether those institutions are protecting basic rights, and often accurately concludes they are not. For the most part, the State Department supports its conclusions with specific examples that provide depth and context, and for the most part addresses the institutional weaknesses underlying the violations observed, particularly the absence of a strong and independent judiciary. In contrast to previous years, the 1994 report appropriately emphasizes particular concerns, for example that young people are often the targets of repression, particularly beatings and summary killings by the police, and criticizes serious overcrowding and rights abuses within Argentina's prison system.
Nonetheless, several material omissions undermine the report's overall objectivity and detract from the impact of the issues it does discuss. The crucial omissions relate to the government's attempts to Justify human rights abuses committed by the military during the period 1976-1983, and its ill-fated efforts to promote and enforce a form of national amnesia about that era. The report fails to emphasize the government's continued efforts to silence its critics, particularly Argentina's independent press. It unfortunately also ignores the continued intimidation of lawyers, witnesses and judges in politically sensitive cases by organized but unidentified forces. These developments significantly poison the atmosphere for human rights protection, and the government's failure to effectively defend the free exercise of fundamental rights requires international reproach. The State Department's continued failure to call attention to these issues is a significant shortcoming in an otherwise reputable report.
One of the Menem government's signatures has unfortunately been its repeated efforts to discourage debate about Argentina's dark record of human rights abuses during the military governments of 1976-1983 and its failure to comply with the call from the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights for investigations to account for the fate of the
11
CRITIQUE 1994
"disappeared." Despite a flurry of laws, decrees and pardons in 1989-1991, which put an end to virtually all human rights prosecutions in Argentine courts, the issue remains very much alive in the memories of victims, their families and the military, and continues to influence current human rights policy. When President Menem accepted an award from the Organization of American States in March for his promotion of peace, democracy and human rights, he once again defended his pardons of military officers as a necessary step toward national reconciliation. However, that policy, which Menem imposed with minimal public consultation, remained under widespread attack within Argentina throughout 1994. The issue has refused to go away, even though the report fails to discuss it.
In February, the government interfered directly in a human rights investigation undertaken by the Italian government — an incident that the State Department does not mention. Under intense pressure from the military. President Menem directed his Justice Minister to obtain an injunction against an Italian judge and prosecutor who were investigating, in connection with the proceedings in Italy, the disappearance and torture of over 90 Italians (including Argentines with dual citizenship) during the period of military rule. Although Argentina signed a treaty of judicial cooperation with Italy, President Menem declared that the investigation of human rights cases was "totally closed" and that all of the 89 present and former military officers being investigated "had already been pardoned." The Italian court was effectively foreclosed from taking official testimony from victims and family members on Argentine soil. Nonetheless, several victims and family members continued to cooperate with the Italian court, and the Italian prosecutor vowed to pursue the case. The report creates the misleading impression that international human rights investigations "faced no restrictions" during 1994.
The report does mention the refusal of the Argentine Senate in October to approve the promotion of two Navy officers after they admitted to having participated in torture during the military dictatorship but fails to emphasize the significance of this vote. This historic assertion of independence by Argentine legislators, including many within the
12
ARGENTINA
president's own party, was a repudiation of the argument that torture was a part of every military officer's duties. The military was infuriated by the Senate's decision. Shortly thereafter, President Menem publicly justified past efforts to "annihilate subversion" and warned that the country should not dwell on the question of torture. As a result of his statements, the president was expelled from the non-governmental Permanent Assembly for Human Rights, of which he had been an honorary member. These events illustrate not only how explosive the issue of accountability for past abuses remains in Argentina, but also how likely it is that such questions will continue to arise as other military officers come up for promotion.
The report's discussion of freedom of the press is accurate as far as it goes, but does not convey the extent to which Argentina's independent press remains threatened by official efforts to limit criticism of the government. While the "number of reports of attacks or threats against journalists decreased in 1994," nobody was ever held accountable for the explosion of violence against the press in 1993, despite the appointment of a special prosecutor to address that issue, and despite promises to investigate such attacks "to their ultimate consequences." As is too often the case in Argentina, such investigations lead nowhere. In addition, the government continued to sponsor legislation that would vastly increase the penalties for slander and libel and would require the media to purchase expensive defamation insurance. Although the press continues to operate with great independence and vigor in Argentina, it does so in a hostile climate.
The report also fails to emphasize the fact that unidentified forces continued to threaten and harass government critics, private attorneys, government prosecutors and judges throughout 1994. In April, the newly appointed Ombudsman for Buenos Aires reported that he was receiving intimidating telephone calls daily, that he had received a bomb threat in his offices, and that a photograph portraying his head in the telescopic scope of a gun had been sent to his home. In the same month, a former prosecutor reported that his family had been threatened in connection with an investigation of bribery by a government official, and the judge hearing
13
CRITIQUE 1994
that case was also threatened. In June, a judge hearing a controversial case involving twins who were abducted during the military dictatorship received a package at his home containing two hand grenades. That same month, the trial of police officers accused of summarily executing three teenagers was interrupted by a bomb scare. In August, the Buenos Aires Bar Association reported that a lawyer representing the grandparents of a child abducted during the military dictatorship had been threatened by persons identifying themselves as members of a "retired task force." In October, a student leader was beaten by four hooded individuals after attending a memorial march for students who disappeared during the period of military rule. The report should have discussed these incidents and should have insisted that the government identify and punish those responsible. The absence of any meaningful response by the government to the continued intimidation of persons involved in politically sensitive cases continues to threaten the free exercise of fundamental rights.
The report correctly observes that politically motivated "disappearances" are largely a problem of the past. However, it tends to mask the continued recourse by the police to disappearance as a means of escaping accountability for the use of excessive force. When people die as a resuh of beatings while in police custody, their bodies are sometimes hidden by police in unmarked graves to avoid detection. The police then deny that they ever had the victim in custody. As was the case in 1992 and 1993, such a case arose in 1994. In February, Diego Rodriguez Laguens, a 25-year-old forestry expert working for the German government, disappeared in Jujuy province. In March, his body was discovered in an unmarked grave, where he had been buried by the police even though his clothing still contained identification papers. His family alleged that he had been beaten to death while in police custody. Resort to this new form of disappearance by Argentina's police forces warrants vigorous criticism and special attention.
Finally, the report mentions but fails to analyze President Menem's efforts to consolidate control over the numerous security forces operating within Argentina, and his appointment of a former military officer as a "super-secretary" for internal security. This initiative was first announced
14
ARGENTINA
shortly after riots erupted at the end of 1993 in various northern cities. Government critics charge that the new interna! security apparatus is being used to monitor political opponents, particularly in Argentina's poorer rural provinces, which are often hostile to the government's economic policies.
Despite these flaws, the State Department report presents a clear and generally accurate view of the human rights situation in Argentina during 1994.
15
CRITIQUE 1994
16
