BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
The State Department's 1994 report on Bosnia and Herzegovina (hereinafter Bosnia) continues the trend set by its predecessors in providing an ambitious and generally forthright account of the human rights tragedy which continues to unfold across that wartom land. In several ways, the 1994 report improves on those of the two preceding years. First, it is bolder in naming individuals who may be accountable for committing war crimes and crimes against humanity. For example, the name of Serbian Democratic Party (SDS) leader Radovan Karadzic appears numerous times in connection with various atrocities committed by Bosnian Serb forces, while Bosnian Serb paramilitary leaders such as the notorious "Arkan" and "Colonel" Vojkan Djurkovic are mentioned in connection with specific incidents. Second, the 1994 report makes an admirable attempt to support allegations of atrocities with details and anecdotes. This welcome development is directly responsive to one of the criticisms made in last year's Critique.
In other respects, however, the 1994 report is disappointingly weak. The overarching problem stems from the report's failure to place the litany of human rights abuses which it recites in any historical context. Three years after the shooting began in the Balkans, the conflict has shifted and evolved. This has several implications. First, the kinds of human rights abuses that were extensive earlier in the war (such as the extensive use of rape in detention camps) may have diminished, while "ethnic cleansing" is committed by different means (such as widespread sniping and shelling). Still other abuses, meanwhile, may have emerged on a significant scale for the first time in 1994 (such as widespread attacks on the provision of medical and humanitarian aid). Human rights monitors must have the analytical insight to identify these changes and the reporting flexibility to capture their significance. The 1994 report fails on both counts.
Second, the victims of human rights violations in Bosnia have endured the horrors and deprivations of war for three years. Reporting on the abuses they suffer cannot be a one-dimensional exercise. In addition
17
CRITIQUE 1994
to the victims' immediate pain or loss is a second tier of trauma that is directly related to the duration of the conflict. The report fails in its analysis to capture this longer-term harm. This is particularly true in the case of children, as will be discussed below.
The third major problem with the report is that it suffers from being poorly organized and coordinated. It reads more like a disjointed laundry list of facts and atrocities than a well-conceptualized analysis of interrelated and interdependent events. This is largely due to the rigid format to which the country reports are required to conform, with a relatively brief overview followed by "categories" of human rights violations. As previous editions of the Critique have noted, this structure encourages an atomized presentation of human rights data rather than conveying a "story" in which the whole is truly the sum of the parts. This structural disadvantage can be — and in past reports has been — somewhat offset by good organization and tight writing. The 1994 report, however, could have done a better job of summarizing and emphasizing key themes and issues at the beginning and then using the categories and subcategories to illustrate them later. The 1993 report did an excellent job in this respect, and consequently was a much more coherent and powerful document, despite being much less detailed.
Fourth and finally, the 1994 report seems to understate the extent of the human rights abuses perpetrated by the Bosnian Muslim and Croatian factions. This is in line with the Clinton administration's generally sympathetic stance toward these factions as 1994 progressed.
The report gets off to a weak start with a dry and disjointed attempt to recount political and military developments in Bosnia during 1994. Unlike its predecessor, which opened with a concise paragraph summarizing the country's political history and setting forth in strong and evocative terms the Bosnian Serbs' "brutal campaign of terror," "acts of genocide" and "human rights abuses," the 1994 report opens with a confused recitation of Bosnia's history and current political status, making no mention of human rights conditions.
18
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
The report then presents the remainder of its overview of the year around an account of the various forces and factions involved in the conflict. Within these discussions of the major "players," in turn, are stuffed random facts about the political and military events of the year. The net result is that neither the chronology nor the priority of events is presented to the reader in a comprehensive fashion. Thus, for example, when later reference is made to an atrocity that took place in connection with the siege of a particular city, the reader has no clear idea of when, where, why, or possibly even by whom the city in question was attacked. For example, the report refers to the lethal beating of a prisoner from Gorazde "following the Serbian assault of Gorazde in May," yet nowhere earlier in the text has there been any description of this important Serbian assault. The 1993 report, by contrast, gave a clear, chronological recapitulation of the political and military events of the preceding year, with explanations of the various individual and institutional players and their complicity in human rights violations woven in logically throughout this summary. The effect was to give the reader a chronologically coherent and thematically organized backdrop against which to read the remainder of the report.
The 1994 report would have benefited by opening with a discussion of the continuing siege of Sarajevo and its mostly Muslim inhabitants. By early January, according to the UN Special Rapporteur, the citizens of Sarajevo were enduring an average of 1,000 shell or rocket impacts a day. In late January, the Clinton administration reluctantly signed onto a NATO ultimatum ordering the Serbs to pull their weaponry out of Sarajevo and place it under UN supervision or be subjected to NATO air attacks. On February 17, in a deal brokered by Russia, the Serbs agreed to do so and a weapons exclusion zone was created around Sarajevo. For the next several months, the citizens of Sarajevo enjoyed a general ceasefire and relative peace. As the Special Rapporteur described it, "[b]y the summer of 1994, essential services were being restored, commercial life was returning, the black market was in decline, bars and cafes were again open, people could walk the streets in relative safety, and cultural life, which had never been dormant, was vibrant."
19
CRITIQUE 1994
In late February and early March, in probably the most important and positive development of the year, the Bosnian Croats and Muslims signed a ceasefire agreement and formed a new alliance, the "Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina." As the report correctly observes, human rights abuses between Croats and Muslims in Federation areas of central and southwestern Bosnia-Herzegovina decreased substantially following the formation of the alliance.
The spring of 1994 was marked by a flurry of international diplomatic and military activity — often of a conflicting and contradictory character — but little or none of this is mentioned in the report. On at least four occasions between March and August, US warplanes under NATO command bombed Serbian weaponry or shot down Serbian planes in order to enforce compliance with weapons exclusions zones, or "safe areas." As Human Rights Watch noted, however, the UN and NATO were at odds over the use of force in Bosnia throughout the year, with NATO generally more willing to use force when UN troops or safe areas were attacked, while the Russians and the commander of the UN forces were opposed to expanding the use of force or the role of NATO in the conflict. By late spring and summer, the UN had backed away from such military actions, and Serb leaders grew increasingly confident in their ability once more to defy the will of the international community.
Thus, although the spring of 1994 was marked by notable calm in former hot spots such as Sarajevo and Mostar, grim reports of new ethnic cleansing campaigns by Bosnian Serbs began to surface. The most brutal of these took place in the Banja Luka region of northwestern Bosnia, the Bijeljina area of northeast Bosnia and the enclave of Gorazde in central Bosnia. As noted above, the report fails entirely to discuss the Bosnian Serb campaign against Gorazde, which the Special Rapporteur described as follows:
The early stages of the Gorazde offensive were marked by the overrunning of a number of villages. By 5 March, some 13 had been taken in the Drina valley. The assaults on the villages involved widespread terrorization of the
20
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
residents, eviction from and destruction of their homes, and the killing of livestock. Eye-witnesses have also attested to the commission of rape by groups of soldiers. The attacks on the villages of Stanici and Kordici are indicative of the practices of advancing troops. In these villages, a number of residents were summarily executed including elderly women and a handicapped man. Bodies of the dead were subsequently mutilated and decapitated. The Special Rapporteur has received information that tank rounds were fired directly into homes. At all stages of the offensive, villagers fled in fear of their lives, leaving behind homes, land and possessions.
By mid-year, Bosnian Serbs had resumed their terrorization of Sarajevo as well, while the end of the year was marked by a vicious attack by Serbs on Bihac in northwestern Bosnia. The situation grew so grim that the Special Rapporteur concluded at the year's end that the current wave of displacement caused either by force or fear in areas under Bosnian Serb control was the greatest since the summer of 1992.
The report generally deals accurately and aggressively with the issue of "ethnic cleansing." It correctly states that Serbian "ethnic cleansing" slowed but did not cease in 1994 and goes on, in an improvement over reports in earlier years, to describe certain of these campaigns in greater detail. The 1994 report highlights the campaigns in Banja Luka, Bijeljina and Rogatica and describes Serbian "expulsion" tactics such as coercing property owners to hand over their property titles, robbing them of their money and belongings, demanding "fees" to transport them into exile, taking men to work-camps to dig trenches along battle lines, thrusting military-aged men into "work-camps" and using people as human shields.
The report also accurately attributes some of these tactics to Serbian military and paramilitary groups acting at the command of Radovan Karadzic's Serbian Republic government and, in a welcome
21
CRITIQUE 1994
development, specifically identifies paramilitary "colonel" Vojkan Djurkovic as responsible for the displacement of many of the 6,000 people removed from the Bijeljina region between July and October. The report also recites powerful statistics that convey the extent of the displacement and upheaval caused by the cumulative effect of three years of war: in Serb-held northeastern Bosnia, the population of non-Serbs has been decimated from 837,000 to 80,000; in eastern Bosnia, the number has declined from 300,000 to 10,000; and in the northwestern areas of Banja Luka and Prijedor, only 17,000 out of 537,000 remain.
Again, however, the impact of this reporting is seriously diluted by the fragmented way in which it is presented. Descriptions of "ethnic cleansing" campaigns appear in at least three different places, undermining both the magnitude and the urgency of the situation. While, as noted above, this is largely due to the rigid format of the Country Reports, this year's drafters could have tried harder to draw links throughout the report between the various categories of human rights violations and the overarching phenomenon of "ethnic cleansing." In its introduction, the report accurately notes that for two years Bosnian Serbs have "laid siege to cities, indiscriminately shelled civilian inhabitants, withheld food deliveries and utilities so as to starve and freeze residents, executed noncombatants, [run] detention camps . . . employed rape as a tool of war to terrorize people, forced large numbers of civilians to flee to other regions, razed villages to prevent the return of displaced persons, and interfered with international relief efforts including attacks on relief personnel," — all in pursuit of the goal of "ethnic cleansing." Yet the later discussion of various campaigns and atrocities fails to reemphasize the links between these campaigns, the terror tactics employed and the overarching goal of ethnic annihilation.
There is also a distinct lack of analysis of the ways in which ethnic cleansing campaigns carried out in 1994 differ from those of previous years. By way of contrast, consider the following observation of the Special Rapporteur concerning the slaughter in the northeastern part of Bosnia:
22
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
Although the details of intimidation suffered do not vary greatly from incidents already described in previous reports of the Special Rapporteur, certain aspects of the displacements from areas such as Bijeljina and Jingo call for attention. First, the displacements are primarily of women, children and men of military age .... Secondly, the victims of the displacements are transported to the area of the line of confrontation with government forces, and sometimes after long and arduous delays, are forced to traverse the "no man's land" on foot. On at least one occasion, in June of 1994, their progress was accelerated by the firing of weapons over their heads.
In its discussion of the excessive use of force and violations of humanitarian law, the report essentially restricts its comments to the wartime phenomenon of the targeting of civilian populations and humanitarian aid convoys. The report accurately observes that the Bosnian Serb Army (BSA) continued to target noncombatant and populated areas "in order to maintain a constant atmosphere of terror and vulnerability." It also notes that sniping and mortar and automatic weapons attacks caused the deaths of hundreds of Bosnian civilians between January and October in cities and villages such as Sarajevo, Gorazde, Mostar, Olovo, Tuzla, Visoko, Vares and Breza. The report fails, however, to convey the intensifying level of such attacks as 1994 wore on. Although numerous ceasefires were established in Gorazde, for example, beginning in late April, both government and Bosnian Serb forces continued to engage in military activity. The Bosnian Serb forces repeatedly attacked both local civilians and UN personnel, particularly in July and August, when, as the Special Rapporteur reported, "the use of weaponry such as anti-aircraft guns and mortars resulted in a daily toll of dead and injured civilians."
Addressing the situation in Sarajevo in November 1994, the Special Rapporteur said:
23
CRITIQUE 1994
[A]ttacks, especially by snipers, never ceased entirely, and since early August have escalated in frequency and deadly effect. The attacks have persisted despite the establishment of anti-sniping agreements such as that of August 1994. On 3 October 1994, there were 2,160 firing incidents (from both sides), the highest number for any single day since the cease-fire agreement of February 1994. The extent of heavy weapons attacks has also increased, especially since mid-August. Attacks occur in both the city center and the suburbs and have been directed at residences, pedestrians on the street and moving vehicles, such as trams packed with people.. . . On a number of occasions the Bosnian Serb de facto authorities have failed to give assurances that they would not target public gatherings or have actually threatened such attack. Two more notable instances of such practices were in the context of the May Day workers' gathering in the city centre and the proposed sports stadium celebration with Pope John Paul II, which was to have occurred in early September 1994.
The report omits any discussion of the intense Bosnian Serb attacks on several other towns later in 1994. It makes no mention of the vicious attacks perpetrated on towns in the Bihac region of northwestern Bosnia in late November and December. The Special Rapporteur reported that Bosnian Serb troops destroyed villages encountered on their march to Bihac and then "pummeled" Bihac with shells and missiles causing extensive injuries and death. On December 13, a four-year-old child was killed and two civilians injured when a mortar blew up near the Croatian Defense Council (HVO) Brigade headquarters in Bihac. On a single day in March, approximately 1,300 shells landed in the town of Maglaj, some hitting a health-care center and killing five medical personnel. The hospital in the town of Travnik was also targeted by Bosnian Serbs during July and August. In Srebrenica and Tuzla, local civilians and UN personnel were targeted by sniper fire and artillery attacks.
24
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
The report also fails to convey the increasing sense of hopelessness and desperation these late fall campaigns produced among the Bosnian people, particularly when juxtaposed against the optimism that had characterized the spring. By December, for example, the then-daily attacks by Serbian snipers and missiles on Sarajevo's city center led the Special Rapporteur to conclude pessimistically that, "[t]he heightened scale of attacks and threats to the people of Sarajevo and such disappointments as the effective prevention of the visit of Pope John Paul II have all but reversed the dramatic improvements of last summer. It can now be said with certainty that the people of that city are facing winter with a sense of hopelessness as acute as ever in the present war and with a heightened sense of having been abandoned by the international community."
The report also draws attention to the BSA practice of firing directly on humanitarian aid convoys and the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) troops escorting them, particularly those headed for Sarajevo and the other "safe areas" of eastern Bosnia. It does not say, however, that such attacks prevented 50% of UNHCR food deliveries targeted at eastern Bosnia from being delivered in September and October, as well as 30% of the food destined for Gorazde, Srebrenica and Zepa in November. Nor does it say that Bosnian Serb authorities threatened UNHCR officials with continued interference unless areas under Serb control also received such supplies.
The report neglects to discuss another important, and apparently new, terror tactic employed by Serbian forces in direct violation of international humanitarian law. This is the direct targeting of hospitals and interference with attempts to bring medical care to the wounded. Kesovo hospital in Sarajevo was targeted in December 1993, causing the deaths of several nurses. The hospital in Garrets was hit at least three times in April 1994, causing deaths and injuries. Amnesty International has reported that a makeshift hospital located in an apartment building in Gorazde was also hit, killing at least 20 patients, most of whom were there to be treated for shell wounds.
25
CRITIQUE 1994
Similarly, the report makes only cursory mention of the Serbian practice of strangling cities by attacking electricity and water supplies. During their assault on Gorazde for example, Bosnian Serbs gained control of the water station outside the city, halted the water supply and subsequently destroyed the facility. As the Special Rapporteur noted, the lack of running water drove people to line up for water at wells where they were then exposed to sniper fire and killed. In November, Serb forces shut off the gas supply to Sarajevo.
The report notes that approximately 500 acknowledged "conflict-related prisoners" are being detained in jails and prisons on both the Federation and Bosnian Serb sides of the conflict, with 15-20 detention or prison camps in Serbian-held territory and ten on the Federation side. The report also discusses the ongoing practice by both government and Bosnian Serb forces of holding prisoners of war for exchange. The most egregious aspect of this practice is the Serbian authorities' policy of holding "ethnically cleansed" Bosnian Muslims to be exchanged for Bosnian Serb prisoners of war (POWs). To its credit, the report states explicitly that this practice constitutes another form of "ethnic cleansing" and quotes the claim of a Western relief worker that one of the main goals of Serbian "ethnic cleansing" campaigns in 1994 was the creation of a readymade pool of non-Serbs who could be exchanged for Serb POWs.
The report gives an exceedingly cursory and disappointing account of the human rights violations inflicted on women in Bosnia in 1994, noting only that women "continued to be subjected to rape and other forms of physical abuse." Unlike the 1993 report, it does not identify rape as a tactic of terrorization and "ethnic cleansing." The 1994 report also fails to discuss the extent to which rape is used and never ascribes blame for rapes that have occurred. Although the Special Rapporteur conceded that it is difficult to chart the extent of rape and sexual abuse, in view of the difficulty in gathering reports or investigating violations, he also noted his perception that such abuses remain widespread. For example, in June 1994, during the Bosnian Serb campaign to cleanse the town of Banja Luka, the adult members of a Bosnian family were said to have been sexually abused by Bosnian Serb neighbors, effectively forcing the Muslim
26
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
family to flee.
Although the report makes several important observations about the plight of children across Bosnia and Herzegovina, it gives a disappointingly one-dimensional account of their sufferings. This again exemplifies the failure of the report to grasp the nuances of a human rights issue whose importance and egregiousness has grown as the war has worn on. The report is simply wrong in stating that children do not face discrimination as such. As the Special Rapporteur remarked in his March 1994 report:
The accounts [from a Bosnian Serb detention centre near Zvomik] indicate that children as young as four years old were beaten and sexually abused. Boys as young as 12 and 13 years old have also been victims of imprisonment and torture in detention dentres. Specific accounts of children released from detention centres at Dretelj and Gabela in western Herzegovina in late August 1993 indicate that some of them were forced by Bosnian Croat guards to beat their fathers.
In central Bosnia, in areas of active conflict such as Vares, Bugojno and Kisejiak, there have been severe allegations of rough handling and brief periods of detention of boys as young as nine. Similarly, it has been alleged that 12-year-old boys have been taken with other prisoners to dig trenches on the front lines.
To its credit, the report does address the very important issue of children being singled out as targets by Bosnian Serb snipers. However, it mentions it only briefly, and in a disturbingly understated tone. For example, the report notes that an "inordinate" number of children were killed by snipers in 1994, confirming a "suspicion" that Serbian snipers were targeting children. Contrast this with the following passage from the Special Rapporteur's March 1994 report:
27
CRITIQUE 1994
The most basic of human rights, the right to life, has been constantly disregarded. In many reported incidents, children have been the primary victims of sniper and mortar attacks. Recently, on 23 January 1994, four children were killed in a playground on Mostar, and four in Tuzla, while three mortar bombs killed six children in Sarajevo on 22 January 1994. Data quoted by [United Nations International Children's Relief Fund] UNICEF indicated that since the beginning of the war close to 16,000 children have been killed in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Large numbers of children have suffered direct injuries from bombing, shelling and sniper fire. Hospitals are often unable to provide adequate treatment. Many children have suffered amputations, bums or the loss of sight or hearing, with only limited treatment.
The report also correctly comments on the long-term harm that children suffer from war-related deprivations and continuing psychological trauma. However, the single paragraph devoted to the subject is woefully inadequate to convey the immediate and long-term impact of three years of war. As the Special Rapporteur commented in his March 1994 report:
UNICEF estimates that there are close to 281,000 children living under the constant shelling of their residential areas, and forced to endure artillery exchanges between rival troops in the vicinity of their homes, attacks by armed forces on their homes and villages and shelling of their schools .... The violent death or injury of someone close to a child, in particular a parent or a care giver, especially if it is witnessed by the child, is known to bring about severe stress and depressive reactions. There are disturbing accounts from children who have not only witnessed their parents being killed, but have been actively forced to watch their killings or, at least, their suffering.
28
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
The report's final weakness stems from its understated criticism of the Bosnian government and its military services. It observes that the Bosnian Army (ABH) has generally respected the Geneva Conventions and the human rights of its citizens, and that, with the exception of some "homegrown" commando and foreign mercenary elements, it did not commit political or other extrajudicial killings. While it is certainly true that neither government nor Bosnian Croat forces have committed human rights violations on the same scale as the Bosnian Serbs, the report seems to gloss over some important episodes. With regard to government forces, for example, the Special Rapporteur made note of reliable reports emanating from Tuzia beginning in July of forced recruitment into the Bosnian Army of men of military age. The Special Rapporteur also noted that the government frequently prosecutes as draft evaders those Bosnian Serbs who attempt to cross confrontation lines. Reliable sources have also reported serious violations of due process of law for arrestees, particularly those of Bosnian Serb origin. Certain arrestees are held incommunicado for longer than the 72-hour period permitted by law in Bosnia and Herzegovina, particularly those detained for military discipline. There have also been credible reports of physical abuse, including torture, of some of these pre-trial detainees.
The State Department does not mention reports during the spring of 1994 of attacks by government forces on civilians in such places as Brcko. The Special Rapporteur reported that five people were killed and 18 wounded by shelling in mid-May 1994 and that fatal attacks by government forces on Bosnian Serbs in Brcko continued through June and July despite a ceasefire agreement. Similar incidents took place in Sarajevo, according to the Special Rapporteur, where government attacks launched from residential neighborhoods incited retaliatory attacks by Bosnian Serbs.
The report notes that the HVO was credibly accused of human rights abuses, although their behavior toward non-Croat populations improved after the Federation Agreements were signed. It fails, however, to mention the ongoing problems in the town of Mostar, where Muslims
29
CRITIQUE 1994
continued to experience human rights abuses both directly at the hands of Bosnian Croat forces and through the failure of local police to protect them. As the Special Rapporteur reported in November:
In one ten day period during May, for example, it is reported that some 10 Muslims were murdered in Western Mostar and that local police took no action to bring the perpetrators to justice. Since that time there have been repeated and reliable reports of the police and military either engaging in assaults on Muslim civilians or failing to act on information provided to arrest well-known troublemakers. There have also been repeated incidents of harassment and intimidation, including the looting of homes of Muslims by men in Croatian Defense Council (HVO) uniforms.
As a result of the climate of fear in western Mostar, there has been an ongoing displacement of Muslims into the eastern part of the city. A large proportion of the acts of violence perpetrated in western Mostar are said by local Bosnian Croat authorities to have been committed by uncontrolled gangs. However, it may be observed that the violence is not random and seems to be directed primarily against long-term Muslim residents. Bosnian Croats have also suffered when they opposed the harassment of Muslims.
The Special Rapporteur reported in January 1995 that the situation in Mostar continued to give cause for serious concern, largely due to the ongoing refusal of local Bosnian Croat authorities in the western part of the city to cooperate with officials in the eastern part.
In sum, the State Department 1994 report on human rights in Bosnia and Herzegovina is ambitious, accurate and generally commendable. It is bolder than its predecessors both in attributing blame and in attempting to illustrate allegations with details and anecdotes. Its
30
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
principal faults are fourfold: first, it fails to identify the ways in which human rights abuses in Bosnia have changed either in form or significance as the war has worn on; second, it fails to move beyond a one-dimensional analysis of human rights abuses to see the additional tier of longer-term damage that is being inflicted on the people of Bosnia; third, it lacks a level of organization that would have made the document more coherent, allowing it to tell a "story" rather than merely recite lists; and, finally, it understates the extent of human rights violations perpetuated by Bosnian Muslims and Croatians.
31
CRITIQUE 1994
32
