	CHINA
In May 1994, President Clinton removed human rights considerations from the annual review of China's most-favored-nation trading status. The premise was that "commercial engagement" would foster human rights progress more effectively than overt criticism or economic sanctions. Unfortunately, the past year has disproved this theory. Chinese authorities greeted the Clinton administration's retreat on human rights not with a reduction of violations, but with increased repression. After Clinton's choice became clear in the spring, China intensified the harassment of dissidents, proceeded with trials long delayed for their political sensitivity, and stalled on bilateral negotiations for prison visits.
The State Department's 1994 report on the People's Republic of China (PRC) is a critical and generally accurate portrayal of the numerous continuing human rights violations in the PRC. A particular strength of this year's report is the section on Tibet. Although the report fails to acknowledge the admission in 1994 by the Chinese Communist Party Central Committee of a controversial policy actively encouraging Chinese settlement in Tibet, it nevertheless provides a thorough and keenly critical commentary on the many human rights concerns in Tibet. The report also corrects factual errors noted in the 1993 edition of the Critique — for example, with regard to the legal character of "supervised residence" or other forms of extrajudicial controls, and the size of fines imposed upon illegal Chinese emigrants upon repatriation. The report also makes brief but welcome mention of the difficulties encountered by some defendants in trying to procure defense counsel in sensitive cases.
Nonetheless, the report suffers from a number of weaknesses. Unlike the more direct and hard-hitting 1993 report, this year's report strains to close its introduction on a positive note. While areas of genuine improvement should of course be acknowledged, the introduction lists some of the PRC's superficial concessions toward international human rights norms without providing any hint of their actual context or limited significance. The report also tends to offer information in a fragmented manner that fails to convey the true extent or patterns of abuses. This
33
CRITIQUE 1994
tendency is particularly noticeable in the report's treatment of freedom of speech and freedom of religion. In several instances, the report should have clarified that the specific cases it cites of due process deficiencies are not aberrations, but merely straightforward applications of inherently problematic laws and regulations. Finally, the report was particularly weak in its coverage of human rights issues related to China's substantial "floating population." The growing plight of these migrant laborers should have been highlighted in the report's discussions of arbitrary arrest and detention and worker rights as evidence of the simultaneous necessity — often denied by the PRC — for civil and political rights as well as economic, social and cultural rights.
With the oddly phrased assertion that "[t]he human rights situation in 1994 was . . . marked by the same diversity that characterizes other aspects of Chinese life," the report's introduction cites, inter alia, the PRC's release of several prominent political and religious prisoners, reaffirmation of its adherence to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, continuation of a human rights dialog with some foreign critics, and provision of limited information about the status of several hundred specific cases of international concern. Yet the very limited significance of these concessions is belied by specific evidence cited in the body of the report or available from reliable human rights monitors. For example, as the report notes, Chen Ziming and other activists released in the spring of 1994 later remained under close police surveillance and control. (Chen was, in fact, rearrested in June 1995 after authonties rescinded his parole.) The case of Wei Jingsheng exemplifies how a number of dissidents were subjected to repeated arbitrary arrest and detention in 1994 for their exercise of free speech and other fundamental rights. (Currently Wei is also being held in incommunicado detention.)
In actuality, these violations were quite consistent with the PRC's operative attitude toward the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. As the report later notes, Chinese officials do not actually accept a universal view of the human rights it has nominally "reaffirmed." Rather, they hold that the PRC's human rights record must be understood in relation to China's history and current stage of development. In an incident reported
34
_CHINA
by Human Rights Watch/Asia, Xu Liangying, Ding Zilin, Jiang Peikun and four other academics were placed under house arrest in March and April for petitioning the government to adhere to the Universal Declaration and release political prisoners.
Moreover, the Chinese government's supposed "continued dialog" with international critics in 1994 was often fruitless, as the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) found in its failure to get the PRC to agree to prison visits on terms in accordance with international standards. (As of July 1995, the Chinese government had indefinitely postponed fiirther negotiations with the ICRC). In a document that the report fails to mention, the UN Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial, Summary or Arbitrary Executions noted on December 14, 1994, that the PRC government had persistently failed to respond adequately to either credible allegations of death penalty abuses or the Special Rapporteur's own longstanding expression of interest in making an on-site visit for investigation.
The report's ambiguous reference to the "limited information" provided by the Chinese government on "several hundred cases of international concern" may refer to the PRC's February 1994 response to an official US inquiry made in October 1993 regarding 341 political and religious prisoners. Yet Human Rights Watch/Asia found that the PRC's vague and inaccurate accounting provided new information on only five people. In some cases, the accounting failed to indicate whether the persons concerned were even in or out of detention; in no case did the government indicate the location, charges or length of sentence for any of the persons believed detained. As for the PRC's June 1994 response to a US inquiry regarding 108 Tibetan political prisoners, the Tibet Information Network found that accounting to be similarly uninformative. Relative to the scores of new arrests in 1994 for peaceful political or religious activity, and the hundreds of political detainees who are still unaccounted for, the government's token gestures hardly support the suggestion that China's human rights situation in 1994 was truly "diverse."
In the area of free expression, the report rightly draws a mixed
35
CRITIQUE 1994
picture of repression and progress, but tends to downplay the problems and overestimate the improvements. Although the report is correct in noting the recent rapid growth of unofficial media in the PRC, its assertion of an accompanying reduction in the government's capacity for censorship is not borne out by the facts. While the report notes the January confiscation of 1,000 copies of the literary quarterly Tendencies and the brief detention of the magazine's publisher, it omits mention of an even larger raid in October. The Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) reported that in the October incident, Beijing police raided an underground publishing house, arrested fourteen people, and seized 4,000 books and journals — including five "reactionary" publications and many books deemed "defamatory" of government leaders and the party.
While the report mentions that officials in April announced a freeze on the overall number of licensed publications, it might also have cited Beijing media sources that subsequently described the nationwide restrictions as specifically targeting magazines publishing articles critical of the government and the Communist Party. And although the report is correct in noting the progressive spread of unofficial communications transmitted by satellite, it should have pointed out that satellite transmissions have not proven immune to government censorship. As CPJ reported, Chinese officials suspended CNN transmissions into Beijing hotels for a period of five days surrounding the anniversary of the June 1989 crackdown on the Tiananmen Square democracy movement.
The report offers no support for its assertion that there was "greater official tolerance for comment and criticism" in 1994 in the areas of economic policy and legal reform. Moreover, several incidents from the year argue against this conclusion. For example, the mainland paper Fazhi Ribao {Legal Daily) was told in September to cease publication of articles calling for an independent judiciary and for new legislation to protect the media from lawsuits and censorship. Government officials ordered the articles* authors to practice "self-criticism," and denounced the articles as "wrong," "biased" and a "bad influence." In one of two state secrecy cases mentioned by the report. Hong Kong reporter Xi Yang received a 12-year prison sentence for allegedly spying and stealing and publishing financial
36
_CHINA
and economic state secrets.
The report should also have emphasized the PRC*s greater use of state secrecy charges or other inflated criminal charges to control dissident expression generally. Although the report refers to only two state secrets cases, Amnesty International reports that a growing number of people were arrested and sentenced on state secrets charges in 1994. In mentioning the case of journalist Gao Yu, who was tried for "leaking state secrets" and convicted in camera without defense counsel, the report should have added that the court's refusal to dismiss the prosecution's case — even after it was found lacking in evidence — is expressly sanctioned by articles 108 and 123 of the Criminal Procedure Law.
With regard to the use of common criminal charges against political dissidents, the report again cites a few individual cases, but fails to identify the issue as a significant and increasingly threatening pattern of government abuse. In addition to the cases of activists Dai Xuezhong and Tong Yi, who were accused of tax evasion and forgery respectively, the report should have noted the use of vague or unsubstantiated allegations of "hooliganism," offenses against public order and economic crimes in the persecution of a number of other dissidents, including Zhang Lin, Liu Huanwen and Bi Yimin. It should also be noted that in September 1994 the New York City-based group Human Rights in China received a new list of political prisoners naming 104 individuals arrested in connection with the June 4, 1989 crackdown. Their conviction on common criminal charges such as "robbery," "arson" or "disruption of traffic" — rather than political charges — delayed their identification by the international community. The disguised political nature of so many detentions underscores the need to interpret official Chinese arrest figures with care.
The report should have given greater coverage to the variety of coercive measures that may be used in place of formal detention. For example, the report should have elaborated on the conditions of well-known dissident Wei Jingsheng's ongoing incommunicado detention under what the PRC authorities term "residential surveillance" or "supervised
37
CRITIQUE 1994
residence" ijianshi juzhu). According to article 38 of the Criminal Procedure Law, persons detained under this measure are permitted to live at home, although they are under surveillance and forbidden to leave the house. In contravention of these provisions, the police have been holding Wei not at home, but at some undisclosed location unknown even to his family.
Other detention-related issues raised in this year's report also merit further clarification. In noting the unusual character of the kidnapping and detention of the Australian businessman James Peng, the report should have clarified that PRC law expressly grants the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress authority to approve detention without charge for indefinite periods of time. Although detention for investigation may not ordinarily exceed two months, article 92 of the Criminal Procedure Law provides that "complex" circumstances may justify a one-month extension by approval of the next highest level of the people's procuratorate. In "especially grave and complex" cases, the same provision gives the Standing Committee power to grant extensions of unspecified length.
While briefly mentioned in this year's report, the problem of prisoners detained past their release dates deserves greater attention in the future — particularly since such cases admittedly run into the tens of thousands. While the PRC Procurator General is quoted in the 1994 report as saying that 34,432 of 73,416 such cases had been "corrected," there is no indication as to why the remaining individuals were not immediately released or whether systemic safeguards have been implemented to reduce the scale of the problem. Next year's report should assess the impact of the new State Compensation Law, effective from January 1995, on the ability of unlawfully detained individuals to recover damages from the government.
The report separately mentions 1983 regulations to accelerate trial in "certain serious criminal cases" and the "particularly egregious" lack of due process in death penalty cases, but should have clarified the direct link between the two concerns. The 1983 "Decision of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress Regarding the Procedure for Rapid
38
_CHINA
Adjudication of Cases Involving Criminal Elements Who Seriously Endanger Public Security" specifically minimizes due process guarantees for certain crimes punishable by death. The order voids the usual time requirements for serving notice and subpoenas upon the defendant and witnesses; it also reduces the time limit for death penalty appeals from the already short ten days stipulated by the Criminal Procedure Law to a mere three days.
With regard to the use of the organs of executed prisoners for transplants, the report states only that previous allegations have been
"revived____[but] have not been verified." The fundamental human rights
concerns at stake require that further attention be given to this issue, particularly in light of the clearly incriminating government documents published in the 1994 Human Rights Watch/Asia report, "Organ Procurement and Judicial Execution in China." Those documents indicate an extensive use of executed prisoners as a source of organs for transplant without previous prisoner or family consent, and with the execution process in some cases corrupted to facilitate timely organ removal.
The report's discussion of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment is brief but quite fair. The report should, however, have made clearer in this section the government-funded status of the China Human Rights Society (also called the China Society for Human Rights Studies), which claims to be an NGO and has worked to defend China against allegations of prison maltreatment. Regarding the supposed "correction" of 17,823 prison violations, an unsupported procuratorial claim by itself cannot establish whether the governmental response to either individual or systemic problems has been fair and adequate. The need to clarify the limited information currently available is especially acute in light of the PRC's continued intolerance for domestic human rights NGOs (discussed further below) and the present impasse in negotiations over prison access by the ICRC. In the event that independent monitors are eventually granted access, future reports should of course consider the resulting observations in light of the detailed account received in 1994 by Human Rights Watch/Asia and Human Rights in China, relating
39
CRITIQUE 1994
how central government officials orchestrated an elaborate cover-up of prison abuses before a proposed January 1994ICRC visit to Beijing's No. 2 Prison.
The report's discussion of the PRC's strict intolerance for independent human rights monitoring is essentially accurate but too terse to satisfy all the State Department's instructions to those drafting the Country Reports. It does not, for example, provide the requisite brief summary of the government's various methods of suppressing domestic activists. Noting only the detention of student activist Wang Dan and members of the unofficial Shanghai-based Chinese Human Rights Association, and the government's refusal to let the Shanghai group register as a legitimate organization, the report should also have mentioned other information that human rights activists have been beaten, threatened or confined to their homes on government orders. The report states that the UN Special Rapporteur on Religious Intolerance made a 10-day visit to the PRC, including the Tibetan capital, Lhasa, but omits any description of the findings of the Rapporteur's trip. Next year's report should discuss the government's behavior regarding the international women's conference planned for Beijing in September 1995. (In July 1995, the Chinese government successfully lobbied against UN accreditation of Tibetan organizations, and made the unilateral decision to move the NGO forum to rudimentary facilities 30 miles outside Beijing.
In the area of religious freedom, the report gives a fragmented listing of incidents which is neither exhaustive nor illuminating with regard to the systemic nature of the Chinese government's suppression of religious practice. The report enumerates a few instances of government harassment of religious groups in Shenzhen, Guangzhou and two towns in Henan province, and claims that unofficial house churches elsewhere are tolerated "as long as they remain small and discreet." The report is unclear as to either its grounds for concluding that "discreet" believers may escape persecution, or its criteria for what constitutes "discreet" religious behavior. Moreover, a March 1994 Amnesty International report of the detention and sentencing of "house church" members from Fujian, Anhui and Shaanxi since 1993 illustrates that the government's intolerance for peaceful
40
_CHINA
religious activity is not limited to the few locations named by the State Department.
The report correctly states that authorities appear to be increasingly utilizing short-term detentions, rather than long prison terms, when dealing with unauthorized religious activities. It might have pointed out, however, that authorities have also used the rubric of house arrest to restrict other believers. An Amnesty International report issued in March 1994 stated that Bishop Joseph Li Side had been restricted to his Tianjin home for nearly two years at the time of publication.
The report is incorrect in stating that "[t]here are no specific bans on particular religious groups .... [although] [n]onmainstream sects are often singled out." In fact, adherents of the evangelical Protestant sect known as the "Shouters" have not only been accused of "counterrevolutionary" behavior and targeted for suppression in Henan, as the report notes; "Shouters" have also been persecuted in other provinces precisely because their sect was officially banned in May 1983 as a "counterrevolutionary" organization.
Most important, the report glosses over the new State Council regulations on religion, issued in January 1994 (Decree Nos. 144 & 145), interpreting these as a primarily permissive codification of existing rules. The reality is that this consolidation of previously localized restrictions on registration for places of worship and religious practice by foreigners can, even without the imposition of new prohibitions, increase the potential for the more systematic nationwide suppression of believers. In fact, the government's use of the regulations to justify its reported arrests of over 160 Christians in Henan alone in the first year of their promulgation clearly indicates how the new regulations can be used against unofficial religious groups and alleged foreign proselytizers. The government's future use of the decrees deserves careful attention over the next year.
The report's coverage of discrimination issues is generally fair, but bears further elaboration in several areas. The report twice refers to the
41
CRITIQUE 1994
October 1994 passage of national eugenics legislation (though it avoids using the inflammatory word "eugenics" in either case). Unfortunately, the report's earlier characterization of the issue in the privacy context is not as accurately phrased as the second mention in the discrimination section, and in fact is quite misleading. It states that the new Maternal and Child Health Care Law "call[s] for premarital. . . examinations to determine whether couples have acute infectious diseases [or] certain mental illnesses," but not that it forcibly postpones the marriage of persons who then test positive; it also states that the law "includes provisions for abortion or sterilization in some cases based on medical advice," but not that it forbids the marriage of couples who are at risk of transmitting congenital defects until they agree to use birth control or undergo sterilization. Next year's report should pay careful attention to how broadly and carefully these coercive provisions are implemented after the law takes nationwide effect in June 1995. The enforcement of provincial eugenics regulations forbidding severely retarded persons to have children also demands comment.
On the problem of trafficking in women, the 1994 report makes a small but welcome change in acknowledging that abduction of women "remains a serious problem, especially in those areas where local officials have resisted efforts of central authorities to stop it." (The 1993 report had suggested the phenomenon was more limited, characterizing it as a serious problem only in those areas where local officials have resisted efforts.) Yet the report should also have noted that while the central government has indeed continued to "condemn strongly and take steps to prevent and punish the abduction and sale of women," numerous flaws exist in the PRC's anti-trafficking legislation. For example, a provision reflecting sympathy for unmarried men and disregard for victimized women stipulates that known purchasers of abducted women may be released without charge as long as they free their victims within an undefined "reasonable" period of time.
With regard to China's "floating population," the report mentions only that lack of official status may narrow access "to housing, schooling and the full range of employment opportunities" — an extreme understatement. Until the hukou (household registration) system of tying
42
_CHINA
rights to official residence is overhauled, the serious denial of the rights of migrant laborers is likely to continue, and deserves greater elaboration in future reports. Because these laborers lack permission to live and work in the cities, the urban labor bureau authorities charged with monitoring work conditions are not bound to respond to their complaints. In numerous instances documented in the Shenzhen Special Economic Zone, migrant laborers denied assistance by the city labor bureau endure totally unregulated conditions of excessive compulsory overtime, sub-minimum wages, unsafe conditions and degrading treatment. Some employers confiscate money and identification from their mostly illegal hires, thereby trapping them in factory compounds and driving them into situations amounting to forced labor. Some workers manage to leave their factories, only to be targeted by public security officers who may detain, beat and fine them apparently unregulated amounts precisely because they lack identification. In several documented cases, local police have stopped individual workers, confiscated their identification cards, then fined or detained them for lacking identification.
However, rather than crack down on the systemic problems of employer abuse, official negligence and police corruption, the government continues to contribute to the exploitation of migrant laborers, scapegoats foreign-invested firms for worker abuses in places such as Shenzhen, a Special Economic Zone across the border from Hong Kong, and is now relying upon the spread of government trade unions as a general panacea. As suggested by last year's edition of the Critique, one of the most pressing questions is whether mandatory unionization actually serves workers* interests, or merely provides another instrument for government control.
China's labor problems are by no means confined to any single sector of the economy or labor pool, as the broad evidence in 1994 of wildcat strikes, industrial fatalities, and trade union activism and repression demonstrates. Overall, the issue of worker rights is a vital one and deserves careful attention over the next year. Implementation of the PRC's new National Labor Law (effective January 1995) should be assessed for its substantive impact, if any, on the rights of Chinese workers. The
43
CRITIQUE 1994
response of the International Labor Organization (ILO) to a pending March 1994 complaint filed by the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) on behalf of arrested lawyer and trade union activist Zhou Guoqiang should also be noted. Finally, on the issue of trade in prison labor products, next year's report should concretely describe the Chinese government's proof, if any, of compliance with its 1992 and 1994 agreements with the United States to bar such exports.
44
