COLOMBIA
In 1994, Colombia continued to maintain the worst human rights record in the hemisphere and one of the worst in the world. The right to personal safety and humane treatment remained seriously imperiled. Though the presidential election brought a new administration to office which stated a commitment to resolving Colombia's human rights problems, President Ernesto Samper's actions in 1994 suggest that like his predecessor, he has greater concern for the Colombian government's public image than for the resolution of chronic human rights abuses. Indeed, the systemic violation of human rights by the Colombian armed forces and the paramilitary groups they (at a minimum) tolerate, is directly related to the scandalous level of impunity still enjoyed by state agents and their allies.
As in 1993, the 1994 report acknowledges the ongoing violations of human rights and utilizes documentation from Colombian and international human rights groups in'an attempt to assign responsibility for the abuses. The report typically cites non-governmental sources to point the finger at guerrillas, narcotics traffickers and paramilitary groups. However, the report rarely uses such information to demonstrate the state's responsibility for abuses. This is inexcusable, because Colombia's human rights violations are as institutionalized as they are widespread and longstanding. Moreover, it distorts the overall thrust of the evidence produced by human rights groups in 1994.
Generally, the report succeeds in providing appropriate levels of detail and concrete examples of the human rights conditions it asserts. Although statistics for some vital categories of abuse have dropped from their all-time highs of the previous few years, the report generally recognizes that the statistics are still staggering. In several instances, specific examples are not accompanied by necessary observations and judgments about the pervasive frequency of such abuses. The result is an often mistaken implication that violations of certain types occur sporadically but are not generalized problems.
Similarly, while the report makes a good-faith effort to describe the
45
CRITIQUE 1994
extremely serious nature of the human rights situation, it fails to bring to light the connection between different categories of human rights violations. Viewed as a whole, these violations constitute a pattern of mutually reinforcing official activities rather than a large collection of isolated acts. The complex and pervasive nature of state involvement in human rights abuse is obscured by the report's excessive focus on isolated events.
As in previous years, the report places official abuses in the context of non-governmental violence. This reflects both the State Department's determination to perpetuate one of the report's major conceptual flaws (human rights law is directed only at state abuses) and the apparent motive for that formulation: this device diverts attention from the state's responsibility for such abuses.
Colombia's judicial system continued to be a major focus of human rights criticism in 1994, and the report acknowledges the problems in its provision of due process, a set of rights guaranteed by the Colombian Constitution. In particular, human rights advocates pointed to the increased use of the "regional" or "public order" courts as a leading source of these violations. The report observes that in 1994, "human rights groups continue to charge that the [public order] system infringed on basic procedural legal rights." But the report makes few critical judgments of its own about the regional courts and generally fails to give the allegations the attention they merit.
The regional courts try charges of terrorism, rebellion and other insurgency-related acts, as well as narcotics crimes. Their particular attributes — closed proceedings, secret evidence, anonymous witnesses, prosecutors and judges and the widespread use of the military for police functions — were originally justified by supporters on grounds of personal security for judicial employees and increased prosecutorial efficiency. But in 1994 these regional courts continued to fail to yield the anticipated results and instead violated due process rights, permitted lengthy arbitrary detentions and misused the judicial process against social protest. Former President Gaviria justified his passage of emergency legislation, allowing
46
COLOMBIA
detainees to be kept in jail past the six-month limit for specified charges, on grounds of judicial delays and inefficiencies. President Gaviria's petition was hardly tenable, for reasons which are too numerous to catalogue here in their entirety. However, wholesale sweeps and mass arrests have contributed to a system in which fewer than 3,000 of 38,000 cases have entered the trial phase; all the other cases represent prolonged preventive detention. Despite the failure to yield positive results, the continued widespread reliance on these courts was not properly addressed by the report.
The report notes that "critics" charge that the vast majority of cases sent to the regional jurisdiction involve persons suspected of subversive activity rather than guerrilla leaders or narcotics traffickers. The report distances itself from these serious allegations by pointing merely to what "critics" say. These critics, however, include major human rights organizations such as Human Rights Watch and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights.
The state's participation in the regional court system is complex and, along with prosecutorial personnel, the system gives a dominant role to members of the military, particularly in areas of active conflict. Anonymous paid informants were still used to identify suspects, and it was not uncommon for an overburdened or intimidated prosecutor's office to ratify such arrests without independent investigation and order preventive detention, which may last for months or years before a meaningful review is undertaken. This means a delay of months before formal charges will be filed or, as occasionally occurs, a finding that the military's arrest was devoid of legal bases. Measures enacted in June under the State of Exception Law further restricted justice by giving security forces greater latitude in making arrests and prohibiting nonviolent protest.
Since regional jurisdiction does not allow for judicial review of preventive detention orders, the system effectively continued to provide the military with carte blanche to "sentence" suspects for months, even years, based only on the secret allegations of its own paid informers.
47
CRITIQUE 1994
The report commendably acknowledges the regional court system's failure to deliver due process: "It is difficult for defense attorneys to impeach or cross-examine anonymous witnesses and often they don't have unimpeded access to the state's evidence." In fact, due process violations are even more egregious than suggested by the State Department. For example, in the investigation in the wake of a widely publicized massacre in the town of La Chinita in the department of Urabá, the government completely denied access to evidence, including exculpatory evidence. Because the judgment phase of the legal process takes place in one of the five regional courts nationwide, defendants have an extremely limited opportunity to have an adequate defense at this critical phase. The few lawyers who will work on such cases outside Bogotá are rarely willing and able to travel up to ten hours to review files in a regional court.
With respect to illegal detentions, the report describes their prohibition as follows: "The authorities must bring a detainee before a judge within 36 hours and the person has the right to seek, before any judge, a petition of habeas corpus that must be acted upon within 36 hours." But the formal, legal guarantee did not in fact stop agents of the Colombian government from illegally detaining persons for long periods of time and under harsh circumstances. Of 183 individuals detained by state security forces in Barrancabermeja between January 1993 and June 1994, 170 suffered torture (including electrical shocks, near drownings and mock executions), and in most cases the culprits went unpunished. The report takes understatement to extremes, stating simply that "instances of arbitrary detentions continued." Leaving aside all other cases, the thousands of people detained without formal charges in regional court jurisdiction make the report's language woefully inadequate.
Like all the Country Reports, the report on Colombia breaks up freedom of speech and press, freedom of peaceful assembly and association and "respect for political rights: the rights of citizens to change their government" into three separate categories. These topics are intimately related, yet the report's atomized treatment of these sections fails to analyze the connection between the categories of human rights violations.
48
COLOMBIA
The report not only fails to comprehensively connect the violations, but is also deficient in analyzing the individual categories. For example, the report discusses freedom of speech and of the press only in the context of the media, failing altogether to deal with the equally important issue of political speech. The report correspondingly fails to address the topic of free speech in any detail in the section devoted to freedom of peaceful assembly and association.
Between the cracks fall situations in which people seek to exercise freedom of speech in the context of political marches and meetings. The report completely distorts reality by stating that "the authorities do not normally interfere with public meetings and demonstrations." In 1994, there were several instances in which the government not merely interfered, but violently repressed public gatherings. For example, on February 14, the National Police violently broke up a peaceful march conducted by the Arauca teachers union, ASEDAR. Twelve of the marchers were subsequently detained by the investigative police for eight hours before being released without charge. In addition, Amnesty International reported that Luis Tellez, a member of the Comité de Derechos Humanos de Ciudad Bolívar, and Ayda Martínez Nieto were detained by agents of SI JIN (the Judicial and Investigative Police Section of the National Police) after participating in a march in Bogotá organized by Colombian human rights organizations as part of International Labor Day. They were both taken to the SIJIN station where they were interrogated and suffered physical and psychological torture. Téllez was bound, gagged and beaten until he lost consciousness. His captors forced water up his nose to the point of near-suffocation. Both Téllez and Martinez were freed that night after being forced to sign a statement which said they had been treated well. The officers were later absolved by an internal police investigation.
The third interconnected section on political rights, dealing with the right of citizens to change their government, emphasizes the set of formal constitutional guarantees such as those providing for elections and secret ballots. An emphasis on the formal provisions comes, however, at the expense of a detailed account of the actual extent to which such formal
49
CRITIQUE 1994
guarantees are available to citizens. The report's claim that "all parties operate freely without government interference" is so demonstrably false that its inclusion throws the State Department's good faith into serious question.
In fact, the government is complicit in activities that repress basic democratic rights. Remarkably, Colombia has a situation in which the third political party, the Patriotic Union, has had 2,000 members killed since its creation in 1985. No mention is made of a report by Dr. Jaime Trenno Córdoba, the Public Advocate {Defensor del Pueblo\ who concluded that members of the security forces were among the main perpetrators of violence against Patriotic Union activists. With this history of systematic elimination of an opposition party, it is nothing short of incredible for the report to focus almost exclusively on the formal constitutional guarantee of free political association.
The report scantily mentions the assassination of Senator Manuel Várgas Cepeda, the only Patriotic Union representative in the Colombian Congress. The one sentence on Cepeda's assassination says no more than that it was perpetrated by unknown assailants. The report does not mention the human rights groups which stated that Cepeda, who had received numerous death threats, was not adequately protected by the police. In addition, the report fails to note that on the day of Cepeda's murder, a paramilitary group calling itself Death to Colombian Guerrillas (MACOGUE) claimed responsibility for Cepeda's death and released death threats against 25 others, including political and church leaders. It is a well-known fact that many such paramilitary groups have proven ties to government security forces and operate with a high level of impunity. The Colombian government's role in the tragedy is unfortunately omitted. After receiving threats. Cepeda himself asked the Minister of Defense, Rafael Pardo, to investigate the possibility of an assassination plan within the military. Pardo refused, and after Cepeda was murdered, Pardo's successor again declined to order an investigation, claiming that there was no evidence that the military had been involved. For his part. President Ernesto Samper precipitously announced, without apparent basis, that drug traffickers were responsible for Cepeda's killing.
50
COLOMBIA
Such obfuscation of the state's role in human rights violations is unfortunately typical of the 1994 report on Colombia, which does its best to avoid dwelling on the worst of the state's abuses and instead tries vainly to accentuate the positive wherever possible. The report speaks in both positive and general terms about the new administration's efforts to address Colombia's human rights crisis but fails to note more explicit remarks and actions by the Samper government which indicate that it does not adequately appreciate the crisis at hand. For example, Pardo's successor. Defense Minister Fernando Botero, insisted during his tenure that abuses are not part of official policy but rather the actions of individual officers, soldiers and policemen.
As the report acknowledges, President Samper organized a new human rights office and widely publicized its efforts to combat human rights abuses. Indeed, as human rights groups point out, the Colombian response to human rights violations has been to expand an already enormous human rights bureaucracy. Little concrete improvement has come of these well-marketed efforts, however. Human rights groups have also accused the Colombian government of instituting a public relations campaign to create the false impression in the international community that the majority of the violence that occurs in Colombia can be attributed to guerrilla activity. The report itself overemphasizes the extent of guerrilla involvement.
The report states that President Samper has reiterated the government's strong opposition to paramilitary groups and rural self-defense forces. However, this claim directly conflicts with recent reports to the contrary. According to The Los Angeles Times, for example, in late 1994 the Colombian government was considering a plan to legalize private security groups in the countryside as a way for rural citizens to protect themselves; in August, the Defense Ministry itself created a 50,000 member paramilitary group. In one instance concerning a paramilitary group known as Cirugía ("surgery") — allegedly for its practice of grotesque dismemberment of its victims — investigating journalists were fired upon by security force personnel standing openly with paramilitary
51
CRITIQUE 1994
members who brandished chainsaws. These are concrete examples of state sponsorship of the paramilitary groups, which has a long history stretching back to Law 48 of 1968, the legal basis for the formation of paramilitary "self-defense" squads. The State Department should in next year's report explain the discrepancy between Samper Administration rhetoric and practice.
The report's failure to describe and analyze in sufficient detail state complicity in abusive practices is particularly evident with respect to its discussion of Colombia's extraordinarily high level of extrajudicial killings. For example, the report fails to mention the findings and recommendations made by the UN Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial, Summary or Arbitrary Executions after visiting Colombia in 1994 to observe human rights conditions. The Special Rapporteur sent 40 urgent appeals to the Colombian government regarding persons whose human rights were imperiled. This is the highest number sent to a single government pursuant to the UN's mandate on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions during a single year.
The lead sentence of one of the report's paragraphs on extrajudicial killing acknowledges that according to the Procuraduría's annual human rights report for the year ending April 1994, the National Police had the worst human rights record among state security agencies and that 80% of the Procuradurfa's disciplinary decisions that involved violations of human rights were linked to police actions.
In fact, however, most killings by security forces are not drunken episodes on city buses (the report's example of police abuse) but rather systematic acts of terror with official sanction. Two Colombian Navy officers recently testified that, "Navy intelligence planned, participated in, and paid for over one hundred murders in the Middle Magdalena region since 1991." These officers recounted various episodes in which they hired killers to hunt people down, including two members of the Regional Committee for Human Rights.
The report fails to mention the important finding by a human rights
52
COLOMBIA
group that the state is involved in a majority of political killings in which the perpetrator can be established. In 1994, for example, Colombian security forces were implicated in the massacre of ten fishermen at Puerto Lleras and participated in (or turned a blind eye to) 256 "local cleansing killings." The Andean Commission of Jurists reported that in the previous year, 23.05% of extrajudicial killings had identified actors and that of these, 54.26% were committed by government forces, 17.91% by paramilitary groups and 27.48% by guerrillas.
The report chooses to focus instead on facts that, while true, are peripheral and divert attention from the central issue. For example, it states that in "77% [i.e., except for the 23% with identified perpetrators, according to the Andean Commission] of all reported violent deaths ... no perpetrator could be established." In fact, the Andean Commission's findings suggest a powerful motive for the police and military to avoid determining responsibility for political killings — namely, that state agents may well be involved.
As much as the report downplays the state's involvement in extrajudicial killings, it emphasizes the paramilitaries' role: "Paramilitary groups also perpetrated scores of extrajudicial killings in 1994, often with the alleged complicity of military units or individuals." Although the report acknowledges the state's "alleged complicity," it does so by use of the passive voice, an unsourced allegation and a trailing clause that serves to dramatically downplay state involvement in paramilitary activities. As noted above, there is a great deal of evidence to suggest that government support for paramilitary groups is very strong. The report should make some informed judgment on whether these allegations of state involvement with paramilitary groups are credible. Unless the State Department is prepared to dispute such allegations, it is disingenuous for its report to separate the paramilitary groups' responsibility for extrajudicial killing from that of the state.
The report's section on women, children and indigenous groups also fails to examine adequately the extent of the state's role in perpetuating
53
CRITIQUE 1994
abuses against them. For example, the report notes that 440 females reported that they had been raped in the first two months of 1994 but is completely silent regarding the judicial treatment of these cases, whether the perpetrators were apprehended or whether judicial process was extended to the victims. In addition, the report makes no mention of the problem of rape committed by the military and police, a persistent problem in Colombia.
The report could have cited the following two extreme examples of mistreatment of women and children. In Predio Unir, 200 families were ejected from their homes by Colombian military police; the women were tied by their hair and children were kicked and beaten. In December, armed criminal investigative forces of the state brutally raided the Oriéntame Reproductive Health Federation, Colombia's second largest nongovernmental family planning clinic. Once inside, they threatened and physically assaulted patients and clinic staff and ultimately closed down the clinic.
Notwithstanding such deficiencies, the report does acknowledge that women suffer from discrimination and violence despite Colombian law that "provides that women may not be subjected to any form of discrimination and specifically requires the authorities to 'guarantee adequate and effective participation by women at the decision making levels of public administration.'"
In addition, the report commendably distinguishes between the lofty set of formal rights accorded Colombia's children and the reality of day-to-day life for a significant number who suffer grave human rights abuses. Though the section on children is brief, the report acknowledges police participation in support of vigilante gangs who kill street children in the name of "social cleansing."
The report acknowledges that off-duty police agents serve as contract killers of children at the behest of merchants and citizens' groups. The report also notes that "the Office of the Defender of the People reported clear complicity by police officers in some of these killings."
54
COLOMBIA
Such complicity deeply compromises what the report states to be the state's obligation under the Colombian Constitution to "assist and protect children, to foster their development and to assure the full exercise of these rights." Instead, according to a Human Rights Watch report, in 1994 the Colombian police contributed to a per capita murder rate for children eight times that of the United States.
However, police participation tends to be more systematic than suggested by the report, which focuses on acts by vigilantes and off-duty police. A Human Rights Watch/Americas report states that "a significant portion of the murders of Colombian children are carried out by agents of the state . . . police agents at the local level commit a range of abuses against minors, including torture, beatings and killings, as well as providing weapons to 'social cleansing' vigilantes and street gangs. Government officials effectively tolerate the killing of children, often by failing to investigate."
The report's short section on torture warrants many similar criticisms. Although it notes the brutality involved, citing a case "in which members of the Nueva Granada Battalion detained the son of a local labor leader . . . tied the person naked to a stake on an anthill, threatened him with rape and then almost suffocated him with a plastic bag," it fails to characterize the pervasiveness of torture. For example, of the persons detained by the state between January 1993 and June 1994, 93% reported being physically or psychologically tortured.
Similarly, it would have been useful for the report to discuss how torture is connected to other forms of abuse. As the Attorney Delegate for Human Rights reported, "enforced disappearance has been used by State security agencies as a method of investigation: individuals are surreptitiously captured; the security agencies conceal the fact of their arrest, they are tortured; information is obtained." Because torture is virtually an element of ordinary police procedure, any analysis of the legal process should include reference to this problem.
55
CRITIQUE 1994
The report contains Httle analysis at a sufficiently general level to address what might be the root causes of Colombia's persistently awful human rights record. Human rights organizations, which have devoted greater attention to this issue, have identified the obvious key: impunity from prosecution and punishment. Impunity appears to be the rule rather than the exception in Colombia. The National Department of Planning indicated that only three percent of the human rights cases filed are prosecuted and 600,000 are pending, with the average judge resolving fewer than 15 cases a year. In particular, the Colombian armed forces and police enjoy near-total impunity from arrest, prosecution or punishment. The armed forces have fought hard to maintain jurisdiction over nearly every crime committed by military personnel, and military jurisdiction is almost tantamount to acquittal for military personnel in human rights cases. While the report acknowledges impunity briefly in a number of places, it fails to integrate the issue into its overall analysis.
Further, the report barely touches on the issue of the government's position on such matters as military jurisdiction over human rights prosecutions. It should have discussed, for example. President Gaviria's veto of the Disappearance Law passed by Congress. Gaviria defended his veto by arguing that the law was unconstitutional because it abolished military court jurisdiction over members of the security forces accused of carrying out disappearances and penalized those who ordered the violations.
Alhough the previous and current administrations have talked about such a change, little effort has been made in this direction by the new Samper administration. By failing to halt such impunity by investigation and punishment, the civilian government not only shares responsibility for the resulting human rights abuses, even when the direct perpetrators are not themselves state actors, but also directly violates explicit requirements in a number of human rights instruments.
In summary, the report makes an effort to catalogue the wide variety of human rights abuses that continued unabated in Colombia in 1994. It fails, however, to come to terms with the complex ways in which
56
COLOMBIA
these various abuses are interconnected. A more comprehensive approach would have brought into greater relief the role of the Colombian government in perpetuating a human rights disaster.
57
CRITIQUE 1994
58
