	EGYPT
The 1994 State Department report on Egypt continues to document widespread human rights abuses. It accurately describes a deteriorating situation in which violence and the denial of basic civil liberties has become rampant. On several issues there is a clear improvement over the 1993 report. This is particularly striking in the candid discussion of torture. Nonetheless, as in previous years, the State Department often avoids taking clear and assertive positions against human rights violations perpetrated by the Egyptian government. In fact, one is left with the unfortunate impression that the Egyptian government, with its close ties to the United States, is treated with a certain amount of latitude and unwarranted sympathy.
In an assertive and honest introduction, the report repeats the often quoted statement that the "ruling NDP [National Democratic Party] dominates the political scene to such an extent that, as a practical matter, the citizens do not have a meaningful ability to change their government." In a welcome addition, the 1994 report states that the "[g]ovemment continues to restrict substantially basic rights of expression and the press." As in previous years, the report lists several rights provided for by the Constitution. But in a clear improvement over past reports, this year's does not wishfully assert that Egyptians enjoy their basic rights. Rather, it frankly admits that the "Emergency Law[s] continues to restrict basic rights."
Although the report refers in passing to the Emergency Laws in the introduction, it does not specifically state that Egypt continues to be governed by Emergency Laws in effect since 1981. This fact appears only later, in the section on arbitrary arrests and detention. Last year's edition of the Critique noted that, pursuant to the State Department's instructions to those drafting the Country Reports, this fact should be set out in the introduction. The fact that Egypt is ruled under a regime of exceptional laws renders unavailable many of the constitutional guarantees that are described — as the report itself acknowledges. Consequently, this fact is integral to understanding "what the political system claims to be and what
67
CRITIQUE 1994
it actually is," and should be specifically laid out at the beginning of the report.
Furthermore, the State Department instructions requires the report to describe frankly the true nature of the electoral process. The report states that the NDP "commands large majorities in the popularly elected People's Assembly and the Shura (Consultative) Council." Later the report states that in 1993 President Hosni Mubarak was elected unopposed to a third six-year term and that his reelection was approved by 96% of the voters in a national referendum. Both statements are inconsistent with the report's admission that the NDP dominates the political scene to such an extent that Egyptians do not have a meaningful ability to change their government. Last year's Critique noted that the Egyptian electoral process cannot be described as free and that there are widespread allegations of fraud and manipulation. In fact, for all practical purposes, the government controls the electoral process. Although the report does cast doubt upon the government's claim that 86% of voters took part in the national referendum, it seems to be unwilling to provide an actual assessment of the Egyptian electoral process. By contrast, when the Country Reports address the electoral processes of countries not friendly to the United States, they do so accurately and assertively. This unfortunate double standard is not consistent with the State Department's exhortation for the Country Reports to "seek to apply a single world-wide standard to the reporting of human rights abuses."
Previous editions of the Critique have repeatedly pointed out that the State Department often avoids stating the abuses of the Egyptian government in its own voice. This leaves the impression that the report is either unable or unwilling to decide on the veracity of various claims. For example, in the section on political and other extrajudicial killings, the report states that "[a]ccording to human rights monitors," Fateh al-Bab Abdel Manem "died after 12 continuous hours of torture, witnessed by his son," and that local human rights monitors "claim that" Mohammad Abdel Hamid Hassan died under torture. Later on, it reports that human rights monitors published a report "which claims" that 11 people disappeared in 1994 after their arrest. In the section on denial of fair public trial, the
68
_EGYPT
report states that "according to Egyptian human rights monitors" the majority of defendants whose cases were pending before security courts "claimed" to have been tortured. In the section on arbitrary arrest, the report states that "according to local human rights groups," the security forces have subjected villages to collective punishments. This is in contrast to last year's more assertive statement that "security forces have subjected villages to collective punishments." The report is replete with many other examples in which very serious governmental abuses are presented as the claims of human rights monitors without the State Department's reaching a clear conclusion on the matter. The abuses of those designated as extremists or terrorists, on the other hand, are presented in a clear, assertive and decisive tone. In such cases, the report invariably adopts the assertions of the Egyptian government as its own.
To make matters worse, the report tends to represent Egyptian government abuses as a natural consequence of the cycle of violence in Egypt. For example, the report states that "[i]n antiextremist operations, security forces killed at least 139 suspected extremists, five civilian bystanders and a fellow policeman," but then notes that the security forces "appear to have caused some of these deaths by excessive use of lethal force." In light of the widespread use of extrajudicial killings as a regular method of legal enforcement by security forces, this statement, to say the least, is mild. In fact, in 1994, security forces appeared to pursue a shoot-to-kill policy, and adopted a policy of retaliatory murders against their opponents. At times, the report is strangely uncritical of the spurious logic of the Egyptian government. For example, it states in a matter-of-fact fashion that "the police reportedly arrested hundreds of people to prevent any disruption of the UN International Conference on Population and Development, which was held in Cairo. The police targeted extremists who were reportedly planning to attack the conference." This phrasing leaves the impression that the report does not consider this type of indiscriminate preventive denial of liberty to be problematic.
In an excellent and improved section on torture, the report accurately documents outrageous acts of degradation and abuse. In a
69
CRITIQUE 1994
welcome correction, the 1994 report acknowledges that detainees have been raped by security officers. In another improvement, the report has added a section on prison conditions in Egypt. Nevertheless, in a long paragraph, the report states that the Minister of Interior has denied the existence of torture in Egyptian prisons and claimed that whatever torture does exist is isolated and is promptly investigated and punished. Government officials, the report notes, have accused human rights organizations of focusing on the rights of accused terrorists and ignoring the rights of the victims of terrorism, and have complained that human rights groups do not take into account the extreme nature of the security threat confronting Egypt. The report's only response to these arguments is to state that the record indicates that the government does not adequately investigate torture complaints when accused terrorists are involved.
This response in inappropriate, given the widespread, persistent, indeed routine use of torture in Egypt. The report of the UN Committee against Torture notes that torture in Egypt is "still widespread" and that measures taken by the Egyptian government against terrorism "must never resuh in non-compliance with the Convention against Torture and cannot in any case justify torture." The State Department should, at the very least, note that it is not the place of human rights organizations to excuse the Egyptian government's rampant human rights abuses because of any perceived or real security threat. The report's failure to respond clearly and decisively to the outrageous justifications of the Minister of Interior gives the impression that the State Department tacitly agrees with some of his claims. This is an unfortunate impression that should be clearly avoided in future reports.
Both in language and tone the report often fails to convey the desperate condition of human rights in Egypt. For instance, it addresses in a very detached tone the shocking case of the lawyer Abdel Hareth Madani who was arrested on April 26 and apparently tortured to death a day later. It notes that he died in custody, that morgue workers observed puncture wounds and bruises, and that the Ministry of Justice promised an investigation. It reports that at year's end the result of the "on-going investigation" had not been made public. The passage on the Madani
70
_EGYPT
incident concludes: "The Minister of Interior has nonetheless publicly denied any police wrongdoing in Madani's death, maintaining that Madani died of natural causes."
It is unclear whether the report finds the minister's arguments to be plausible. It fails to mention that Madani was a member of the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights, as well as being a prominent defense attorney in several political cases. It also fails to say that Madani was a young lawyer in excellent health who suffered from no particular ailments. Furthermore, the report fails to mention that the security forces used threats and intimidation to force Madani's family to bury his body. In fact, an uncle and two cousins were detained and family members were ordered not to talk to human rights organizations. Madani's shocking and brutal murder resulted in domestic and international protests. It is inappropriate to give the Egyptian Minister of Interior the last word on the matter without any indication whether the report deems his claims to be plausible or not.
The report's comments on the judicial process and due process of law are accurate as far as they go but inadequate to the gravity of the violations. Past editions of the Critique have repeatedly criticized the State Department reports on Egypt for their inadequate coverage of the Terrorism Laws and the prosecution of these laws in military courts. The 1993 report states that "[t]he Penal Code contains several provisions to combat extremist violence. These provisions broadly define terrorism to include the acts of 'spreading panic' and 'obstructing the work of authorities.'" The president regularly refers defendants accused of acts of terrorism or membership in subversive organizations to military courts. The report acknowledges that "military courts do not guarantee the defendants due process before an independent tribunal." There is no right to an appeal from the judgments of the military courts, hearings are rushed, defense attorneys are not given adequate time to prepare their defenses, and claims of torture are not treated with sufficient seriousness.
However, the report fails to fully explain the draconian and virtually unlimited nature of the Terrorism Laws enforced by the military
71
CRITIQUE 1994
courts. For example, defendants may receive life sentences for vague charges such as "obstructing the work of authorities" or opposing the Constitution. The report does not mention that these trials are held in secret and that military courts have sentenced defendants to death for attempted murders or for belonging to an organization that attempted murder. Incidentally, the report notes that through September 1994 these courts sentenced 22 defendants to death. In fact, by August 1994, 56 death sentences had been passed, 40 of which were carried out.
Last year's Critique warned of a growing trend of harassment and persecution directed against attorneys involved in security trials. This year the UN Special Rapporteur on the Independence of the Judiciary has expressed "concern at the increasing repression directed against lawyers, including raids at their offices and homes and confiscation of documents." The Special Rapporteur stated that allegations from credible sources of "grave procedural shortcomings" and threats and harassments reported against lawyers to be "most disturbing." Furthermore, the Special Rapporteur called upon the Egyptian authorities to comply with the UN Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers. The report does mention the detention of attorneys in the context of the peaceful demonstrations protesting Abdel Hareth Madani's murder. But it does not pay specific attention to the Egyptian government's policy of targeting defense attorneys or to the fact that this policy undermines the rule of law.
In the section on freedom of speech and press, the report once again adopts an ambiguous and inconsistent position. It repeats the statement — much criticized in previous years — that "Egyptians openly express their views on a wide range of political and social issues, including vigorous criticism of the Government without fear of retribution." In an improvement over the 1993 report, it states that there are "substantial limitations" on press freedom rather than saying, as it did last year, that there are "some limitations on the freedom of speech and press." A few sentences later, the report concedes that "[a]s in past years, the Government continued to interfere with freedom of expression, arresting and harassing Egyptian and foreign journalists, and confiscating printed material from the marketplace." It goes on: "The Government has used such harassment to
72
_EGYPT
indicate that there are limits to criticism of the Government."
Especially in view of these statements, it is difficult to understand the report's optimistic assessment of Egyptians' freedom to express their views on a wide variety of issues without fear of retribution. As the report acknowledges, journalists and writers have been interrogated, imprisoned or attacked. The coverage of certain topics, such as corruption, incurs the wrath of the authorities and some journalists have been prosecuted in military courts. New draconian measures have been added to the Political Parties Law, and the Penal Code is already replete with laws that would punish writers for confusing public opinion, offending state symbols or encouraging terrorist and extremist thinking. The report seems to believe that writers will fear retribution only if each and every expression of free speech is punished. In reality, it is sufficient for a few writers to be persecuted in order for the remainder to realize the risks of freely expressing their opinions. There is'no doubt that some degree of freedom of speech exists in Egypt, but it is enjoyed as a matter of discretion and not as a right.
For the most part, the report accurately describes the Egyptian government's handling of human rights organizations active in Egypt. However, it fails to mention the arrest in June of attorneys Gamal Abdel-Aziz and Sayed Fathi who were members of the fieldwork unit of the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights. The two were charged with inciting hatred and disregard for the regime and breach of public peace. In July, security forces attempted to detain an Egyptian interpreter accompanying a Human Rights Watch mission. Furthermore, the report fails to describe accurately the Egyptian government's hostile attitude toward human rights work in Egypt. For example, in June Interior Minister al Alfi stated that "calls for the protection of human rights are out of place in Egypt" and "that those who make such calls are encouraged by foreign quarters." As last year's edition of the Critique noted, the attitude of the Egyptian government is not at all conducive to the improvement of the human rights situation.
73
CRITIQUE 1994
In summary, Egypt's human rights record is worsening with each passing year, with the security forces committing abuses with increasing impunity. Egypt's close relationship with the United States should be an added incentive for the State Department report to be assertive and vigilant about the enforcement of human rights in Egypt. As in past years, the 1994 report is generally accurate and comprehensive, but it is also particularly detached, atomized and unemotional. The State Department appears unable or unwilling to acknowledge the fact that the critical human rights situation in Egypt today calls for assertive reporting that conveys a sense of real urgency.
74
