UNITED KINGDOM/HONG KONG
For Hong Kong, 1994 will be remembered as the year when official attempts at placating China's resistance to democratic development were largely abandoned and Hong Kong decided to go it alone on political reform. Democratic development had been the subject of intense public concern ever since the signing of the 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration for the return of Hong Kong to China in 1997. The Joint Declaration, in addition to promising maintenance of Hong Kong's existing legal system and way of life, provides for the future Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR) to have a constitutionally mandated high degree of autonomy, democracy and human rights — or, as China historically characterizes these commitments, "one country, two systems" and "Hong Kong people ruling Hong Kong." The Hong Kong Basic Law, passed by China's National People's Congress (NPC) in 1990, was marked by its provision of a slow pace of democratic development and ambiguity in several areas relating to human rights. Further public debate and an intense diplomatic row followed the formal proposal for increased democracy made in 1992 by Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten. The Legislative Council's passage of this democratic blueprint in 1994, over China's longstanding objections, saw a partial and temporary resolution of this conflict.
As in the previous two years, the 1994 State Department report, while technically accurate with respect to those rights it addresses (especially respecting refugees, labor and women), seems reluctant to assess the importance of current developments and neglectful of China's role in events in Hong Kong. Although the 1992 and 1993 editions of the Critique made the same comment, there is little indication of improvement. One would be justified in suspecting that the United States is pursuing a "hands off policy with respect to Hong Kong.
Without question, the defining moments of 1994 were the passage by the Legislative Council of the democratic proposals first advanced by Governor Patten (in response to community pressure for more democracy) in 1992. In April, the laws allowing for the full direct election of the
257
CRITIQUE 1994
District Boards, as well as a combination of direct and indirect election (as well as ex officio seats) of the Urban and Regional councils, were passed over China's objection. As the report notes, this legislation also lowered the voting age to 18. Likewise, over China's objection, laws were passed in June allowing for the full election of the Legislative Council through a combination of 20 directly elected/universal suffrage seats, 30 functional constituency seats (with the ten new ones being more broad-based than the existing 20) and ten election committee seats to be filled largely by a committee of the other elected bodies. These enactments embraced Governor Patten's 1992 proposals, although not various proposals for an increased pace of democratic development advanced by some liberal legislators. Some legislators and many community groups had demanded greater, or even full democracy. Governor Patten's proposals had been the subject of intense Chinese objection and diplomatic discussion throughout the previous year. With regard to Hong Kong's chief executive, the report properly notes that the governor of Hong Kong is not elected; likewise, the first HKSAR Chief Executive is set to be chosen by an appointed selection committee.
Attempts at resolving the year-long 1993 diplomatic row over democracy were abandoned with the passage of this legislation. China's reaction came in the form of an NPC resolution to completely dismantle the political structure of Hong Kong as it exists on July 1, 1997. The diplomatic row with China continued throughout 1994, although there was some improvement late in the year and pro-Beijing forces did participate in the September District Board elections.
During 1994 the British Hong Kong government was confronted with two additional human rights problems in respect of political rights, neither of which is mentioned in the report. The first was the use of electoral residency and criminal record requirements to ban Hong Kong resident Mr. Lau Shan-ching, who spent ten years in prison in China for counter-revolutionary activity, from standing for election to the District Board. The electoral officer's finding was upheld by the Court of Appeal on a procedural basis though this was subsequently reversed in 1995, long after the election. A second incident called into question the right of Hong
258
UNITED KINGDOM/HONG KONG
Kong people to change their government by highlighting the extraordinary power of the government over legislative decisions. Not only did the government early in the year completely block a legislative members' bill for a human rights commission but it also, late in the year, withdrew its own bill, the Employment (Amendment) Bill, when an elected legislator succeeded in revising it to increase the upper limit on workers' long-service payments. The elected legislator, Mr. Lau Chin-shek, subsequently resigned in protest.
The year 1994 also witnessed an intensification of China's development of its alternative political framework, the so-called "second stove," with further meetings of its appointed Preliminary Working Committee (PWC) and the naming of numerous local Hong Kong Affairs Advisers. In this respect, leading members of Hong Kong's Democratic Party faced continued political isolation from Beijing by their exclusion from appointments to the PWC and from the rapidly growing list of Hong Kong Affairs Advisers. Despite their electoral popularity, China refused any official contact with the leaders of the Democratic Party, which was formed in 1994 by the merger of,two parties in the liberal camp, the United Democrats of Hong Kong and Meeting Point. The Chairperson of Meeting Point, Anthony Cheung Bing-leung, had been nominated by China as a Hong Kong Affairs Adviser but his nomination was withdrawn when the merger of the two parties took place.
Although the PWC increasingly functions as a govemment-in-waiting, the report omits any mention of it. This is striking given the PWC's often expressed hostility to the Hong Kong Bill of Rights, which some leading PWC members have indicated should be set aside after 1997. In 1994 the PWC's most striking proposal was for the establishment in 1997 of an appointed provisional legislature to replace the elected one described above. This proposal was severely criticized in Hong Kong but endorsed by Chinese Vice Premier Qian Qichen.
In addition to the ongoing threats to set aside the existing Hong Kong Bill of Rights, other human rights initiatives also came under attack
259
CRITIQUE 1994
in 1994. While the report properly highlights the Hong Kong government's rejection of legislative proposals for a human rights and equal opportunities commission, it fails to mention the strong official Chinese opposition to the proposal or China's threats to abolish any such body in 1997. It appears that, other than its election proposals, the Hong Kong government is still steering a wide path around the Chinese government's sensibilities on the human rights front. This was evident throughout 1994 and makes it difficult for Hong Kong people to firmly establish a strong human rights legal tradition before 1997.
Especially striking were the report's omissions respecting Hong Kong's legal structure. Acting in secret, and without the benefit of proper legal procedure, the legal sub-group of China's PWC has set about reviewing all the laws of Hong Kong for conformity to the HKSAR Basic Law. Its extralegality aside, this review process is of particular concern when one considers this body's antipathy to various pieces of Hong Kong human rights legislation. This rushed and secret review process is taking place despite earlier Chinese assurances that even the NPC's limited review powers under the Basic Law would be sparingly used. The PWC review process, which appears aimed at ensuring that rights are not overprotected, seems to turn the usual mission of constitutional review on its head.
In connection with the updating of old laws adopted from Britain that are applied in Hong Kong, it was reported in May that PWC leaders meeting in Beijing were advocating the retention of the archaic British laws on sedition. Such laws, contained in Chapter 200 of the Laws of Hong Kong, afford a broad definition of sedition and give the authorities almost unfettered power to seize seditious materials. These laws, which had not been enforced in decades, are among those related to freedom of expression that the government has been widely encouraged to reform. This issue should be watched carefully in the future. On a related matter, legislators and legal experts have also called for the reform of laws relating to defamation, contempt of court and reporting on court proceedings, although the Hong Kong government has taken the view that these latter laws comply with the Bill of Rights.
260
UNITED KINGDOM/HONG KONG
At the same time, China's cooperation in localizing British Hong Kong laws and treaties submitted to the Sino-British Joint Liaison Group (JLG) has virtually ground to a halt. China has also refused to consider in the JLG the issue of the compliance of existing laws with the Basic Law. The report fails to mention these important developments. It likewise omits any reference to the continued failure of the Hong Kong government to establish a Court of Final Appeal (CFA) to replace the role now performed by Privy Council in London. The ongoing controversy concerning the presence of foreign judges on this court had not been resolved at the end of 1994. Furthermore, in December, China's leading Hong Kong official, Lu Ping, indicated that existing judges could possibly not be reappointed by the HKSAR despite provision in the Basic Law for judges to remain in employment. (A Sino-British agreement on the CFA was finally announced on June 8,1995, and will require detailed comment in next year's State Department report).
The absence of human rights law reform has been especially telling in respect of freedom of expression. The government has been slow to respond to calls by the Hong Kong Journalists Association to reform some 17 laws that affect the media, ranging from emergency regulations to various censorship laws. While the current government has been largely benign in the use of its extraordinary powers under such ordinances, there is concern that this may not continue to be the case after 1997. It is noteworthy — though not mentioned by the report — that the government, even in the face of reported Chinese government objections, did agree to a legislative proposal to remove a particularly egregious provision in the Film Censorship Ordinance that permitted the banning of films that "would seriously damage good relations with other territories."
The report does highlight the increased level of self-censorship that is generally attributed to intimidating acts from China. During 1994 they included the sentencing on the mainland of Hong Kong Reporter Xi Yang to 12 years in prison after a secret trial for stealing "state financial secrets" (apparently reporting on Chinese official plans to sell gold and raise interest rates); the reported admission that the Chinese Ministry of Public
261
CRITIQUE 1994
Security has been gathering information on Hong Kong residents who are "against the Chinese government"; the forced closing in Beijing of a retail store owned by Next Magazine publisher Jimmy Lai after he published in Hong Kong an article critical of Chinese Premier Li Peng; and retaliation against Hong Kong reporters who had signed a petition protesting the arrest of Xi Yang by refusing them permission to cover news stories relating to a securities symposium and the mainland visit of a Taiwan delegation. There are also concerns in media circles over commercial intimidation, given the historic Chinese hostility toward businesses that are considered unfriendly (including reports in previous years of a list of newspapers to be excluded from advertising by Chinese companies). Although the report does not say so, the Jardines Group was singled out for Chinese hostility in 1994 after the Chinese government objected to its being awarded certain government contracts. This is reportedly in retaliation for Jardines' support for Governor Patten's democracy proposals.
Examples of self-censorship in 1994 included the refusal of local station TVB to show both a documentary on Chinese labor camps and an unflattering BBC documentary about Mao Zedong (the report notes Chinese objections to a public showing of this film at the Foreign Correspondents Club), and a similar refusal by the other local station (ATV) — later reversed after the public resignations of most senior editorial staff — to show a commemorative documentary about the June 4, 1989 Beijing massacre. Hong Kong's Star TV likewise dropped the BBC news service from its northern satellite beam, directed at China, because of Chinese objections to the character of BBC reporting.
The report also points out several other significant developments on the government policy front. These include the abandonment of plans to grant independence to the government broadcaster RTHK, after strong Chinese protests, and government opposition to freedom of information legislation proposed by Legislative council members. In the latter regard, the government instead declared its intention to institute an internal policy of access to information. Proposals by the Law Reform Commission respecting the need for laws on privacy and wiretapping also awaited government action at the end of the year.
262
UNITED KINGDOM/HONG KONG
In its discussion of the rights of peaceful assembly and association, while the report notes the relative liberality of the Societies Ordinance, it completely fails to mention the months-long debate over the Public Order (Amendment) Bill. The government's proposal to strike provisions requiring the licensing of assemblies and processions and to increase the ceiling on the number of participants in gatherings requiring prior notification to the police met with strong objections from the legal subgroup of China's PWC; their objection included threats to set aside such amendments in 1997 as violative of the Basic Law. These proposals are still pending.
The report's failure to discuss the international dimensions of the human rights picture in Hong Kong is an especially unfortunate illustration of its determined neglect of China's role in Hong Kong's affairs. Both Chinese officials and leading members of the PWC have indicated that China will not submit the human rights reports required under the international human rights covenants, despite the Joint Declaration's specification that the covenants will continue to apply in Hong Kong. To make matters worse, in 1994 Brjtain deferred its own reporting under the ICCPR. Furthermore, under the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, members of the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights accused Hong Kong and Britain on November 23 of treating NGOs with contempt and presenting a one-sided view in their reports to the UN. This contempt was evident in the failure to take account of the numerous criticisms offered by NGOs. In addition, the Hong Kong government was especially chastised for not re-housing Hong Kong's "caged dwellers," the now infamous residents of crowded buildings where old men live in caged bunk spaces.
The report correctly notes that international human rights NGOs are tolerated in Hong Kong. It should have pointed out, however, that this tolerance may now be threatened, given the repeated objections to either an official human rights commission or a private international monitoring body expressed by China's top official in charge of Hong Kong affairs, Lu Ping. He specifically objected to proposals to fund such a body put forth
263
CRITIQUE 1994
by a committee of the European Parliament. The International Commission of Jurists has also proposed such a monitor. It is important to note that Article 23 of the Basic Law requires the HKSAR to enact laws to "prohibit foreign political organizations or bodies from conducting political activities in the Region, and to prohibit political organizations or bodies of the Region from establishing ties with foreign political organizations or bodies." Lu Ping's statements raise fears that this provision may be invoked against international human rights NGOs.
The report accurately notes the continuing problem of the detention of Vietnamese refugees. Some 24,000 Vietnamese refugees remain in Hong Kong's largely closed camps. The implementation of the Orderly Return Program (ORP), which includes forced repatriation, as the report describes, resulted in several tense incidents in the camps in 1994. By far the worst was on April 7, when security officials used tear gas to remove 1,500 screened-out asylum seekers protesting the selection of individuals for forced return under the ORP. A subsequent investigation resulted in the indictment of three security officers. Negative publicity surrounding this incident also induced moderation and the official implementation of a system of independent monitors for subsequent ORP actions. A related problem of the deportation of Chinese nationals across the border has attracted international attention where children with Hong Kong parents, but without proper documentation, have been sent across to China, splitting up families.
The report properly describes the serious problem of discrimination against women in Hong Kong. As noted above, comprehensive legislation to create a human rights and equal opportunities commission was proposed in a legislative members' bill but firmly rejected by the government, despite broad support for such a commission from the Hong Kong Legislative Council, the British Parliament and even Amnesty International. The government has sought to advance a much more limited proposal. To the government's credit, legislation was passed in 1994 to eliminate discrimination in inheritance against indigenous women in the New Territories. The problem of discrimination in Hong Kong against the disabled remains acute.
264
UNITED KINGDOM/HONG KONG
The report gives a rather comprehensive account of worker rights, including some deficiencies in the labor laws protecting the rights to join unions and to strike. In comparison with past years, the report is also more attentive to the problems of the nearly 100,000 Filipino domestic helpers who, facing the risk of deportation, are vulnerable to abuse by their employers. Except for domestic helpers, there is no minimum wage; however, wages are usually sufficiently sustained by competitive market forces. The report notes that occupational health and safety are regulated, though a shortage of inspectors and the inability of workers to elect their own safety representatives weakens enforcement. The report does not mention Hong Kong's role in exporting production to Shenzhen across the Chinese border, where China is plagued with many worker safety violations by Hong Kong-owned companies. Partially Hong Kong-owned factories in China have been the scene of a number of catastrophic fires and other industrial accidents.
The report notes a number of moves to restrict official powers in the area of law enforcement. While the Police Complaints Committee was given greater leeway in 1994 jn investigating complaints by directly interviewing witnesses, the government resisted calls to create an independent body. Similarly, the courts have not adopted a compulsory exclusionary rule respecting improperly seized evidence. The report also notes that legislation has deprived the Independent Commission Against Corruption (ICAC) of its previous independent authority to issue arrest or search warrants. Meanwhile the new ICAC Review Committee has recommended that the commission stay away from matters of ordinary police jurisdiction. The review committee refused, however, to recommend any change in provisions requiring an assumption that unexplained funds held by civil servants are ill-gotten. On the defense side, the problem of establishing an independent legal aid authority persisted. This also infringes on the ability of people of low income to bring civil cases. While the government announced the establishment of a Legal Aid Services Council to monitor the Legal Aid Department, it did not embrace calls for independence. It is noteworthy that Amnesty International issued a report recommending such independence and making
265
CRITIQUE 1994
the additional recommendation that the loser-pays-all costs rules not be applied to human rights cases.
The report notes official movement toward greater use of the Chinese language in legal matters, including greater Chinese proficiency among directorate officers in the Legal Aid Department. However, it omits any mention of moves announced by the Chief Justice to amend the Official Languages Ordinance to allow greater use of Chinese in the higher courts. Elsewhere, controversy over language policy has arisen over Chinese language testing in the civil service, which especially affects expatriate civil servants. Legislators and local civil servants have encouraged such testing. Expatriate civil servants have also filed suit over alleged discrimination in the localization policy, again in confrontation with local civil servants who believe that such a policy must overcome historical patterns of discrimination favoring expatriates. Attempts by the government to encourage greater use of the Chinese language in secondary education has also met with resistance, this time from parents who worry about their children's competitiveness in Hong Kong's international job market.
The report omits any mention of the controversy over official attempts (now abandoned) to ignore recent controversial political developments, such as the 1989 Tiananmen Square protest movement and the June 4 Beijing massacre, in designing the content of the secondary school history curriculum. The Director of Education ultimately backed down from his position that the last 20 years were not a fit subject for history studies. Leading PWC members have also called for updating secondary textbooks on the political system and public administration. While this seems practical enough, the content of such a review is sensitive and will be carefully watched by all sides. At the tertiary level, there is some concern with the future potential for improper pressure that may threaten academic freedom, arising out of increased centralization of the processes for determining faculty performance review standards.
Finally, the report ignores a number of vexing social welfare issues. One academic report showed that Hong Kong's social welfare
266
UNITED KINGDOM/HONG KONG
programs for the poorest of its people were well below the standard for developed countries. At the same time, government proposals to institute a public pension scheme were harshly attacked by Chinese officials and others concerned with the costs of the scheme. (These proposals were eventually abandoned in 1995.)
Overall, the quality of the 1994 State Department report on human rights in Hong Kong leaves a great deal to be desired. In particular, its neglect of China's increasing influence on Hong Kong affairs makes for a partial and distorted account of the state of human rights in the territory. The reporting process should be seriously reevaluated by responsible officials in the coming year.
267
CRITIQUE 1994
268
	UNITED KINGDOM/NORTHERN IRELAND
The State Department's 1994 report on the United Kingdom is much less accurate and penetrating than the 1993 report in its treatment of the human rights situation in Northern Ireland. As in past years, it fails to take a contextual approach to human rights in Northern Ireland, preferring to look at specific rights in isolation rather than considering the extent to which politics have determined the degree of protection granted to rights.
In particular, it is regrettable that even after several months of Republican and Loyalist ceasefires, the State Department could not acknowledge that there was no longer an "emergency" in Northern Ireland and that there was therefore no longer any need for emergency laws. By retaining these laws, the UK government has done more than react "cautiously" to the ceasefires; it has, in the eyes of many international lawyers, reacted unlawfully. It is now almost impossible to argue that there is still a "public emergency threatening the life of the nation" in Northern Ireland — the condition required to be satisfied by Article 15 of the European Convention on Human Rights before a government can derogate from its obligations under the Convention as the United Kingdom has done.
One of the reasons why the government can proceed in this fashion is the absence of a Bill of Rights in Northern Ireland (or, for that matter, anywhere in the United Kingdom). Unfortunately, the government continues to give no firm commitment that it will enact such a bill: even the so-called Framework Documents issued with the Irish government in February 1995 do not promise such a development. The State Department refers to one case taken to the European Court of Human Rights but fails to express a view on whether it would be helpful if the European Convention on Human Rights were incorporated into domestic British law so that persons could rely upon it in local courts without having to take their case to Strasbourg. This is a reform long called for by numerous interest groups, including the main opposition Labour Party. Ratification by the United Kingdom of the Optional Protocol to the ICCPR is also long overdue.
269
CRITIQUE 1994
The report would have benefited from some consideration of the issue of policing in Northern Ireland. How to make the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) more accountable for its actions and policies is one of the key problems facing the people of Northern Ireland in this post-ceasefire era. It would have been helpful for the report to include some comments on what kind of accountability mechanisms would satisfy international human rights standards.
It is a welcome development that the security forces caused no deaths related to the "troubles" in 1994, although a report on the police killing of a robber brandishing an imitation firearm at Donaghadee in January has still to be published. The law on the use of force remains unsatisfactory because on the one hand it permits the use of lethal force even when it is not necessary but only reasonable [under Section 3 of the Criminal Law Act (NI) 1967], while on the other it requires that a charge of murder be brought against a soldier or police officer who intentionally fires at a person, even if that is done when there is no time for due reflection. The report does not mention the conviction of Private Lee Clegg for the murder of a civilian (confirmed by the Court of Appeal in March 1994 and by the House of Lords in January 1995), or the government's announcement that it is reviewing the law in this area in light of the Clegg conviction. There are grounds for concern that the law will be relaxed so as to limit constraints on the use of force by members of the security forces without at the same time creating new offenses with which they can be charged. In February 1994 another two soldiers were convicted of the murder of Peter McBride in September 1992.
There is concern among civil libertarians in Northern Ireland that the courts are applying the law on murder somewhat haphazardly. Throughout 1994 pressure mounted on the government to reopen the 1990 convictions of three men accused of complicity in the killing of two British soldiers in 1988: the so-called "Casement Three" are still struggling to disprove their involvement in the killings, the trial judge having adopted what to most lawyers seems a bizarre interpretation of the "common purpose" doctrine.
270
_UNITED KINGDOM/NORTHERN IRELAND
Just as worrying is the state of the law on inquests and on police complaints. As the report notes, the coroner for Belfast had to abandon the inquest into the 1982 deaths of three men after the government refused to release the findings of police investigations. However, the report fails to mention that, in another inquest into the shooting of three men by undercover security force personnel in January 1990, the fmdings were overturned by a judge because the jury and coroner had supposedly overstepped their legal powers. The families of the victims are reported to be so disillusioned with the inquest system that they see no point in holding a fiirther inquest into the incident.
As regards the investigation of complaints against the police, the report glosses over the fact that procedures are such that not one of the 1,600 or so complaints of assault made by persons arrested under the emergency laws in Northern Ireland in the past five years has been capable of substantiation. That is because there is no independent evidence of what went on in the interrogation room (for example, video- or audio-tapes), and because the standard of proof required to substantiate a complaint is "beyond all reasonable doubt." The government announced minor changes to the complaint system early in 1995, but they did not include an alteration to the standard of proof, despite a promise to that effect in 1994. The State Department report mistakenly claims that the Independent Commission for Police Complaints (ICPC) cannot require the Chief Constable to take disciplinary action against police officers; in fact such charges can be and are directed from time to time, as the annual reports of the ICPC clearly indicate.
In 1994, allegations were repeated that members of the security forces colluded with members of illegal paramilitary organizations, but government restrictions, relying upon the vague notion of "national security," continued to prevent the publication of official reports into this issue. In April, Paul Thompson was shot dead by Loyalist gunmen in circumstances which gave rise to considerable suspicion of involvement at some level on the part of the security forces. An Independent Public Inquiry in September 1994 (which included two US judges) found that
271
CRITIQUE 1994
there was a case to answer in this regard.
While the report is correct in noting a decline in the number of allegations of police brutality in the "holding centres" (for which, incidentally, there is no statutory mandate whatsoever), the fiasco of the so-called "Ballymurphy Seven" indicates that little account is taken in these centers of the vulnerability of young and mentally retarded persons. The report notes that four of the Ballymurphy Seven were released in July 1994. The judge. Justice Kerr, described the remaining three young men, who were released in March 1995, as "the less than deserving beneficiaries of the inadvertent lapse on the part of the prosecution authorities," this lapse being the failure to disclose material which the authorities conceded was of potential assistance to the accused. The judge did say, however, that if there had been video- or audio-recording of the police interviews with the detainees it would have saved the court many hours.
In its assessment of the right to a fair trial, the report makes a serious error when it states that "uncorroborated confessions... cannot be the sole basis for conviction anywhere in the UK." This is just plain wrong. Uncorroborated confessions are used practically every week as the sole basis for convicting persons in Northern Ireland. For as long as the prosecuting authorities rely upon such confessions as the sole evidence against a defendant, without the benefit of video- or audio recordings, there will always be doubt as to the validity of the resulting convictions. The other dimension to this is the anguish caused relatives of victims if persons charged with murder are acquitted simply because the police cannot prove that they did not mistreat the defendants while in custody.
The Independent Commissioner for the Holding Centres, Sir Louis Blom-Cooper QC, issued a report in November 1994 dealing with access to solicitors for persons detained under the emergency laws. He had flagged this issue in his first annual report dated January 1994, but the scheme he suggested in that report was criticized by the solicitors' governing body, the Law Society of Northern Ireland, as well as by civil liberties groups and international human rights organizations (including the Lawyers Committee), because it deprived the detainee of the right to
272
_UNITED KINGDOM/NORTHERN IRELAND
consult with a solicitor of his or her own choosing. The November report modified the scheme to permit such additional consultations in certain circumstances. The government has not put in place either the original scheme or the modified scheme, and the possibility therefore remains that a person may be detained in a "holding centre" for as long as 48 hours without access to a solicitor.
Strangely, the State Department makes no mention at all of the report of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture (ECPT), which was published in November 1994 along with the government's response. Based on a nine-day visit conducted in 1993, the ECPT report concluded that "persons arrested in Northern Ireland under the Prevention of Terrorism Act run a significant risk of psychological ill-treatment. On occasion, resort is had to physical ill-treatment." The committee recommended that conditions of detention be substantially improved without delay, expressed deep concern about the denial of access to solicitors, called for the introduction of electronic recording of interviews and criticized the fact that the police complaint system seldom if ever reaches an adverse decision about a police officer.
The State Department report is confusing when it describes the arrest powers of the RUC. At one point it suggests that it is only outside Northern Ireland that the "ordinary" detention power applies: in fact civil liberties groups in Northern Ireland have long maintained that the ordinary detention power, enshrined in the Police and Criminal Evidence (NI) Order 1989 and already used in Northern Ireland in non-terrorist cases, could replace the emergency detention power with no diminution in police effectiveness. The reference to detentions authorized by magistrates "for periods of up to three years pending trial" is curious and inexplicable, since only judges, and not magistrates, can remand people for long periods.
The report should have mentioned that the government is planning to create a Criminal Cases Review Commission to try to ensure that miscarriages of justice do not recur either in England and Wales or in Northern Ireland. However, the powers of the proposed body (contained
273
CRITIQUE 1994
in a bill presented to Parliament in February 1995) have been widely condemned as inadequate. A report by the British section of the International Commission of Jurists (Justice) proposed much more wide-ranging provisions. Certainly more needs to be done to ensure that those responsible for bending the rules in the interrogation of suspects are themselves brought to justice; in April 1994 the police officers involved in the "Birmingham Six" tragedy were told that the case against them was being dropped.
Meanwhile, miscarriages of justice continue to be unearthed. In December 1994 three men from Deny were freed by the Northern Ireland Court of Appeal after spending over four years in custody. There are ongomg campaigns on behalf of at least four other prisoners, excluding the Casement Three mentioned above. For as long as the right to silence is abridged in the manner permitted by the Criminal Evidence (NI) Order 1988 — which is barely noted by the State Department report, the risk of miscarriages will be increased. Research on the use of this order by Justice and the Committee on the Administration of Justice (CAJ), a Belfast-based civil liberties NGO, was published in June 1994 and showed that lawyers involved in the relevant cases in Northern Ireland had grave reservations as to its effects. Early in 1994, in a development that appears to have gone unnoticed by the State Department, the European Commission of Human Rights declared admissible a case that challenges the application of the order. The judgment of the European Court of Human Rights is awaited.
Although it releases the relevant figures for the rest of the United Kingdom, the UK government continues to refiise to release figures on the number of telephone taps it authorizes in Northern Ireland. The absence of a Freedom of Information Act, and the intrusiveness of legislation such as the Official Secrets Act 1989, means that ordinary people can be deprived of the most basic data at the whim of the government.
A further fundamental flaw in the State Department report is the statement that the government "removed Sinn Fein from its list of proscribed organizations and their supporters, whose voices may not be broadcast in the electronic media. The broadcasting ban remains in place."
274
_UNITED KINGDOM/NORTHERN IRELAND
In fact the broadcasting ban does not remain in place; it was lifted in September 1994. The system for issuing exclusion orders, however, does. This permits the government to restrain people from moving around their own country. The government lifted the exclusion orders applying to some members of Sinn Féin and others but could not prevent actions' being taken in the courts to challenge the validity of exclusion orders under European Union law. In two of these cases the courts have refused to allow the actions to proceed in view of the government's lifting of the exclusions in question, but in one case (exparte Gallagher) a ruling by the European Court of Justice is pending. The report is inaccurate in claiming that birth in Great Britain or in Northern Ireland is a reason in law for not being made the subject of an exclusion order from that part of the United Kingdom.
The report states that participation in the political process is open to all persons and parties. This appears to ignore the fact that persons who are serving prison sentences are not permitted to vote in elections in Northern Ireland, and that the Labour Party, which is widely tipped to be the United Kingdom's next party of government, refuses to allow persons who live in Northern Ireland to become party members. There is no law preventing such "geographical" discrimination, even though it is likely to lead within the next two years — if the Labour Party wins the general election that must be held not later than 1997 — to something approaching "taxation without representation."
In Northern Ireland there is still no law against racial discrimination, despite longstanding government assurances that one would be enacted. In commenting on the government's proposals, the report fails to note the delay — totaling 19 years! Similarly, there is no law in Northern Ireland (or anywhere else in the United Kingdom) against discrimination on the basis of disability, age or sexual orientation. (In 1995 the government introduced a bill for the whole of the United Kingdom dealing with disability discrimination, but it has been widely criticized by disabled persons for not going far enough to protect their civil rights.) Fair Employment Acts in Northern Ireland do not tackle discrimination in any sector other than employment: it is still lawful for a person to deal in
275
CRITIQUE 1994
goods, facilities or services even though he or she chooses to discriminate against customers on the basis of their religion or political beliefs.
The report glosses over the issue of overcrowding at Belfast's Crumlin Road prison. The prison was the scene of a riot in July 1994 and that summer two prisoners committed suicide there. One of the grievances at the prison was the authorities' refusal to allow Republican and Loyalist prisoners to keep their own company and not mix; havmg refused to permit that for so long, the government responded to the riot by transferring prisoners to segregated prisons elsewhere in Northern Ireland. The report fails to comment, moreover, on the reluctance of the UK government to transfer Northern Irish prisoners who are serving their sentences in Great Britain to prisons in Northern Ireland: families therefore continue to be punished by having to travel long distances to visit their relatives.
Finally, the report fails to acknowledge that the human rights of children are not properly protected in Northern Ireland. This was demonstrated after hearings in Geneva in 1994 into the UK government's report on its compliance with the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. The UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, which issued its report in January 1995, found that the use of emergency powers in Northern Ireland led to the ill-treatment of children; it also criticized the imprisonment of fathers so far from their children and the absence of any law against the racially discriminatory treatment of children. Research into the harassment of young people by the police and army was published by a civil liberties group in 1994; it showed that the problem was widespread within both the Catholic and Protestant communities.
276
