	GEORGIA
The State Department's 1994 report on Georgia provides on the whole an objective picture of the human rights situation in that country. The facts that it contains are generally accurate. However, it also contains some erroneous statements and misplaced emphases as well as some important omissions.
The report generally discusses human rights violations at two levels: those committed by the Georgian government itself and those for which non-governmental groups are responsible. This approach reflects the chaotic situation of multiple authority in the country during 1994, in which the writ of the central government of Eduard Shevardnadze extended little further than the capital city, Tbilisi. Nevertheless, at least one of the groups that the report describes as a criminal paramilitary organization, Mkehdrioni (or Georgia Rescue Corps), was granted the status of a government department in 1994. 'The group's leader, Djaba losseliani, controlled this department and still maintains his office next to Shevardnadze's in the apparatus of the Head of State. losseliani played a central role in government decision-making and was often referred to as the second-ranking official in the Georgian government. As a result, Mkhedrionfs actions should not be considered those of a private group beyond the control of the Georgian authorities, as the report attempts to depict them. Mkehdrioni is a state body and, as such, its human rights violations must be held the responsibility of the government.
In addition, Vazha Adamia, the leader of another paramilitary group, the Merab Kostava Society (widely reported to be responsible for multiple human rights violations, especially against ethnic Ossetians), is the Chairman of the Law Enforcement Committee of the Georgian Parliament.
The report achieves a great deal of accuracy in describing violations of humanitarian law, atrocities and ethnic cleansing committed in Abkhazia. To its credit, it is far more precise and detailed than the report issued in November 1993 on the basis of a fact-finding mission dispatched
75
CRITIQUE 1994
to Georgia by the UN Secretary-General. At the same time, while it is true that Georgian government forces were responsible for many fewer atrocities than were separatist troops, Russian mercenaries and Russian forces stationed in Abkhazia, the government still did nothing to investigate violations of human rights by its troops or to punish those responsible for such violations. The report should have made mention of this negligence.
The same holds true in the case of violations committed in South Ossetia. While there were strong indications that elements of the Georgian National Guard were involved in the killings of about 30 Ossetian refugees near the village of Kekhvi in 1992, the government has never taken any steps to investigate the matter and apprehend the perpetrators.
The report is accurate in describing the beating of alleged "terrorists" by other prisoners. However, it fails to establish the pattern of behavior of the official prison authorities in these instances. It appears that convicted criminals are routinely used to administer these beatings, and otherwise to mistreat other prisoners, in order to avoid any appearance of responsibility on the part of the prison authorities.
The report's flat assertion that "[t]here were no exiles" is only partly correct. While there were no summary exiles, a number of people were forced to flee the country as a result of harassment on the part of official bodies. Thus, the former Defense Minister, General Karkarashvili, as well as a number of other military personnel were obliged to leave Georgia after receiving numerous threats from the Minister of State Security, Egor Giorgadze, and members of Mkehdrioni. A number of supporters of former President Zviad Gamsakhurdia were also forced into exile.
The report tries to create the impression that almost all extrajudicial killings had criminal motivations. This view is hardly borne out by the facts. The overall level of criminal activity declined in 1994, while the number of assassinations and attempted assassinations of political figures increased. There were two assassination attempts on General Karkarashvili and anone such attempt on Tengiz Kitovani. In the case of
76
_GEORGIA
Kitovani, the report — without naming him directly — describes him as a "crime world figure" and speculates that the attack on him may have been "the work of criminal elements." While this may indeed be the case, it does not explain why the attempted assassination took place at the very moment that Kitovani was mounting his political campaign against the Shevardnadze government.
On December 6,1994, the popular and influential political figure Giorgi Chanturia was killed and his wife, also a popular figure, was seriously wounded. The report mentions this incident only in passing. In all above-mentioned cases, no one was held responsible or claims responsibility. Future reports should give closer attention to such cases, especially as assassinations, and assassination attempts, continued in early 1995. In January, for example. Gen. Karkarashvili escaped a further attempt on his life in Moscow — an attack in which another Georgian military officer. Gen. Batuashvili, was killed.
The government also failed to find the perpetrators of the extrajudicial killing in 1992 of Gamsakhurdia supporter Vladimir Djikia, committed in full view of numerous witnesses in the center of Zugdidi (all eyewitnesses concurred in holding a member of Mkehdrioni responsible). Similarly, no investigation was ever undertaken into the fate of the leader of the Ossetian community of Tbilisi, who was abducted in front of the Georgian Technical University in 1991 and never seen again.
While the report may be strictly accurate in saying that Georgia held no political prisoners, arbitrary detention for a few hours still occurred during 1994, apparently as a deterrent to political opponents of the government.
The report's section on freedom of speech and the press, with its claim that "[i]n practice, freedom of the press in 1994 was almost universal," amounts to an extremely misleading characterization of the real situation in Georgia. While the accounting of specific abuses against individual journalists and newspapers may be accurate as far as it goes, a
77
CRITIQUE 1994
variety of other factors severely circumscribe press freedom in Georgia. The first channel of Georgian television is still firmly in the government's hands, although it has allowed opposition figures greater access than before. The country's leading independent TV station, Ibervision, was forced to close in 1994 because of economic difficulties. One should stress that only leading political figures have access to the government-controlled channel; it is not true to say, as the report implies, that there is universal freedom for any speaker to express his or her opinions on political matters. Two other channels are much more free, but their broadcasts are limited to Tbilisi and its suburbs.
As far as the print media are concerned, the official newspapers and other government-owned media have unequal access to printing resources and distribution facilities. As a result, pro-government papers are on the average ten times cheaper than competing papers, which, given the overall poverty level in Georgia, represents an unfair and decisive advantage (the average price of a single issue of the main nongovernmental newspaper amounts to 25% of the minimum daily wage). Self-censorship is widespread. Furthermore, only government papers are distributed outside Tbilisi.
The report is also guilty of a number of erroneous judgments regarding Georgian legislation. Its assertions that the old Soviet-era Criminal Code has been abolished and that no new legislation was introduced — thus creating a legal vacuum— is simply not true. The old code, with all its guarantees and failings, remains in force. The assertion that Georgian legislation contains no anti-discrimination procedures is also incorrect. Georgia has in fact ratified the ICCPR and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and their ratification makes them part of domestic legislation and thus enforceable in the Georgian courts.
In the section dealing with discrimination against women, the report expresses some unfortunately stereotyped views, asserting that the participation of women in Georgian politics is generally limited and citing as one of the reasons for this the fact that women were perceived to be
78
	GEORGIA
among the ex-president's most ardent supporters. To compare the number of women in the present Parliament with its Soviet-era predecessor is meaningless, since membership in Parliament during the Soviet period was devoid of any real content. The report fails to cite the presence of a number of well-known women members of the present Parliament, such as Irina Sarishvili, who is regarded by many as the most popular politician in Georgia.
The report sees the heavy involvement of women in such occupations as the arts, languages and social sciences as a reflection of their inferior status. But such assertions are grounded in the application of standards that do not adequately understand Georgian realities. During the Soviet period, these very fields were deemed to be the most prestigious. The assertion that women are not often encountered in professional fields that supposedly require '"more complex' reasoning" is not convincing if one recalls, for example, that Georgia has produced several female world chess champions in recent years or that several technically specialized members of the Georgian Academy of Science are women. The majority of members of the Georgian medical profession — also traditionally regarded as a highly prestigious one — are also women. In general, then, while it may be true that the participation of women in a number of fields, including the executive branch of government, may not be adequate, the report seems to rush to oversimplified and superficial conclusions.
As for the remainder of the section on discrimination, the report's claim that the government generally respects the rights of ethnic minorities is on the whole accurate. However, it is also true that the government is much more reluctant to investigate crimes committed against minorities and that some local law-enforcement officials display a serious lack of impartiality in such cases, which has led many members of ethnic minority groups to organize for self-defense. This has generated considerable ethnic tension and the serious potential for conflict.
As for religious minorities, the problem of discrimination is rooted not only in the attitudes of the Georgian Orthodox Church, as the report
79
CRITIQUE 1994
daims, but in the continued support of the government for some of these attitudes. The Georgian Orthodox Church exercises great influence on the government's consideration of demands from the Catholic Church for the restoration of church properties. At the same time, a German Catholic Church is being constructed in Tbilisi without any impediments, reflecting the Georgian government's close relations with Germany, its second-largest source of foreign aid.
In the discussion of worker rights, the report correctly notes that the Labor Code prohibits forced or compulsory labor. However, there have been reports of private citizens' ignoring this prohibition. The report should have noted that, as well as the government's failure to investigate these reports, which are difficult to confirm. In addition, the Russian press has reported some alleged cases of slavery in Georgia, involving ethnic Russians held against their will and forced to work in the mountainous area of Svaneti.
In general, then, the 1994 State Department report falls short in a number of important areas. It fails to discuss the different standards of justice applied to supporters of the government, to opposition figures and to members of ethnic minorities. Levels of physical protection offered to each group also varies visibly, with the Georgian government failing to demonstrate the will to protect the rights of, and investigate violations committed against, political opponents and members of ethnic minorities.
Furthermore, the Shevardnadze government is shielded from merited criticism by the report's tendency to characterize as private and criminal groups which in fact enjoy strong connections to the government and whose criminal activities are a direct result of encouragement by some government officials.
Despite Georgia's ratification of a number of major international human rights instruments, no mechanisms exist for their implementation and no steps have been taken toward creating such mechanisms. The Georgian judiciary, as presently constituted, has shown no willingness to enforce the provisions of the covenants in the domestic sphere.
80
	GEORGIA
Finally, the report avoids raising both the question of the direct responsibility of Russian troops for past gross human rights violations committed in Abkhazia and their complicity in continuing violations. Future reports should address all of these shortcomings.
81
CRITIQUE 1994
82
