GUATEMALA
The 1994 State Department report on Guatemala, with a few notable omissions, does a thorough job of listing major human rights violations. Like previous reports, it also provides a catalogue of the government's positive actions and public statements regarding the observance of human rights. The year 1994 saw many innovations in the steps taken by Guatemala to respect human rights, and the report provides a valuable overview of these changes.
However, many government efforts fell far short of their stated intentions and a chilling increase in death threats was followed by actual and targeted violence. Unfortunately, a complete picture of these failures and of the general human rights situation in Guatemala is difficult to gamer from the 1994 report because it continues a pattern of atomized reporting without placing events in a context that would permit an analysis of the patterns and motivations of human rights violations. Similarly, the omission of key violations, or of groups of violations, compromises the extent to which the report can be used as a tool for understanding the human rights situation in Guatemala. The report could also have been improved if the detailed discussion of government initiatives to protect human rights had been accompanied by an assessment of their actual effect, if any, on the human rights situation. Particularly troubling is the report's unexplained tendency to treat the Guatemalan security forces as agencies unrelated to the government, thereby allowing it to praise the government's democratic and humanitarian efforts while pointing out the negative role of the military and other security forces. This decoupling has the undesirable effect of muting the government's responsibility for the actions of all state agents.
The drafters of the report could have prevented many of its inadequacies if they had adhered to the State Department's own guidelines. One crucial directive that is overlooked is the instruction to establish in the report's introduction the government's source of authority. Although the report does point out that President Ramiro de León Carpió was elected by Congress on June 5,1993 to complete the term of deposed President Jorge
83
CRITIQUE 1994
Serrano, it does not mention the pivotal role played by the military in the transfer of power. Nor does it attempt to consider how the duly observed fact that the "armed forces operate with considerable institutional and legal autonomy" might affect the president's authority. As Human Rights Watch/Americas has aptly pointed out, the president's struggles for reform in the Congress and the Supreme Court have left "the military high command his major source of strength." This description has unfortunately proven to be a charitable assessment of a supine executive whose public remarks have stretched credibility each time fresh evidence of army misconduct is aired. Additionally, Human Rights Watch/Americas charges that, "lacking a political party base, the new president appears to feel so strong a debt to the officers who allowed him to assume the presidency that he is loathe to confront them on [human rights] issues." An understanding of the power (or lack thereof) wielded by the executive is essential in order to understand Guatemala's human rights situation, and the State Department has compromised the report by failing to provide an analysis of the extent to which the president's mandate is circumscribed by an autonomous military.
By far the most frequently ignored instructions are those requiring that descriptions of specific human rights violations be followed by a "discussion of their overall significance in the country concerned" and by "an opinion on whether a pattern of abuse is present and who appears to be responsible."
The report's discussion of the denial of fair public trials is one area in which this failure to provide the necessary framework greatly affects the reader's understanding of human rights violations. The report introduces a listing of threats against three judges and one justice of the peace with a single sentence that, unfortunately, represents the extent of the analysis of this issue: "Members of the judiciary also continued to receive threats in an attempt to influence decisions or as reprisals for past decisions." There is no indication of whether the State Department believes these threats to be organized on a national level and targeted against specific types of judges, or the result of lawless individuals seeking to influence their fates. Also, the report's description of Judge Maria Eugenia Villasefíor simply as
84
GUATEMALA
a "reform activist," rather than acknowledging her caseload of criminal appeals involving members of the military, obfuscates a pattern of intimidation against judges involved in cases against military personnel.
In contrast to the State Department's silence, UN Independent Expert Monica Pinto has explicitly linked violence against judges to an organized campaign, not simply to retaliation by individuals on a case-by-case basis. According to her report, judges were particularly targeted in August and September 1994. The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights also suggests possible motives for the pattern of violence: "Judicial magistrates and police investigators who investigated or who had in their charge cases related to military or security forces have been assassination victims, under circumstances that make one suspect acts of revenge against them for having taken on the professional completion of their duties."
The report's discussion of the denial of fair public trials, which does address intimidation of judges, inexplicably ignores noteworthy cases, and where the report does refer to some cases, its treatment of them is open to question. For example, the assassination of Judge Elias Ogaldez, who had ordered the arrest of a military commissioner for his alleged role in the murder of activist Pascual Serech, and perhaps the most notorious case, the assassination of Constitutional Court President Epaminondas González Dubón, are absent from this section. With regard to the latter case, the State Department indicates elsewhere that no motive for the murder has been established. It then implicitly discredits the theory that the magistrate was killed for his role in removing President Serrano from office by indicating that this was the theory "initially" believed, while reporting uncritically that the government has arrested several members of a car-theft ring in connection with his death. Human Rights Watch/Americas says that it is "highly unlikely" that González Dubón was a victim of common crime, as alleged by the Guatemalan government, while the UN Independent Expert writes, "Because of the threats he received in the days before his death, the matters he was dealing with in the Constitutional Court and his firm stance on the occasion of former President Serrano's coup in 1993, his
85
CRITIQUE 1994
family, together with the non-governmental community and the Expert, regard the matter as an extrajudicial execution."
The State Department's inadequate examination of clandestine detention fails both to expose the potential perpetrators and to explore the significance of this human rights violation in Guatemala. The one-line discussion of political prisoners states simply, "[TJhere are no known political prisoners" — disregarding entirely credible charges by human rights groups that the government has failed to investigate adequately evidence of clandestinely held political prisoners. The report makes no mention, either here or elsewhere, of the 1992 kidnapping and detention of Maritza Urrutia for eight days by the security forces or of the fact that no progress has been made in the investigation of the case. And though the report does mention elsewhere that US nun Diana Ortiz has identified the former military academy as the place of her detention and torture, it does not consider the significance of the case as part of a pattern of clandestine detention of political opponents. Finally, the US government's own embarrassing (and previously undisclosed) revelation that it was aware of the unacknowledged detention of guerrilla leader Efrain Bámaca prior to his murder by the military should form the basis for a more enlightening discussion of the issue (including the allegations of there being at least 36 clandestine guerrilla prisoners) in next year's report.
The State Department also fails to examine adequately the overall significance of politically motivated killings, as well as the likely perpetrators. The report lists a number of responsible parties, including "individual members of the security forces" and guerrilla groups. After duly noting the rising numbers of extrajudicial killings, the report is quick to point out that neither the Archbishop's Human Rights Office nor the Human Rights Ombudsman indicated how many of the crimes were believed to be attributable to different parties. Although the Guatemala Human Rights Commission/USA reports that the figures of the Archbishop's Human Rights Office show that "[t]he sectors most affected by the violence were labor unionists, religious workers, human rights workers, campesinos and journalists," the report does not attempt to analyze the types of victims or their likely assailants. Instead, it simply
86
GUATEMALA
states that "both government security forces and leftist guerrilla forces committed such offenses." This statement does not credibly begin to capture the reality of extrajudicial killings in Guatemala — particularly in the absence of key contextual information, such as the fact that some 500,000 Guatemalans are officially armed in some capacity to deal with a guerrilla force estimated as low as 800.
Another example of the report's inadequate examination of the potential sources of human rights violations is its treatment of violations against journalists. The report does a better job than the previous year of presenting the issues that journalists do not cover openly. However, the State Department chooses simply to indicate that the perpetrators in the two cases it examines are "unknown," rather than assessing the likelihood that the two sectors "off limits" to reporters — the military and landowners — are connected to this violence.
Regarding discrimination and human rights abuses against women, the report properly points out that women experience wage discrimination, have fewer rights than men within marriage and are commonly the victims of violence. However, it fails to explore these issues further. The report merely cites the Constitution's provision guaranteeing equality between men and women while noting that some domestic laws continue to discriminate against women. It might usefully have indicated the degree of international concern regarding the government's insufficient commitment to women's rights. Members of the UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women reported in April that Guatemala's report and presentation to the Committee "increased their concern at the discrimination institutionalized in law." They also "expressed alarm" that Guatemala's Constitutional Court had ruled that none of the country's Civil Code required change, despite Guatemala's ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, which was automatically incorporated into domestic law and requires that states not discriminate on the basis of gender. The State Department does not report that, in the words of the Committee, "women did not appear to be a priority for the Government [and] that there was
87
CRITIQUE 1994
far-reaching legal discrimination."
In several instances, the report's discussion of violent acts is undermined by unexamined allegations regarding likely perpetrators. In at least three instances, the report simply alleges that right-wing groups are responsible, and it also suggests that the perpetrators were "freelancers" — a term it leaves undefined. Given that right-wing extremists and military hardliners have a long history of common interests and activities in Guatemala, the discussion sorely lacks some examination of the potential links between the two.
This report provides a more accurate picture than its predecessors of the Civil Defense Patrols (PACs). It clearly indicates that the PACs are part of the government's security forces and points out the official role of military commissioners as liaisons between the military and the PACs. The report should also be commended for its detailed discussion of the heavy involvement of PAC members in specific human rights violations. The report does tend, however, to play down the international concern over a serious problem of long standing. While it notes that the Inter-American Court of Human Rights did not agree to a request by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights to order the Guatemalan government to disband the PACs, it chooses not to mention that calls to dissolve the patrols have also come from Guatemala's Human Rights Ombudsman and the UN Independent Expert, as well as many Guatemalan human rights groups, Human Rights Watch/Americas and the Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Center for Human Rights.
The report inexplicably chooses to include a study in which a majority of the respondents "claimed to be pleased with the PAC membership and with the PAC presence in their communities." The report, without stating its own interpretation of the study, does allow that "some human rights monitors have charged that PAC members may have felt intimidated by fellow PAC members and did not give completely candid answers." The State Department should have provided its own assessment of the study's validity, given its acknowledgment elsewhere in the report that the PACs engage in forced participation and that PAC members are
88
GUATEMALA
allowed to commit gross human rights violations with impunity.
Perhaps the report's most glaring failure to provide mandated analysis comes in its description of the freedom of association and assembly. The UN Independent Expert reports that participation in union activities in Guatemala "entails great risks." The Archbishop's Human Rights Office relates that in the department of El Quiche, "[a]II those persons wishing to realize in their communities any development project, such as schools, drinking water, electric power, health programs, etc., are seen as a danger." The UN Independent Expert, in an oral statement to the UN Human Rights Commission, reported that nearly every person participating in human rights and social or labor activities in Guatemala has received threats.
The State Department mentions none of this, addressing the issue in just four sentences, one of which relates that the Guatemalan Constitution protects peaceful assembly and association. The report goes on to mention that the police acted with restraint in a number of cases of peaceful demonstrations. (The fact that the State Department sees fit to highlight the incidents not marred by police violence may be the most trenchant, albeit implicit, commentary in the section.) It neglects to mention allegations that excessive police force was responsible for the killings of two workers who were involved in a peaceful occupation of the La Exacta ranch in Coatepeque. The report does not recognize that the right to associate or assemble is extremely circumscribed in Guatemala; much less does it consider who is responsible for the limitations on this right.
One event is utterly dissociated from its overall significance as a result of its questionable location in the report. During a peaceful meeting in December 1994 in Tecpan, Chimaltenango, between the UN Verification Mission (MINUGUA) and human rights activists, military commissioners and their assistants threatened MINUGUA officers and beat activist Eliseo Calel. The report describes these events in the section devoted to human rights violations arising from the civil war without mention in any other
89
CRITIQUE 1994
context, such as in the section dealing with the freedom of peaceful assembly and association. The report thereby misses an opportunity to point out the implication of this event in the larger context of Guatemala: that those backed by the armed forces have little respect for the sanctity of peaceful activities by either national or international personnel.
In a few areas, the report does not so much fail to follow specific State Department guidelines as simply violate the overall objective of providing accurate and coherent information. For example, although it states that "the legally mandated minimum wage for most unskilled and semiskilled workers is rarely paid to rural and urban workers," the report also claims that "[m]ost workers receive the minimum wages." The only way to reconcile these statements is to assume the State Department believes that the majority of workers are skilled workers — in a country characterized by widespread poverty, illiteracy and unemployment. There is evidence that most workers do not in fact receive the minimum wage. The UN Independent Expert cites official figures that approximately 95% of the minimum wage is paid along the southern coast, where most of the country's agroexport plantations are located, and approximately 70% in the western department of San Marcos. She quotes official sources to the effect that in northern Guatemala "the extent to which employers fail to comply with the minimum wage is alarming."
The report also fails to provide an accurate picture of the progress being made in bringing past human rights violators to justice. It includes the Nicholas Blake and "white van" cases in a section detailing five high-profile cases in which it claims some progress was made in 1994. The Blake family has charged the Guatemalan government with the 1985 murders of Blake and Griffith Davis, both US citizens, but has met with little success or official cooperation. From the report's two-sentence account of the case, it can only be surmised that the Blake family's search for justice continues to be unsuccessful. In describing the 1988 "white van" case, in which the Treasury Police allegedly assassinated civilians, the report does not make clear what progress, if any, has been made. The inclusion of this case in this section is extremely perplexing since the only developments in 1994 to which the report alludes are the assassinations of
90
GUATEMALA
a leading witness and the assistant to a judge involved in the case.
The report also provides inconsistent accounts of the situation regarding the rights of union members. It misleadingly states that "[pjublic sector workers held a series of work stoppages in early 1994 and suffered no sanctions for their action." However, as the report itself notes two paragraphs later, "anonymous threats increased markedly early in the year when one of the federations of government employees held a prolonged series of work stoppages for improved wages and government compliance with previously negotiated agreements." The original claim covers up the reality of threats and human rights violations suffered by organized labor. Here again, the State Department does not consider the potential sources of the threats and attacks.
As noted above, the omission of key human rights violations, or groups of violations, makes it difficult for the reader to detect patterns, and compromises the extent to which the report can be used as a tool for understanding human rights in Guatemala. Such omissions occur again in the report's treatment of journalists, refugees and exiles.
The report does find that there are "[cjontinuing acts of political violence directed against journalists." However, it obscures the pattern of such acts by omitting both important incidents and relevant information about the cases it does mention (such as the type of reporting done by the victims). Events such as attacks on the building and reporters of Tinamit, a magazine known for its outspoken criticism of the government and the military, are not mentioned. The most glaring omission is the torture and assassination of Maria Eugenia Muñoz de Mejía and María Alejandra Polanco Muñoz, the wife and daughter of Tinamit reporter Marco V in icio Mejía. Mr. Mejía has received numerous death threats as a result of his work. Also, the offices of the Association of Guatemalan Journalists and those of the newspaper La República were attacked, the latter shortly after it had begun to publish reports on human rights violations.
The report all but omits any discussion of the situation of returning
91
CRITIQUE 1994
refugees, mentioning only the numbers who have returned and the shortage of appropriate land for their relocation. Human Rights Watch/Americas has reported that Guatemalan and international organizations working with returned refugees "are concerned by the army's repeated attempts to sow fear and hostility toward refugees in planned return areas." The UN Independent Expert highlights the failure of the Guatemalan authorities to recognize the returnees in practice as a civilian population, as required by the Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights. The State Department does not provide any analysis regarding the protection of the right to repatriate, but Human Rights Watch/Americas finds that the Guatemalan Army, by its "efforts to prevent what it perceives as the strategic consolidation of returnee communities... has also jeopardized the security of the returnees and the possibility for their reintegration into Guatemalan society."
It is true, as the report notes, that exile is not permitted by the Constitution. It is less clear, however, that exile is not effectively practiced despite the legal prohibitions. The report does not even consider that as a result of harassment, death threats and, in some cases, attacks on family members, a number of high-profile individuals have been forced into exile out of fear for their lives. They include Karen Fisher de Carpió (who had been investigating the murder of her father-in-law Jorge Carpió Nicolle) and her children. Judge Maria Villaseñor and journalist Adolfo Barrera.
The report could also have been improved by looking beyond the stated intentions of government actions. For example, it highlights the new Criminal Procedures Code and a revised Labor Code, but it does not fully examine the actual or potential effects of these initiatives on the human rights situation. The new Criminal Procedures Code is touted for its provisions on public defense and its extension of civilian jurisdiction over members of the military who have committed crimes unrelated to the military. However, buried later in the report is the fact that the public defender's office is not adequately staffed to provide the mandated services, particularly for non-Spanish speaking indigenous Guatemalans. The report points out that the old regulations restricted the capacity of the civil courts to prosecute persons affiliated with the military. However, it does not fully
92
GUATEMALA
consider the new code's stipulations that, in cases involving military personnel, military judges will supervise the investigations of the Public Prosecutor, two army officers will participate in the trial and the civilian court will also be designated as a military court. The UN Independent Expert finds "that all that has been achieved so far is a cross between military and civil jurisdiction."
The report points out that under the revised Labor Code workers should not be fired for participating in union organizing. It goes on to note that the labor courts are usually ineffective at enforcing labor laws but does not cite the fact that many union members have been fired by their employers in an effort to curb union activities. The UN Independent Expert reports: "In some sectors attempts are made to discourage workers from exercising trade union rights by means of mass dismissals." The report presents no evidence to suggest that the revised code has ever effectively been used to prevent a firing.
Without examining its suppositions, the State Department generally treats the Guatemalan security forces as agencies unrelated to the government, thereby allowing it to praise the government's democratic and humanitarian efforts while pointing out the negative role of the military and other security forces. Typical of this unexamined dichotomy is the report's description of the activities of human rights organizations: "The Government permits local human rights groups to operate freely, but the security forces... continued to threaten and use violence against [members of human rights groups]." Were the State Department speaking of a democracy in which the executive branch possessed some degree of control over the armed forces, it would not be possible to speak so matter-of-factly of security forces engaged in activities at such odds with the stated desires of the executive. However, the report provides no insight into why it consistently — and accurately — treats the armed forces as able to commit human rights violations autonomously without effective oversight from the executive.
This military autonomy, to which the State Department alludes in
93
CRITIQUE 1994
passing, has implications both broad and deep for the quality of Guatemala's democracy. These are most striking in the areas of rule of law and human rights, yet the report does little to illuminate the problem, despite its lengthy catalogue of abuses.
94
