	CROATIA
The human rights situation in Croatia improved in 1994 in some respects. The March 29, 1994 ceasefire accord between the Croatian government and the so-called "Krajina Serbs," who occupy nearly one-third of Croatian territory, contributed to a considerable decrease in violations of international humanitarian law. The agreement created a buffer zone along the border between Croatian-controlled territory and the so-called "Republic of Serbian Krajina" (RSK), thereby reducing the frequency and severity of clashes between the warring parties. But the effects of the prolonged war in Bosnia and the stalemate between the Croatian government and the Krajina Serbs over Krajina's political status continued to take their toll. Serious human rights violations, patterns of discriminatory treatment against minority groups — particularly ethnic Serbs — and arbitrary practices on the part of the Croatian authorities persisted throughout the country. The presence of hundreds of thousands of refugees also created serious humanitarian problems and continued to strain the resources of the Croatian state.
During 1994, the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) continued its peacekeeping mandate in the United Nations Protected Areas (UNPAs). But frustration with the failure of the UN peacekeepers to implement their mandate — specifically, to repatriate Croats to their homes and reintegrate iCrajina with Croatia — led the ruling party in Zagreb (the HDZ) repeatedly to threaten the expulsion of UN peacekeepers and the use of force to recover Krajina. Such an uncertain and unstable environment has jeopardized democratic development, human rights and the rule of law in Croatia. Moreover, it placed both local human rights monitors and minorities at heightened risk. While information may at times have been difficult to obtain, the persistence of a committed group of local human rights advocates to investigate and document violations has made it easier to make an accurate assessment of the human rights situation in Croatia. And although security considerations and logistical difficulties sometimes placed limits on the work of the field staff of the UN Special Rapporteur for the former Yugoslavia, they were able to enter the UNPAs to collect data and verify reports of human rights abuses in those areas.
59
CRITIQUE 1994
The 1994 State Department report makes a credible effort to describe the human rights situation in Croatia. It properly assigns responsibility for the violations to the appropriate parties and offers the Croatian government no concessions related to wartime conditions that would lessen its responsibility to protect human rights. It also accurately and forthrightly reports on the dismal human rights situation in the so-called "Republic of Serbian Krajina." The report notes that the denial of basic freedoms by that region's de facto local authorities affects Serbs and non-Serbs alike, stating in the introduction that "all residents were subjected to a totally controlled legal system operating in an atmosphere without any of the basic human rights of freedom of expression, assembly, press, religion, movement or the right to change their government."
Despite its breadth, the report does not offer an adequately in-depth treatment of many issues. More frequent and less cursory examples might have provided a deeper understanding of the human rights environment in Croatia. The report's continuing adherence to a rigid structural format contributes to this shortcoming. Two glaring examples of such superficiality lie in the report's treatment of Croatia's judicial system and the inadequate discussion of "ethnic cleansing" in the UNPAs. Both of these issues receive only sporadic coverage. At the same time, the report cites too few illustrative examples to convey adequately the suffering of victims of abuses, despite reports available from local organizations such as the Croatian Helsinki Committee for Human Rights, which detail hundreds of specific human rights violations.
As in past years, the State Department scatters information about human rights conditions in the Serb-controlled territories in Croatia in various sections of the report. This procedure fragments reporting on a critical issue, thereby preventing a cohesive picture or analysis of the situation in the RSK from emerging. The reader is tempted to highlight these scattered bits of information about Serb-held territories and reread them at one time. Such a time-consuming effort to gather together essential data, however, should have been undertaken by the State Department. It would have been a welcome change to the over-rigid format of the report to include a clear description of the political, social and
60
_CROATIA
economic realities in Krajina during 1994, followed immediately by a comprehensive and coherent analysis of the prevailing human rights conditions in that region.
Despite its significance in the context of the Yugoslav crisis, the report contains very little information about — and no comprehensive analysis of — "ethnic cleansing" in Krajina. In the section entitled "Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Conflicts," the report states that "ethnic cleansing continued to be used aggressively and with the blessing of local 'officials' against Croats, Hungarians, Slovaks, Czechs and other non-Serbs." Concerning the number of original Croat residents vis-à-vis current Croat populations in each of the four UN-designated safe areas or UNPAs, sometimes referred to as Sectors North, South, East and West. However, the report provides figures only for Sectors North and South (in the introduction) and gives no figures at all for Sectors East and West. Nor does it give any indication of where the former residents have gone or whether the rate of expulsions from the UNPAs has increased or slowed in comparison to 1993. Instead, the report speaks only of a "slow but steady stream of non-Serbs out of the UNPAs." It makes brief reference to the methods used to force non-Serbs from their homes — but again only in the introduction, and without subsequent follow-up. The report does describe (in yet another section) the practice of the forced installation of Serbian soldiers or Serbian refugees from Bosnia and Croatia in the homes of non-Serb residents of the UNPAs to pressure them into leaving. But this information loses much of its impact when scattered throughout the report, and should have been included in a more thorough discussion of "ethnic cleansing" in the UNPAs.
Further, the use of terminology from year to year in the report to define, describe and gauge "ethnic cleansing" is inconsistent. For example, the 1993 State Department report defined "exile" as a form of "ethnic cleansing" and gave several specific examples to illustrate the practice. The 1994 report, by contrast, contains the statement that "the Constitution prohibits exile, and it is not practiced." Instead, the report's brief reference
61
CRITIQUE 1994
to the practice of "ethnic cleansing" is now found under the rubric of "expulsions," with no illustrative examples. Additionally, the introduction to the 1994 report states that "of the 44,000 Croats who before the conflict lived in what is now UNPA Sector South, only 800 to 900 remain." In 1993, however, the report cited UNPROFOR to the effect that "fewer than 400 Croats remain in Sector South." From this comparison, it might appear that the Croat population had actually increased over the year in Sector South. There is no explanation of this apparent discrepancy. A further search for statistics in the 1993 report yields the statement that "in Sector South and the Pink Zones, home to 44,000 ethnic Croats in 1991, there were reportedly only 1,161 ethnic Croats by year's end." By inference, the discrepancy can be understood. But the report's limited and careless use of population data and shifting terminology is more confusing than helpful to understanding the scope of "ethnic cleansing" in the UNPAs.
The independence of the judiciary is one of the cornerstones of a democratic system as well as an important mechanism for the protection of human rights. Unfortunately, the report does not treat this issue in a comprehensive manner. The Croatian judiciary is riddled with problems, with a very high turnover of judges, a frequent failure to implement court decisions and an absence of prosecutions in cases involving abuses committed by members of the Croatian Army against Serb civilians.
The report does note that "the judicial process is not free of ethnic bias or political influence" but falls short of conveying the significance of this weakness. For example, the report merely states that emergency measures are still in effect despite appeals from the UN Special Rapporteur to abolish them. A UN report on this issue, however, speaks more candidly of the consequences, stating that "prolonged application of emergency measures . . . seriously endangered the protection of human rights." It further adds that "the undue prolongation of such regulations is incompatible with the process of creating a democratic State governed by the rule of law." The State Department report also fails to mention the UN Special Rapporteur's finding that the Ombudsman appointed by the Croatian government at the end of 1993 was ineffective in his role as guarantor of basic human rights throughout 1994.
62
_CROATIA
Even more telling is the report's failure to mention the controversy surrounding the selection of candidates to serve on the High Judiciary Council. The council, composed of a president and 14 members of the legal community, is responsible for appointing judges and prosecutors. Since judges in Croatia have lifetime tenure, the composition of the council is crucial to the creation of an impartial and independent judiciary. The UN has noted that "serious irregularities occurred during the selection process of candidates for membership of the council." Local human rights organizations have charged that many of the candidates were selected on the basis of their allegiance to the ruling party and not according to established procedures. This controversy has taken on greater magnitude in 1995 due to the diligent efforts of local human rights organizations to keep the issue before the public.
The issue of forced mobilization is dealt with in just a single sentence of the report, which states that "Croatian citizens, originally from Bosnia and Herzegovina, reported that the government forcibly mobilized them to fight in the Bosnian Croat paramilitary forces during the first few months of the year." Given the seriousness of this issue and the numbers involved, this merited far greater explanation and attention than it received. Beginning in late 1993, and continuing into the early months of 1994, the Croatian Army forcibly rounded up and sent as many as 10,000 Croatian citizens who were bom in Bosnia and Herzegovina to fight as "volunteers" in that country. Some individuals who had filed for conscientious-objector status were mobilized before the Commission for Civil Service had acted on their application. No call-up papers were sent; they were simply taken to an army barracks. Among the "volunteers" were several thousand Croatian Army regulars. To disguise the fact that these men were from the Croatian Army, the emblems on their uniforms were changed from HV (Croatian Army) to HVO (Croatian Defense Council). The Croatian government denied this practice, claiming that the recruits were "volunteers" who had chosen to fight in Bosnia of their own "free will." However, according to UN officials and local human rights organizations, some of those who refused to comply were forced to sign documents under duress which indicated that they were "volunteers." Those who refused to
63
CRITIQUE 1994
participate were beaten, thrown in military prison for 30 days or threatened that their family members would be harassed or their citizenship revoked. In some cases, criminal investigations were initiated against them. By March, the practice of forced mobilization had decreased, although there were continuing reports that Croatian Army soldiers were still being punished for refusing to go to Bosnia.
The report's section on discrimination reaches a puzzling conclusion with respect to the government's observance of the rights of minorities in Croatia. It first points out that "the [Croatian] Constitution specifies that all citizens shall enjoy all rights and freedoms, regardless of race, color, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth, education, social status or other attributes." It further adds that "members of all nationalities and minorities shall have equal rights in Croatia." Despite then providing a litany of serious and substantial discriminatory practices against ethnic Serbs, Muslims and Roma, the report paradoxically states that "with the exceptions noted below, these rights are observed in practice."
Far from being the exception, discrimination against minorities in Croatia appears to be the rule. The report itself finds that "in practice, however, there continues to be ever-present, subtle, and sometimes open discrimination against Serbs in such areas as the administration of justice, employment, housing, and the free exercise of their cultural rights." It notes that "Serbs continue to be particularly vulnerable to attack because of the Government's reluctance rigorously to protect their rights" and that "the vast majority of cases involving violence against Serbs went unpunished." The report also details discrimination against ethnic minorities (particularly Serbs and Muslims) in the issuance of citizenship papers, as well as societal discrimination faced by Roma — coupled with official inaction when complaints were filed — and harsh ethnic discrimination against Croatia's Muslim community.
The illegal eviction of tenants (mainly ethnic Serbs) from homes once owned by the Yugoslav People's Army (JNA), but now owned by the Croatian Ministry of Defense, was a major human rights problem during
64
_CROATIA
1994. The State Department report does address this issue but fails to note the frequent attendant brutality and theft of personal belongings. The report does assign responsibility to state authorities and acknowledges that President Franjo Tudjman appears to tolerate the practice, stating that "President Tudjman justified the forced evictions by linking them to the Serbian aggression against Croatia and eviction of one-quarter million Croats." Elsewhere in the report, the government receives credit for "address[ing] more seriously some of the primary concerns of human rights organizations, such as citizenship rights and evictions" over the course of the year. In July 1994, however, the government announced its intention to evict thousands more residents, and the practice of forced illegal evictions continued throughout the year, contrary to assurances from the government that it would take measures to restore victims' rights and prevent recurrences. Further, court orders for the reinstatement of tenants continued to be disregarded. Many evictions were ultimately postponed, in part as a result of the presence of local and international observers. By the end of 1994, however, the authorities had not yet adopted effective criminal or disciplinary measures for punishment or financial compensation in the cases of such evictions.
During 1994, the authorities used a variety of tactics in an attempt to silence opponents and critics. The report briefly mentions a few incidents but neglects to cite other significant acts. For example, the government used the military draft as a means of intimidation. In 1994, two lawyers working on human rights cases in Dubrovnik were drafted into the Croatian Army, reportedly to prevent them from pursuing their legal work. The editor-in-chief of the independent newspaper Feral Tribune, a satirical weekly critical of the government, was also forcibly drafted into the Croatian Army in January 1994. (The Feral Tribune has covered illegal and forcible evictions extensively in its pages.) In Split, the offices of two lawyers who defended evicted tenants were damaged with explosives. A journalist for Arkzin, an anti-war magazine, was stopped and beaten by police in April 1994 in Zagreb as she walked home at night from a friend's house. The police later questioned her at the police station about her writing in the magazine.
65
CRITIQUE 1994
In the section dealing with "disappearances," the report merely states that "there were few new cases of disappearances reported." The introduction, however, leaves the impression that this may be an understatement. While violence against Serbs by security forces declined, it notes, disappearances and harassment in government-controlled areas near the front line continued. Yet there is no indication in the report of the total number of disappearances in 1994, the circumstances surrounding them, or what actions — if any — the government took to try and ascertain the whereabouts of those missing.
The report details restrictions on press freedom and freedom of expression through government ownership of most print and broadcast media outlets, the intimidation of journalists and critics, and the application of economic and administrative tactics to silence dissent. It should also have described the continuing government monopoly on the printing and distribution of print media, which has been used to prevent the release of critical publications. The report also neglects to mention the frequent appearance of publications which advocate discrimination or racial hatred, despite a constitutional prohibition. One such publication, Hrvatski vjesnik, brought protests from intellectuals and journalists for its vitriolic expressions of hatred and intolerance toward Serbs. Not only has no legal action been brought against Hrvatski vjesnik, but the Croatian government actually supports its publication through advertisements in its pages by state-controlled enterprises.
Finally, the report fails to deal directly with the consequences of widespread human rights violations on democratic development in Croatia. The actions of President Tudjman and the ruling HDZ to restrict freedom of expression, intimidate critics of the government and exert improper influence over the judiciary, as well as its failure to protect the rights of ethnic minorities, all have profound implications for the development of a democratic state governed by the rule of law. The report's omissions in this regard diminish the impact and significance of its findings about the continued disturbing level of human rights violations in Croatia.
66
