	HAITI
During the first nine months of 1994, Haiti's de facto military regime and its allies escalated an already ferocious campaign of human rights abuses aimed at destroying any popular support for democracy and the return of the legitimate elected government of Jean-Bertrand Aristide. The arrival of the US-led Multinational Forces (MNF) on September 19, 1994 and the restoration of Aristide as president on October 15, 1994 led to a marked decrease in human rights violations and a fragile stability in a country ravaged by three years of military rule.
The 1994 State Department report on Haiti represents a considerable improvement over the previous year's effort. However, in addition to some omissions and understatements regarding the last nine months of military rule, the report as it relates to the situation in Haiti after the arrival of the MNF and the restoration of Aristide presents an incomplete assessment of the human rights situation in Haiti at year's end. The report's narrowly statistical approach to the incidence of violations, and its lack of emphasis on the long-term impact of abuses committed during the period of military rule, tend to understate the serious challenges that continue to face Haiti as it struggles to build a culture of enduring guarantees for human rights.
The report's section on extrajudicial killings is a marked improvement over the 1993 report, which distorted the findings of the joint UN/Organization of American States human rights mission in Haiti (MICIVIH) and failed to use statistics provided by local human rights NGOs. The 1994 report is a much more accurate reflection of statistics published by MICIVIH and local NGOs, and this is a welcome change. However, it should have included MICIVIH's own caveat that its figures are "no more than indicative of the seriousness of the situation. The Mission is aware that it receives only partial information concerning extrajudicial executions." Only in a subsequent section does the report note that MICIVIH was subject to harassment and threats from the de facto authorities and that, from April 1994 until its expulsion three months later, the mission was largely confined to Port-au-Prince and Haiti's other main
95
CRITIQUE 1994
cities. MICIVIH was also hampered by a vastly reduced number of personnel — it returned to Haiti in 1994 with perhaps 10% of its original staff — and by the reimposition and tightening of sanctions, which restricted the supply of fuel, spare parts and office supplies. Local human rights organizations were also severely restricted in their ability to report on human rights abuses as the de facto authorities stepped up their repressive campaign and thereafter declared an illegitimate state of emergency on June 11.
This is important information for several reasons. The reality confronted by human rights monitoring organizations generally speaks volumes about the human rights situation. Moreover, the inclusion of such important considerations might discourage, or at least contextualize, the inevitable country-to-country comparisons that are encouraged by the reliance on statistics to characterize widely divergent human rights situations. Some of the blame belongs to the atomized structure of the Country Reports^ which exacerbates the fragmentation of data that is not (and is not intended to be) exhaustive. In a manner typical of many of the Country Reports, the section entitled "Political and other extrajudicial killing" begins by citing MICIVIH figures on such killings, along with figures supplied by local human rights NGOs. Comment on the limitations under which MICIVIH and local groups operated is buried in the section that deals with the government's attitude toward the work of human rights organizations, although these limitations are highly pertinent to the key statistics given by the report. The solution to this problem is simple. Future reports should accompany their statistics with enough contextual information to allow readers to make an intelligent judgment of the extent to which the figures reflect the incidence of abuse rather than local investigative capacity and/or the freedom of human rights monitors to operate.
In addition to its clear identification of the military government and its allies as being responsible for a wide range of gross abuses, the 1994 report acknowledges the impact of the Revolutionary Front for the Advancement and Progress of Haiti (FRAPH), the paramilitary front for attachés and other armed civilians which emerged in 1993. The failure of
96
_HAITI
the 1993 report to discuss the emergence of this institution, which functioned overtly as a death squad, was widely criticized. The 1994 report repeatedly implicates FRAPH, particularly in connection with extrajudicial killings. Unfortunately, the report's account of the arson fire set by FRAPH members in December of 1993 in the Port-au-Prince slum district of Cité Soleil understates both the evidence linking FRAPH to the crime (which it ascribes to "unidentified terrorists") and its disastrous effect. Credible reports provide estimates ranging from at least 36 to as many as 102 dead, with another 25 missing or unaccounted for and thousands left homeless — far higher than the report's estimate of "at least six deaths, many more missing, and hundreds left homeless."
The Country Reports have generally been criticized in past editions of the Critique for their failure to provide any analysis demonstrating the overall logic and pattern of the human rights abuses that they discuss. This year's report on Haiti commendably discusses in detail the increased use of rape as an instrument of intimidation against politically active women and their friends, colleagues and relatives. This marks a welcome, if overdue, shift in the US perspective on this subject. In their report entitled "Rape in Haiti," Human Rights Watch and the National Coalition for Haitian Refugees roundly criticized the US government for its earlier position on politically motivated rape. On April 12,1994, the US Embassy in Port-au-Prince sent a cablegram, authored by the embassy's human rights officer and approved by Ambassador William Swing, which accused the Haitian left of manipulating and fabricating human rights abuses for propaganda purposes. Specifically, the cable stated that the embassy was, "frankly, suspicious of the sudden, high number of reported rapes, particularly in this culture occurring at the same time that Aristide activists seek to draw a comparison between Haiti and Bosnia." The State Department, which was forced to apologize for the cable, has already paid a relatively high price in credibility for the embassy's remarks. However, the incident was illustrative of the not uncommon reporting phenomenon of political opinion lacking in any sound empirical basis. In light of the indisputable increase in the scope and severity of human rights abuses during 1994, a rise in the number of reported rapes hardly comes as a surprise. In any event, the
97
CRITIQUE 1994
embassy should have tested its suspicions before attempting to discredit reports of serious abuse. The episode was sadly reminiscent of much of the tendentious human rights reporting that so marred the State Department's credibility regarding Latin America during the 1970s and 1980s.
The 1994 report on Haiti also cogently analyzes individual accounts of human rights violations, linking them to the military and its allies and often noting compelling evidence of politically motivated abuses. For example, the report provides a number of examples of "security actions" executed by the de facto authorities and their allies that resulted in multiple extrajudicial killings. While the military offered various excuses for its actions, the report discounts them on the basis of eyewitness accounts and MICIVIH investigations. The report also notes the political affiliations or activities of the victims, strengthening the likelihood that these killings were politically motivated. The inclusion of such information is commendable.
In general, the report's evaluation of the political character of human rights violations could have been strengthened by the use of statistical analysis provided by human rights monitors. For example, MICIVIH made the following observations in a mid-year report:
The political dimension of [human rights] violations is particularly striking in the case of enforced disappearances and rapes, where more than two-thirds of victims are leaders of or activists in grass-roots political or working-class organizations or their relatives. It is clear that the political oppression affecting the whole country is particularly concentrated in working-class districts (Cité Soleil in Port-au-Prince and Raboteau in Gonaïves) and in localities and zones (for example. Borgne and the area around Cayes) which are well known for their sympathy and support for President Aristide.
Citing this type of statistically based analysis in the report would have more effectively identified both the pattern of politically motivated
98
_HAITI
repression and the demographics of its victims.
The report's discussion of the persecution of Haitian asylum-seekers forcibly returned to Haiti by the United States is regrettably understated and misleading. The report states that "individuals in the military and the de facto government occasionally harassed repatriated boat people in isolated incidents, but the authorities did not pursue a policy of general repression against them." According to the National Coalition for Haitian Refugees, from the beginning of 1994 through May 4, 139 of the 904 Haitians returned were arrested on the dock. In July alone, 40 repatriated Haitians were arrested upon arrival. Some of those arrested were freed relatively quickly; however, others remained in prison for weeks. In addition, most detainees had to pay to be released and were generally badly treated in prison. There were numerous reports of beatings, including an account of a security official's pushing in the eye of a repatriated Haitian. This pattern of human rights violations against repatriated Haitians cannot credibly be characterized as occasional harassment, especially since the report identifies similar patterns of abuse perpetrated against other members of the Haitian population and correctly identifies such abuses as serious human rights violations. In addition, the report is incorrect in stating that the de facto authorities did not enforce the laws prohibiting the departure of Haitians seeking asylum by boat. On May 19, 1994, the illegitimate provisional president, Emile Jonaissant, announced that his government would take sanctions against boat people departing clandestinely for Florida. Credible reports indicate that in the weeks af^er this announcement at least 100 Haitians, including children, were beaten and detained for attempting to flee Haiti by boat.
The report's section regarding freedom of the press, criticized in past editions of the Critique^ remains somewhat understated. Although it provides an accurate, detailed account of the de facto regime's official decrees and actions against freedom of the press, the report should have provided more detailed examples of individual attacks against journalists, which are described generically as "harassment." Notably, the report fails to report that five US journalists were wounded and the Haitian driver for
99
CRITIQUE 1994
a US television crew killed when army supporters attacked them with guns, machetes and clubs during a pro-democracy march on September 30,1994. According to the Committee to Protect Journalists, the harassment of journalists in Haiti during 1994 included the beating of Jean Jacobe of Radio Caraïbes by FRAPH members, the detention of MacNeil/Lehrer NewsHour correspondent Elizabeth Famsworth for four days and the detention of her Haitian driver and interpreter for a number of days thereafter, the attack on CNN correspondent Peter Amett and Newsday photographer Lorescu Voirel, and the practice of threatening Haitian journalists by firing machine-guns at their homes. Last year's Critique also criticized the 1993 report for failing to discuss the shutdown and "systematic silencing" of 24 radio stations that had been broadcasting from the provinces outside Port-au-Prince before the coup d'état. This year's report again omits this discussion and concentrates instead on the radio stations operating in Port-au-Prince. The shutdown of the radio stations contributed to the isolation and vulnerability of Haitians in the provinces, where many of the most brutal human rights violations took place.
The State Department's instructions to embassies drafting the Country Reports ask for special emphasis on the rights of women and children. The report, which provides a detailed account of the use of rape as a form of intimidation in one section, fails to cross-reference that discussion in the section that deals specifically with human rights abuses against women. The report also should have acknowledged indications that children were the victims of severe human rights violations during the first nine months of 1994. For example, of 340 cases of extrajudicial killings reported to MICIVIH, 23 of the victims were minors; of 76 reported rape cases, 11 involved minors.
The report — and the State Department's reporting in general —
would be strengthened if it identified the continuing repercussions of earlier human rights abuses. These after-effects of repression are critical to understanding the ongoing problems which, in Haiti's case, persist even after the US-led intervention and the restoration of the elected government. For example, the report's discussion of internal migration notes that in 1994 there were 300,000 internally displaced Haitians. However, it fails to
100
_HAITI
provide an adequate discussion of the connection between this phenomenon, known in Haiti as marronnage, and the systematic violation of human rights. In an August 1994 report entitled "Fugitives from Injustice," Human Rights Watch, the Jesuit Refugee ServiceAJSA and the National Coalition for Haitian Reftigees argue that forced displacement is a consequence of human rights violations as well as "a punitive measure directed against individuals, organizations and entire neighborhoods, and enforced by the local authorities; this deliberate practice violates a series of internationally recognized human rights." The disastrous effects of marromage include the break-up of families, the dismemberment of community organizations and the forced disappearance of many of Haiti's legitimate elected authorities. The State Department's inadequate assessment of this serious human rights problem is apparent not only in its country report on Haiti but also in its rebuttals to Haitian asylum claims where, as "Fugitives from Injustice" reports, it "misconstrues internal displacement as evidence of internal safe havens that undercut the rationale for asylum."
Another example of the report's failure to identify the natural consequences of certain violations is its discussion of freedom of assembly and association. Here, the report correctly states that, in the first nine months of 1994, the de facto authorities severely restricted such rights and that even non-political organizations including civic education, community health and literacy groups faced repression and intimidation. However, the report fails to add that, according to MICIVIH, groups hostile to the return of democratic rule, such as FRAPH, "enjoy[ed] every freedom and organize[d] meetings or street demonstrations against the embargo and the political strategy of the international community." The implications of this practice reach far beyond the first nine months of 1994. The freedom accorded such groups during the period of military rule ultimately strengthened anti-democratic paramilitary forces such as FRAPH and in some measure served to augment the credibility of these organizations as political entities. At the same time, this practice severely weakened democratic political organizations as well as the ability of non-political organizations to address the social, medical and educational needs of the
101
CRITIQUE 1994
Haitian people. The resuhing imbalance continues to undermine the democratic process and development efforts even after the restoration of the Aristide government. For example, some Special Forces units of the MNF conducted their operations on the express assumption that FRAPH and the pro-Aristide Lavalas movement were essentially equals and rivals. In fact, in many instances MNF forces actually worked with FRAPH members, particularly in rural areas. With fresh elections scheduled for 1995 and 1996, legitimate democratic organizations were left with only a few months to regroup and mount successftil election campaigns to challenge the fully formed political fronts of the de facto regime.
The State Department's assessment of the human rights situation in Haiti after the intervention is inadequate to its task of assisting US policymakers in assessing and developing foreign policy strategies. In this critical year of transition and fragile stability, it is imperative that the government's primary human rights reporting document on Haiti provide insightfiil analysis of any potential for a renewed human rights crisis. The report notes that after the entry of the MNF, political violence was dramatically reduced and that "[wjhile politically motivated violence continued in isolated instances, it became infrequent by early November." The report repeats this type of simple comparison throughout, noting marked decreases in the number of nearly all types of human rights violations after the intervention. However, the institutional causes of human rights abuses remain, a fact that should have been included to accompany the report's recitation of areas of improvement. The task now confronting Haiti, as the Lawyers Committee noted in a recent report, "goes far beyond the restoration of the elected government or a short-term decrease in the incidence of violence. It requires tackling the deep-rooted institutional problems that have contributed to the historic absence of the rule of law in Haiti."
The UN Secretary-General, the UN High Commissioner on Refugees, and international and Haitian human rights groups have all expressed concern over the following unresolved institutional problems:
102
_HAITI
•	The absence of a functioning judicial system equipped to address past and ongoing human rights violations as well as criminal acts by former military personnel and their allies;
•	The inadequacy of the present law enforcement forces after the dismantling of the Haitian Army and their lack of credibility in the eyes of the Haitian people;
•	The deplorable inefficiency and cruelty of the prison system; and
•	The continued presence of thousands of paramilitary personnel, including former members of the Haitian Army, who have been neither arrested nor disarmed. While in retreat, these forces are violently opposed to the democratic process.
To its credit, the 1994 State Department report on Haiti does discuss the dysfunctional justice and prison systems. However, these items are discussed separately in different parts of the report and are not juxtaposed with the discussion of the decrease in the number of human rights violations after the intervention. The report thus fails to provide a coherent inventory of the existing threats to the integrity of human rights in Haiti and presents an incomplete assessment of the human rights situation in Haiti at the end of 1994.
103
CRITIQUE 1994
104
