INDONESIA
The accuracy of the State Department report on human rights in Indonesia is especially important this year, for a number of reasons. Indonesia's eligibility for preferential trade status under the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP), as well as the future of US assistance under the International Military Education and Training program (IMET), were both under consideration in 1994 and continued to be so in 1995. To a large extent, the outcome will depend on evaluations of labor conditions and on the role of the Indonesian military in human rights violations, respectively. At the same time, 1994 was marked by a considerable deterioration in the human rights situation in Indonesia.
In general, the 1994 report is quite clear and complete. Its strengths include clear and forthright statements as to the decline in human rights conditions, the responsibility of the armed forces for most abuses, the weakness of the judiciary, and other key aspects of Indonesia's human rights situation. Also commendable are the elimination of weaknesses detailed in previous editions of the Critique. The report has improved its coverage of a number of areas of judicial procedure, including the failure to implement pre-trial hearing mechanisms that exist on the books, and the absence of witness immunity and compulsory process for defense witnesses.
However, especially in view of the importance of close scrutiny of this year's report, it is also necessary to point out a number of weaknesses. They include frequent understatement of suspected or confirmed military involvement in human rights abuses; a failure to explain the pattern of abuses, including their historical and political context; considerable reluctance to pass judgment in the State Department's own voice; and cursory mention of Indonesia's attempt to exert a negative influence on freedom of association in neighboring countries for its own national interest. Some of these weaknesses may be inherent in the guidelines and design of the report, while others represent omissions of facts or allegations.
113
CRITIQUE 1994
The report correctly notes that in 1994 the Indonesian government "became markedly more repressive." While it is certainly accurate to note that 1994 marked a decline in the human rights situation, it is questionable to describe setbacks in some areas as "departing from a long-term trend towards greater openness." Rather, in the context of the 30 years of President Suharto's rule, the past five years of greater openness have been less a long-term trend than a short-term experiment, with a demonstrably freer press, greater tolerance of demonstrations and a greater role for NGOs — but all still subject to the whims of the authorities. The legal and institutional mechanisms of suppression — the anti-subversion law and the "hate-sowing" laws {hatzaai artikelen), press licensing, permit requirements for all public meetings — were never dismantled and indeed continued to be exercised throughout the past five years. When rising labor unrest, internal power struggles and an increasingly vocal NGO community began to threaten Suharto's authority and Indonesia's image abroad, these mechanisms were once again exercised vigorously to stifle debate, restrict freedoms, and imprison those who challenge the government.
Throughout the report, there is a general unwillingness to make statements expressing the State Department's own judgment, and a reliance on the opinions of unnamed "observers," that exceeds the need imposed by admittedly uncertain or incomplete data. For example, the report states that in the case of labor disputes, there "is some evidence that the incidence of such military involvement decreased in 1994 . . . However, these perceptions are not shared by all observers." The statement is then followed by specific examples of military involvement, including cases involving the Asian-American Free Labor Institute (AAFLI). In fact, involvement continues not just in the cases noted in the report but in many others that are not reported.
The International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) reported 23 known cases of army intervention in strikes in the first sixth months of 1994 alone. However, as a result of specific warnings to the press or the general climate of censorship that now prevails, many additional incidents went unreported, and this may have contributed to a perception that the problem was declining. The report notes that in Medan
114
INDONESIA
newspaper articles on the labor situation were quashed, but does not tie this to the question at hand. As noted above, the US evaluation of labor conditions in 1994 is especially significant given the extension and then indefinite suspension of the GSP review, an evaluation of Indonesian labor practices in connection with the granting of special trade benefits provided to developing countries. The six-month review was ordered in early 1994 in response to criticisms of Indonesia's human rights performance. It was then suspended for six months at the time of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit in Jakarta in November 1994, and later suspended again — this time sine die. The report does not mention that the Indonesian government, to its credit, did revoke the Ministry of Manpower decree authorizing military intervention in labor relations. Nor did it say that military intervention in labor relations, in the name of political and social stability, was still fully authorized by a decree by the internal security apparatus Bakorstanas, the Coordinating Body for Securing National Stability.
Another example of this unwillingness to pass judgment is the report's discussion of a proposed decree on NGOs, a passage that deserves elaboration for other reasons as well. The report appropriately raises, as an important issue affecting freedom of assembly and association, an impending decree on the "Guidance and Development of Community Organizations," issued in 1994 as a draft for consideration. Unfortunately, the report makes no judgment on the decree with respect to these freedoms, although it does later note that it would seriously impede the ability of NGOs to function. The report cites only NGO concern over the decree's requirement for government approval of all foreign assistance, prohibition of political activity, and government guidance in having an organization fulfill its functions. It would be worth adding that Indonesian NGOs are fearful that the draft decree gives the government wide latitude not only to "control their organizations or curb some of their activities," but also to shut down any organization perceived as threatening the national interest. In the past, the Indonesian government has described as contrary to the national interest actions including protesting development projects, organizing workers and criticizing government officials.
115
CRITIQUE 1994
In addition, the decree specifically states that an organization that "provides assistance to foreign parties that may be detrimental to national or state interests is liable to have its operations suspended." This provision would have dire consequences for the ability of Indonesian human rights monitors to provide and obtain accurate information, and would of course affect the ability of international human rights organizations — not to mention the State Department itself — to draft accurate human rights reports. It is worth recalling that in 1992 Fernando Araujo was sentenced to nine years for subversion for his actions in "undermining the Indonesian government and disgracing the nation in the eyes of the international community"; Araujo had provided information to Amnesty International and the International Committee of the Red Cross.
The report also notes that "[s]ome observers credit government security forces with restraint in restoring order in the Medan riots of April." While it is true that the massive demonstrations could have been handled in a way that would have led to even greater violence than actually occurred, "restraint" is a questionable word to use given the scale and nature of the military response, and especially given the allegations of military involvement in the Medan events at several levels. Thousands of armed troops from the army's district military command, the air force and police were reportedly present at the demonstrations, in addition to nine armored vehicles. In the aftermath, more than 100 workers and activists were detained and trade union and NGO activists were put on trial. As the report notes elsewhere, some of these suspects were arrested before warrants were issued.
There are continuing and unanswered questions regarding military involvement in the demonstrations themselves, which are not mentioned in the report despite allegations by Indonesian and international NGOs and a newspaper report. NGOs, including the Legal Aid Institute (LBH), charge that the military provoked violence by the use of excessive force, and there are additional reports, supported by some evidence, of attempts by the military to subvert the political impact of the demonstrations by transforming them into violent ethnic clashes and thus providing an excuse to crack down on the labor movement. Other observers suggest that the
116
INDONESIA
motive was an attempt by the military to weaken the standing of the president and his protégé, the governor. The reasons for these suspicions include the sudden, late appearance of professionally produced signs and leaflets inciting anti-Chinese violence but not mentioning the labor demands. In addition, one Indonesian newspaper reported that two mid-ranking military officers admitted infiltrating the demonstrators. (This was precisely the technique used in the Malari demonstrations of 1974, when hired military-backed thugs are believed to have transformed a peaceful protest into anti-Chinese riots.) Curiously, protesters brought their demands to Governor Siregar, the president's protégé, rather than to the local representative body, as would usually be the case. The governor later stated that the objective was to "present impossible demands in order to inflame the workers and hence destabilize Jakarta. The mastermind was not in Medan but on the national level."
The report details Operation Cleanup (OPSIH), a massive campaign against street crime, in which suspected criminals are ofien shot and killed and notes concern that the operation was intensified in preparation for the November APEC meeting. The report would have been stronger, however, if it had placed these killings in the context of a long history of shoot-to-kill anti-crime measures. Most notable are the Petrus ("mysterious killings") campaign of 1983-1985, which involved the killing of approximately 4,000 suspects, a measure President Suharto has referred to in his autobiography as necessary "shock therapy".
A similar lack of political and historical context is evident in the report's failure — noted in previous editions of the Critique — to address the use of an imagined communist threat to contain opposition to development projects, government policies and the government itself. The report does note that candidates are routinely screened to keep out those who were involved in the abortive 1965 communist coup or pose other risks and that critics charge that these screenings can be used to eliminate critics of the government from Parliament. But it does not address the widespread use of anti-communist rhetoric to quell debate and intimidate opponents. In avoiding this issue the report gives the impression that the
117
CRITIQUE 1994
government is reacting to a credible communist threat, despite the annihilation of the Indonesian Communist Party in 1965-1966 and the continued repression of all former communists.
The report's failure to mention allegations of military involvement in the Medan violence, described above, may reflect not just an avoidance of political analysis as being beyond the scope of the report, but also a general tendency to understate the extent of military culpability in specific cases. Two examples are the rift in the Batak Protestant Church (HKBP) and the ability of the National Commission on Human Rights to perform its functions.
The HKBP case is a complex one, with two factions of the church — one of them backed by the military — involved in a conflict over leadership. TTie conflict has been marked by violence and several deaths. In its discussion of the case, the report notes only that the military was involved in the origins of the internal conflict when it appointed an army-backed clergyman to head the church. The report also notes that supporters of only one faction have been prosecuted for acts of violence despite evidence that members of both engaged in such acts. In one blatant intervention, four members of the faction that does not enjoy military support, three of them pastors, were detained and severely tortured in the military district command, Tarutung, North Tapanuli, on May 12. They had been detained on charges of holding a meeting without permission. The report is derelict in failing to refer to these events, given the State Department's explicit instructions to those drafting the Country Reports that they should assess responsibility and assign blame for human rights violations.
One of the report's most surprising omissions relates to the Marsinah case, in which a young labor activist was mysteriously murdered in 1993, a case which is mentioned throughout the report. The report notes that the National Commission on Human Rights had questioned whether all the guilty parties had been brought to justice, and adds that all those charged in the case stated that their confessions had been coerced under torture. However, it makes no mention of the fact that the suspected guilty
118
INDONESIA
parties, alluded to in the National Commission on Human Rights findings as well as in the investigation carried out by the Legal Aid Foundation (LBH), are military officers. The report notes only that one military officer was convicted in the case, but does not say that he was charged with failure to report information to his superiors, and not the murder itself.
Similarly, the report notes that "[f]ol!owing the April labor unrest in Medan, local security authorities increased surveillance and harassment of NGO's in North Sumatra that were active in labor affairs." In fact, these actions were not limited to surveillance and harassment but included the arrest, trial and imprisonment of three NGO activists — as well as the trade unionists from the Indonesian Workers Welfare Union (SBSI) mentioned in the report—last October. One of these men, Maiyasyak Johan, was tried in connection with legal assistance he provided to workers prior to the demonstrations. In a similar understatement, during a generally accurate discussion of academic freedom, the report notes than an outspoken academic was criticized by government figures and his house stoned by unknown youths. In fact, the academic, Dr. George Aditjondro, was not just criticized but interrogated by police on October 22 and 24 on charges of "insulting a government authority or body" in violation of Section 207 of the Criminal Code. In early 1995 the results of the police investigation were submitted to the prosecutor's office in Yogyakarta in preparation for trial. This section of the report also fails to mention that Aditjondro's colleague, the outspoken Harvard-trained sociologist Dr. Arief Budiman, was fired in October for "making unauthorized comments that damaged the good name" of the university. Although this was ostensibly the action of a private institution, the rector responsible for firing Dr. Budiman is a figure closely allied with the government.
A further significant understatement of military complicity in human rights violations is in the report's treatment of the National Commission on Human Rights, which began operations in 1994. The report correctly characterizes the commission as institutionally weak and without enforcement powers and yet occasionally quite outspoken and independent. Although it notes that members of the commission, including retired Police
119
CRITIQUE 1994
Brigadier General Roekmini K. Astoeti, have been among the many prevented from participating in public seminars, it omits mention of other types of interference and does not identify these acts of censorship as part of a larger pattern of deliberate attempts by security forces to limit the commission's effectiveness. Other instances include an April 28 incident in which a commission member, Asmara Nababan, returning from a conference in Paris of the International NGO Forum on Indonesian Development (INFID), was stopped with other conference participants. The group's papers were "borrowed" by officials of the attorney general's office. In October, a member of the commission was prevented from meeting with detained trade unionist Mochtar Pakpahan on the ground that he was not a family member.
These are not isolated incidents, but reflect a stance by security officials on the appropriate limits of the commission's actions, even given its lack of independence and a membership that includes former human rights violators alongside genuine advocates. At an April 23 meeting, not long after the commission had conducted an investigation into the Marsinah case described above, army officials warned members not to be too aggressive. Commission members were told that the armed forces were protecting the human rights of the majority by maintaining stability. According to one commission member, who asked not to be identified: "It seems that if we keep our high profile in the future we will have a clash with ABRI [the armed forces] and we aren't ready for that. The blocking of Roekmini's lecture and the confiscation of Asmara Nababan's documents after returning from the INFID meeting indicate that the military wants to show the public that the commission is nothing, that ABRI can easily control the commission." In light of these facts, it is optimistic and euphemistic to say that the commission's "operations in 1994 were hampered somewhat by start-up logistical and procedural problems."
While it is true that disappearances have been increasingly rare, it is important to stress that there has been no progress on accounting for past cases. The UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances transmitted four newly reported cases of disappearances from 1992 and retransmitted nine cases. The working group is aware of an estimated 418
120
INDONESIA
cases of unresolved disappearances, many of them dating from the 1991 killings at Dili, East Timor. The report correctly notes that efforts to account for the missing and the dead from the 1991 Dili massacre remain inadequate. The UN Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial, Summary and Arbitrary Executions went further, stating that "there is no independent State authority capable of investigating cases of disappearances in East Timor" and that he "feels that there is no ongoing investigation regarding the cases of the persons who remain missing."
The report mentions the Special Rapporteur's visit to East Timor and correctly notes that while the visit was a positive step, the rapporteur questioned whether all those who wanted to meet with him had been allowed to do so. It bears noting also that the Special Rapporteur was not allowed to visit Aceh and Irian Jaya as he had requested. Furthermore, six of the imprisoned East Timorese whom the Special Rapporteur had expressed a wish to visit had been abruptly transferred from Dili to Semarang, in Central Java, on June 12, several weeks before the mission. The reason for their transfer was their protest to visiting foreign journalists about the conditions of their detention, and the move made it impossible for the Special Rapporteur to visit them in person. His requests for medical files, disappearance reports and guidelines on how these should be investigated, as well as for the full report of the National Commission of Inquiry that looked into the killings, were not complied with. In addition, the Chief of East Timor police reported to the Special Rapporteur's surprise that no cases had been received from the Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances. These lapses are especially disappointing in view of Indonesia's membership on the UN Commission on Human Rights.
The report's discussion of trial procedures and the judiciary is very good. In an improvement over previous years, the 1994 report accurately describes the possibility of defendants challenging the legality of their arrest and detention as "virtually impossible," rather than simply citing the existence of the procedure on the books. It also notes the absence of provisions for witness immunity and compulsory process for defense witnesses in the Criminal Procedure Code, an observation absent from
121
CRITIQUE 1994
previous years' reports.
At tl\e same time, wliile tlie report is usually careful to balance official accounts with the views of independent, non-governmental observers, it occasionally gives excessive credence to government measures. It notes that the government offered a general amnesty to members of the Timorese resistance, and was reported to have released some who were apprehended rather than trying them. It does not mention that the government has periodically offered such amnesties in the past, only to renege on them later, thereby considerably reducing their value to the peace process. In addition, some of those insurgents who availed themselves of the amnesty, such as Jose "Mauhudu" da Costa and Antonio Gomes "Mauhunu" da Costa, were actually placed under a form of house arrest in which they had to spend each night in the home of a military officer. This fact was noted in the State Department's 1993 report, but is missing this time. Also in connection with East Timor, the report mentions that visitation rights for the jailed East Timorese Fretilin leader Xanana Gusmao were suspended for a month after he sent a letter to he International Commission of Jurists. The report does not describe the content of Gusmao's letter, which, as noted in last year's edition of the Critique, makes claims that directly contradict the assessment of the 1993 State Department report that Gusmao's government-appointed defense counsel "conducted a vigorous defense."
The State Department's instructions direct the drafters of the Country Reports to include information on coercive population control practices. While Indonesia's family planning program, long recognized for its quantitative success, has improved attention to women's health and rights in recent years, there continues to be questionable military involvement in recruitment and service delivery and allegations of strong-arm tactics in East Timor and elsewhere. While these allegations are admittedly difficult to confirm, they go altogether unmentioned in the report, which might have made some effort to assess their validity.
Finally, the report makes only brief mention of the fact that Indonesia successfully exerted pressure on several neighboring countries
122
INDONESIA
in 1994 to restrict NGO-sponsored conferences on East Timor. The Indonesian government exerted economic and diplomatic pressure in an attempt to force the Philippines to cancel the conference, a move that would have violated the Philippine Constitution. In the end, Philippine President Fidel Ramos did not cancel the conference but did block entry by participants, including Danielle Mitterand, wife of then French President François Mitterand. The drama then repeated itself in similar conferences organized in Thailand and Malaysia. Public statements by Indonesian officials expressed incredulity that constitutionally protected freedoms would be placed ahead of perceived national interest.
123
CRITIQUE 1994
124
