	INDIA
The 1994 report follows its recent predecessors in marking a significant improvement in the State Department's reporting of human rights practices in India. It accurately reflects the perceptible easing of tensions following the significant decline in terrorist activity in Punjab — which, along with Kashmir, has been a source of great concern to human rights monitors in recent years. It also continues the trend set by its predecessors of making available some quite accurate statistical information. However, like previous reports, it contains some errors (mostly of omission) and a few misstatements.
In its treatment of political and other extrajudicial killing, for example, the report fails to note the admission of the Indian junior defense minister in August 1994 that there had been some 50 instances of the killing of civilians by soldiers since the beginning of the year. Similarly, it fails to note an announcement made by the Minister of State for Home Affairs in Parliament on May 5, following growing complaints about deaths of persons in police custody, that the government had decided to consider a legal amendment to provide for judicial inquiries into all cases of deaths in custody.
In the latter context, the report could have usefully cited the strong line taken by several judges in different parts of the country emphasizing the need for condign punishment of those responsible for custodial abuse. A sessions judge in Andhra Pradesh, for instance, sentenced five policemen to imprisonment for between three and ten years in April after a judicial inquiry established that they had indiscriminately beaten to death a sailor, Mr. T. Muralidharan, while he was in their custody. The court also ordered the policemen to pay fines which would then be handed over to Mr. Muralidharan's relatives. In another case, the Rajasthan High Court ordered the state government to establish a committee to determine the number of custodial deaths between 1990 and 1992 and to pay monetary compensation of50,000 rupees (approximately $1,600) each to the families of victims so identified. The court also ordered the government to take suitable legal and disciplinary action against the police personnel
105
CRITIQUE 1994
responsible for these deaths, to launch a special training program for police on the need to treat detainees humanely, and to appoint a committee of public representatives and a doctor for each police station.
The value of the report could have been enhanced by the inclusion of a few more examples of custodial deaths and extrajudicial killing by state security forces. In Rajasthan alone, for instance, at least eight people were reported to have died in July and August after being tortured while in police custody, a development described by Amnesty International as "unprecedented, even in a country where such killings have been frequent." Again, on May 9, troops belonging to the paramilitary Border Security Force (BSF) were reported to have arrested and shot dead three teenage boys in Bandipora, apparently in retaliation for a grenade attack by Kashmiri militants on a BSF patrol.
The report rightly highlights the widespread problem of "disappearances" but could have underlined the seriousness of the problem by referring to the fact that the Punjab High Court alone was faced with some 58 petitions relating to 62 disappearances up to early December. At least a dozen more petitions were reportedly filed against the Punjab police in the Supreme Court. The report could also have made reference to the dramatic — and potentially damaging — revelations made by a former member of an elite anti-terrorist force, Satwant Singh Manak, in a Supreme Court petition, that some 11 of his ex-colleagues had participated in faked "encounter" killings in Punjab.
The report could have emphasized that the phenomenon of "disappearances" is not confined to trouble-prone states such as Punjab or Kashmir by referring to some of the scores of cases reported from elsewhere in the country. A typical example, highlighted by Amnesty International, concerned Sherpal, a 32-year-old man belonging to a backward caste, who "disappeared" after being taken into custody by police in Uttar Pradesh in February. His wife and father, who had also been arrested with him, were beaten up and released, but their efforts to locate Sherpal were reportedly stonewalled by the police.
106
_INDIA
The report's treatment of torture and related abuses by the police is fair and accurate. However, here again, the report could have included a few more examples to underline what has been seen by human rights activists as one of the most serious and intractable problems. It could have referred, for instance, to some of the scores of cases of high-handed behavior by the Punjab police documented in a damning report published in India Today in August. That report concluded that police in that state, "hardened by their long-drawn-out battle with terrorists, have yet to recover their peacetime bearings. They are applying the same tactics to deal with ordinary criminals and even innocent citizens as they did with the militants."
The report could have underlined the continuing difHculties in bringing to justice those accused of torture by citing the widely publicized case of Archana Guha, a school teacher from West Bengal, who, after being permanently disabled as a resuh of torture inflicted by the police, has been fighting a 16-year battle to bring her tormentors to book. Her case was highlighted by Amnesty International in a report published in March.
The report gives a slightly misleading picture concerning the punishment of state security personnel involved in rape by quoting a People's Union for Democratic Rights (PUDR) report to the effect that there have been no convictions in such cases. While that may be strictly true in the sense that no police or army personnel were convicted in a civilian court, at least two soldiers were reportedly court-martial led and sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment in July for raping a woman in a village in Kashmir.
A significant omission in the report's treatment of arbitrary arrest and detention is the lack of any reference to Shabir Ahmed Shah, who was one of the longest-serving political prisoners in India. First arrested in 1989 and detained without charge or trial under the Jammu and Kashmir Public Safety Act, he was subsequently held under the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act (TADA) before being released on October 14. He is reported to have spent, intermittently, some 18 years in
107
CRITIQUE 1994
detention without charge or trial since 1968 and had been adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience.
The report rightly highlights the controversial nature of TADA and its unfair invocation in cases that clearly fell outside the stated purpose of the law when it was first enacted in 1985 — namely, to fight insurgency in Punjab. It could have underlined this anomaly by citing the statements made earlier in the year by both the chief minister and the director-general of police, Punjab, that the situation in the state had virtually returned to normal and yet asking for the retention of TADA. The value of the report is further diminished by a few other significant omissions concerning TADA and its application.
It could have usefully pointed out, for instance, that Kerala — one of the latest states to invoke TADA during the year — is also one of the most peaceful states in the country. Here, the act was used in February to detain political party workers amid strong protest from the opposition. In referring to the misuse of TADA in Gujarat, the report could also have noted that, according to the National Human Rights Commission, no fewer than 19,000 people — a majority of them bootleggers — had been detained under the act in that state alone. Among those who suffered from the misuse of TADA was a meat-seller who was charged with carrying an unlicensed weapon — even though the weapon was only a knife, a tool of his trade.
In its reference to the Supreme Court judgments of March and July 1994, upholding the validity of TADA, the report fails to note that the court imposed some strict conditions on the application of the act. It held, for example, that not every criminal act, however serious, can attract the provisions of TADA: the act should be one committed with the requisite intention envisioned by the statute. Furthermore, every accused person detained under TADA has the right to be released on bail if the police fail to complete their investigations within six months, other than in those exceptional circumstances explicitly laid down in the act.
The court also recommended the establishment of screening or
108
_INDIA
review committees by the federal and state governments to review all TADA cases, including the manner in which the act had been applied by those responsible for its enforcement. The federal government was required, in addition, to undertake a quarterly administrative review of how the act was being implemented by the states. In deference to these directives, a number of such committees have reportedly been established by both the federal and state governments, though some human rights monitors have expressed concern that little is known about the nature of the review process.
The report completely ignores another important judgment concerning TADA, which was delivered by the Supreme Court in September 1994. That judgment, among other things, insisted that, for a successful prosecution of someone accused under the act of possessing arms without authorization, it was incumbent on the state to prove that the accused was in conscious possession of such arms. The court's judgment implicitly endorsed the view expressed by many critics of TADA that the correct way of dealing with mere unauthorized possession of arms without the requisite "terrorist" intent was to bring a charge under the Arms Act, which provides for such an offense.
The report pertinently refers to the statement made by the Minister of State for Home Affairs that the government may not renew TADA when it expires in April 1995. It could have usefully added that the minister also admitted that 95% of the cases registered under the act had been rejected by the courts and that the act was being "misused extensively against Muslims." In another significant statement missed by the report, the Minister of State for Internal Security announced in September that the ruling Congress Party would establish a two-member committee to review all cases of detention under TADA in Gujarat to remove the heavy volume of complaints emanating from that state. No less significantly, the director-general of police in Punjab admitted as early as January that TADA had been of "little advantage" to policemen engaged in combatting terrorism.
The report's reference to the National Human Rights Commission's
109
CRITIQUE 1994
decision to challenge some of TADA's provisions in the Supreme Court could usefully have included the statement of the commission's chairman, made after its review of the act's application with senior federal and state officials, that, in his opinion, TADA should be scrapped in toto because of its extensive misuse, especially in states untouched by terrorism. The chief minister of one such state, Madhya Pradesh, reportedly endorsed this criticism, describing the act as "unreasonable" and promising to withdraw all cases registered under it in his state.
The report's section on freedom of speech and press could have been strengthened by the inclusion of a few more examples of state-sponsored or state-inspired attacks on newspapers and journalists. There is no mention, for instance, of the seizure of copies of the June 2 issue of the Far Eastern Economic Review on the grounds that it contained an "objectionable" photograph of Muslim separatists burning the Indian flag in Kashmir or of the seizure of another magazine, India Abroad, for similar reasons. Nor does the report refer to the calculated and persistent attacks, carried out on the orders of the Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister, Mulayam Singh Yadav, on two leading Hindi newspapers, DainikJagran and Amar Ujala, which led to widespread protests and a hunger strike by journalists in the state in October. Activists belonging toYadav's ruling party reportedly assaulted vendors selling the two papers throughout the state and burned thousands of copies while Yadav imposed a ban on government advertisements in the papers, allegedly because the papers had opposed the chief minister's discriminatory policies against the residents of the state's hill districts.
The report correctly highlights the harassment of the Punjabi daily Aj Di Awaz by the Punjab police. It could have usefully added that the general manager of the newspaper had earlier been summoned to the office of the assistant district commissioner who reportedly advised him to stop criticizing the government and offered inducements to follow a pro-government line. On July 13, one of the journalists working on the paper, Sukhpal Singh Pali, was allegedly abducted by the police, and all pleas by his family and the journalists' union to trace him were ignored by the authorities.
110
_INDIA
Another incident which fails to find a place in the report concerns the physical assault on the executive editor and journalists of the Urdu-language newspaper, Dainik Citizen, by members of the Hindu-nationalist Shiv Sena party while attending a press conference being addressed by its leader, Bal Thackeray, in Aurangabad, Maharashtra. The alleged reason for the attack was a report in the paper earlier that a rally organized by the party had been poorly attended. Although the police apparently registered a case against Thackeray, journalists expressed concern over the government's reported reluctance to press criminal charges against those responsible for the attack.
In the section on respect for political rights, the report refers rather cryptically to a judgment of the Supreme Court, delivered in May, which apparently upheld the government's authority to suspend fundamental rights during an emergency. Despite extensive research and inquiries with leading Indian lawyers, the Lawyers Committee has been unable to locate any such judgment. It might be advisable for the authors of the report in the future to provide more details of such judgments — for example, the title of the case in question — for ease of reference.
The report's treatment of the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) is as fair as it is comprehensive. However, one valuable piece of information which has been left out is the announcement by the commission in August that it would soon have its own independent investigating agency — an announcement that was seen as meeting the frequently expressed concern of human rights monitors that the commission's effectiveness might be compromised without such an independent aid to its work. The report could also have noted that, during the commission's on-site visits to Punjab and Kashmir, the governments of both states attempted — albeit unsuccessfully — to prevent people with complaints from meeting commission members and deposing before them.
In its discussion of the continuing controversy between Hindus and Muslims over the demolished mosque in Ayodhya, the report could usefully have included mention of the decision by the Supreme Court in
111
CRITIQUE 1994
October, refusing to answer a presidential reference that sought to pass on to the court the responsibility of determining the historical facts behind the controversy. The purpose of the reference, said the court, was opposed to secularism and therefore unconstitutional.
112
