	IRAQ
The State Department's 1994 report on Iraq maintains the improvement in precision and attention to detail that was noted in the 1993 edition of the Critique. However, reliable information continues to be limited by lack of access to Iraq.
Although the report notes the lack of US diplomatic representation in Iraq, it does not directly state that all the main bodies reporting on human rights there — including UN Special Rapporteur on Human Rights in Iraq Mr. Max Van der Stoel, Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch/Middle East — are also unable to visit government-controlled areas of Iraq. All are therefore dependent for direct testimony on refugees and deserters who reach Iraqi Kurdistan, Iran or other countries to which Iraqi nationals have fled. Other sources used are opposition groups, in particular the Iraqi National Congress, now based in the Kurdish-controlled areas of northern Iraq, and Iraqi opposition groups based in Iran. The report does for the most part specify the sources of its information, but it would have been helpful for the reader to be made fully aware of the constraints under which the report is compiled.
The format of the report, although helpful in presenting various categories of human rights violations, restricts the amount of background information or analysis that can be included. Furthermore, the division of material under fixed headings relating to specific types of abuse sometimes splits up information on particular areas or groups which would be easier to follow if presented together in a single section.
More important, the role of the international community and the human rights consequences of its interventions in Iraq since 1990 continue to be played down or left unexplained, a point also raised in last year's Critique. Given that the United States has been a key player in decisionmaking within the UN Security Council on issues relating to Iraq during this period, this perspective would seem very relevant. As with the 1993 report, this omission is most evident in addressing the question of the impact of sanctions on Iraqi society. Clearly "human rights" in the context
125
CRITIQUE 1994
of this report refers mainly to civil and political rights. But the report includes discussion of issues to which the effects of sanctions are directly relevant — for example, the rights of children, where it notes the reported increases in child mortality and disease rates.
Insofar as it recognizes the effects of sanctions, the report places the blame for their consequences entirely on the Iraqi government. First, it argues that Iraq has not complied fully with UN Security Council Resolution 687 (the ceasefire resolution). Iraq has also rejected Resolutions 706 and 712, which allowed it to sell limited amounts of oil in order to pay for its humanitarian needs, to provide funds for the UN Compensation Fund for victims of the Gulf War (individual, corporate and government), and to pay the expenses of UN operations in Iraq. (In May 1995 Iraq rejected a further Security Council Resolution, number 986, to the same effect.)
On Iraq's responsibility for the impact of sanctions, the State Department's view is shared by the UN Special Rapporteur. In his November 1994 report, Mr. Van der Stoel argues that Iraq's appeal to national sovereignty as a reason for refusing the limited oil sale is spurious, since it has — after pressure — accepted very substantial infringements of its sovereignty by the weapons inspectors of the UN Special Commission (UNSCOM). He ftirther points out that the import of food and medicine are not restricted under sanctions.
However, the major problem for ordinary Iraqis is the overall collapse of the economy and the erosion of the country's infrastructure, which affects all aspects of life, particularly family income, health and education. While in no sense underestimating the responsibility of the government of Iraq in this situation, it may be argued that in choosing to impose sanctions as a means of enforcing a particular set of post-war requirements on Iraq, the international community — with the US government acting as a leading protagonist — cannot avoid all responsibility for the consequences, even if the suffering caused the general population is unintended.
126
_IRAQ
As the report itself makes clear in its description of Iraq's "repressive one-party apparatus," Iraqi citizens are in no position to bring pressure on their government to change its position or conduct. Since sanctions were introduced in 1990, the international community has been well aware that the Iraqi government, with its decades-long record of human rights abuses, would be likely to put its own survival first in any crisis. The inequitable distribution of increasingly scarce resources could therefore have been anticipated. At the very least, this suggests the need for further debate on the targeting and implementation of sanctions to avoid further suffering on the part of those who are already victims of their own government's policies.
The report alludes to the problems facing the delivery of humanitarian aid to vulnerable groups in Iraq. In referring in the introduction to attacks on aid workers during 1994, the report suggests these attacks occurred throughout the country. It only becomes clear only in a later section that the attacks on UN and NGO personnel and journalists occurred mostly in Kurdish-controlled northern Iraq, or on convoys entering or leaving this area.
In fact, as the report shows, aid workers in the north were at risk from a number of sources: attacks which, as the report suggests, were probably the work of agents of the Iraqi government; inter-Kurdish fighting; and attacks by Iran and Turkey across their respective borders. The UN and the few NGOs still working in government-controlled areas do not appear to have encountered serious harassment during 1994, with the exception of one incident — mentioned in the report — of an attack by a crowd in Mosul on a UN helicopter attempting to evacuate an injured guard.
What the report does not mention is the decline in international donor funding of the aid program since the first year of crisis after the Gulf War. While the Iraqi government has certainly placed obstacles in the way of the aid program and made monitoring difficult, the international community has not shown the same determination to ensure the
127
CRITIQUE 1994
effectiveness of humanitarian aid to needy communities as it has to carry out UNSCOM's weapons inspection program.
A further issue is the role which the post-war economic crisis has played in the incidence of specific human rights abuses. In 1994, as the report notes, the Iraqi government resorted to the amputation of hands, feet and ears and branding on the forehead as punishments for theft and desertion from the army. In his November report, the Special Rapporteur detailed the decrees issued between June and September instituting these "cruel and unusual" punishments. The State Department report does not itemize the decrees. Although Amnesty International and the Special Rapporteur have documented specific cases of persons subjected to these punishments, the report only discusses them in general terms, citing opposition sources as saying that large numbers of people had bled to death as a result. The report notes that doctors (mainly employed by the military, but in some cases civilians) have been threatened with the same punishment if they do not carry out these operations. The Special Rapporteur has further pointed out that the punishments have diverted limited health resources for the purpose of "legalized mutilation."
The State Department report does not link the introduction of these brutal punishments to the burgeoning crime wave in government-controlled areas of Iraq and to high levels of army desertion. It is clear that since 1991 there has been a marked deterioration in civil order. This has been caused mainly by the drastic decline in living standards and the intense struggle over scarce resources arising from the effects of economic sanctions. The report makes no mention of other laws passed in 1994 that are directly related to rising levels of army desertion and "economic crimes." A law was passed in June 1994 setting up special courts within the ministries of the interior and defense to try certain offenses. These courts operate outside the central judicial apparatus and deal with the offenses of desertion or default from military service on three occasions, and possessing and trading in medicines or medical equipment obtained from non-official sources. A new decree, also passed in June 1994 by the Revolutionary Command Council, empowers certain Ba'ath Party officials and other civilians to detain without trial for up to five years persons who are accused
128
_IRAQ
of offenses involving rationed goods and foreign currency. The detention of such people takes place outside the official penal system.
In its introduction, the report reiterates the allegation of mass executions of political opponents. However, it details only three specific instances in 1994 of extrajudicial killings for which the government is known or suspected to be responsible. These are the assassination of Talib Suhayl al-Tamimi in Lebanon, apparently by Iraqi diplomats based in Beirut; the death under suspicious circumstances in a road accident in southern Iraq of Mohammed Taqi al-Khoei, a son of Grand Ayatollah al-Khoei, whose family, as the report notes, has long been a target of government harassment and abuse; and the killing of German journalist Lissy Schmidt and her Kurdish bodyguard, Aziz Kader Faraj, in Sulei-maniyah govemorate. According to the Kurdish authorities, several suspects arrested in the latter case confessed that the Iraqi government had paid them to carry out the killings.
A statement in the 1993 State Department report referring to the alleged mass arrests, detention and execution of Shi'as in the south of Iraq is repeated in the 1994 report without further elaboration, except to note the difficulty of confirming the numbers killed because of government controls on the movements of international personnel in southern Iraq. A few paragraphs earlier, the report quotes the Special Rapporteur's report of mass executions of Shi'a Arabs during 1993 in Abu Ghraib and al-Radwaniyah prisons in central Iraq.
While the report quotes the Special Rapporteur as having received "reports on the widespread phenomenon of disappearances," it cites no specific cases as having occurred in 1993-1994. The report does allude to the continuing problem of more than 600 Kuwaitis missing since the 1991 Gulf War.
The report refers briefly to human rights abuses related to inter-Kurdish fighting in the north, which has flared sporadically since December 1993. The introduction to the report states that "[f]reedoms of
129
CRITIQUE 1994
expression and association do not exist, except in Kurdish-controlled areas in the north." In the light of events in the north over the past two years, this assertion needs to be qualified, particularly in light of the pressure brought to bear on the smaller political parties by the dominant Kurdish Democratic Party (KDP) and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK). The report does make a welcome improvement, however, in its detailed discussion of the impact on northern Iraq of military actions by the Turkish and Iranian governments in pursuit of conflicts with their own Kurdish populations. The 1993 edition of the Critique noted the paucity of such detail in the 1993 report. Also welcome is the report's reiteration of concerns about the effects of land mines, which, as it correctly says, "continue to kill and maim innocent civilians in northern Iraq."
The continuing internal embargo on the north is mentioned, with new developments, including the cutting of electricity supplies from the Iraqi grid which particularly affected the Dohuk city area (since August
1993)	and the Aqrah area in the south of Dohuk govemorate (since August
1994).	However, the report fails to note that the Iraqi government began in 1994 to permit some trade in oil products between government-controlled areas and the Kurdish-controlled north. The continuing impact of international sanctions is not mentioned at all in this context.
In its discussion of the use of excessive force and violations of humanitarian law — a section first added to the Country Reports in 1993 — the report again stresses the continuing abuses caused by the Iraqi government's scheme to drain the southern marshlands, and related attacks on the civilian population of this region. In giving details of these attacks, the report acknowledges clearly that it is drawing heavily on "opposition sources." It would be helpful to have a clearer idea of exactly which opposition sources these are, as well as the State Department's assessment of their reliability in reporting events in Iraq over the past few years.
The report contains a clearer acknowledgement than in past years of the fact that the no-fly zone (in force over Southern Iraq below the 32nd parallel since August 26,1992 and policed by the United States, the United Kingdom and France) has not prevented human rights abuses in the
130
_IRAQ
marshes. The report states: "The Gulf War allies imposed a 'no-fly zone' over southern Iraq in 1992. It continues to deter aerial attacks on the marsh dwellers but does not prevent artillery attacks or the military's large-scale burning operations." The previous year's report, by contrast, merely acknowledged that the Iraqi military were carrying out land-based artillery attacks "in defiance of the no-fly zone."
The report states that the US government made public in 1994 aerial and satellite photographs showing "the almost total destruction of the marshes." The question arises as to why it took so long for this material to be published, given the concern expressed in previous reports about the environmental damage and human rights abuses associated with the Iraqi campaign. Aerial surveillance of Iraq has been going on at least since the 1991 war, and opportunities for collecting data from the air have increased from mid-1992 with allied planes patrolling over the area daily. By that time, the drainage project was already underway. The 1993 State Department report mentioned that the UN Special Rapporteur had already had access to "aerial and satellite photography."
The report notes the internal displacement of many marsh dwellers who have been forced to move to the edges of the marshes, to areas not yet drained and to the peripheries of cities in order to escape attack, harassment or arrest. It is almost impossible to quantify these movements but it seems likely that such displaced people are very vulnerable both in terms of their human rights and their access to food, housing and social services. The same section of the report refers to the "regime's diversion of supplies in the south." This ambiguous phrase presumably refers to the marsh areas, where, as the Special Rapporteur noted in his February 1994 report, government restrictions effectively denied the marsh dwellers access to food and health care. While it is oiien alleged that the south as a whole has suffered in the distribution of scarce resources, it does appear that the majority of people outside the marsh areas receive government rations.
In the section dealing with freedom of movement within the country, foreign travel, emigration and repatriation, the report mentions the
131
CRITIQUE 1994
forcible relocation by the Iraqi Army of marsh inhabitants and notes the renewed flow of refugees to Iran. In discussing the latter, the report states misleadingly that the Amar Appeal is "operating several of the camps" for Iraqi refugees in southwestern Iran. Official refugee camps are in fact under the control of the Iranian Interior Ministry's Bureau of Aliens and Foreign Immigrants Affairs, and, in one case, of the Iranian Red Crescent Society. A number of aid organizations, including the Amar Appeal, work in these camps but do not run them. The Amar Appeal also has a major role in providing assistance in the border "transit" camp at Himmet.
There is some unnecessary vagueness in the report's references to the dates of forced population movements. For example, the report refers to estimates of 50,000 - 60,000 Shi'a refugees as having fled "in previous years." Most of this flow occurred in April-June 1991 in the immediate aftermath of the post-war uprisings. Relatively small numbers of refugees were added to the total in Iran between then and the summer of 1993, since when the draining of the marshes has provoked another exodus of 10,000 or more.
The report is similarly misleading in its reference to the large numbers of Iraqis expelled from the country as "Persian sympathizers." It alludes to these expulsions as having taken place "in recent years." However, as the Special Rapporteur made clear in February 1994, these mass expulsions of persons alleged to be "of Persian origin" took place mostly during and in the buildup to the Iran-Iraq war in the early 1980s.
The report devotes a section to the exclusion of human rights monitors from Iraq. It mentions Iraq's refusal to allow human rights monitors into the country, and notes that the UN General Assembly has endorsed the Human Rights Commission's call for monitors to be deployed in Iraq. The Special Rapporteur himself has not been able to visit Iraq since 1991, and only his February 1992 report was based on access to the whole country. In his first appeal for human rights monitors in his report on the marshes, presented to the Security Council in August 1992, Mr. Van der Stoel called for monitors to operate in the same way as UNSCOM inspectors.
132
_IRAQ
However, while Iraq's record of gross human rights abuses and the need for outside monitors have been invoked to demonstrate the need for continued economic sanctions, no positive steps have been taken to remedy the situation beyond the establishment of the no-fly zones. In sharp contrast to the commitment of leading members of the Security Council to ensure the ability of UNSCOM inspectors to operate freely, no serious attempt has been made to insist that Iraq accept human rights monitors. The January 1994 démarche addressed to Iraq by four permanent members of the Security Council — France, Russia, the United Kingdom and the United States — called for monitors to be admitted, but no other action has been taken. Naturally, it is not easy to induce many members of the international community to accept more intrusive action on human rights, and the issue of monitors raises difficult questions about the limits of sovereignty. Nonetheless, given the strong line from states such as the United States on human rights in Iraq, one might have expected more energetic efforts to implement effective monitoring.
In fact, the Special Rapporteur's reports during 1994 have reiterated his concern for the lack of support his office has received in carrying out even the limited human rights monitoring which has been possible, including visits to Iran (to interview newly arrived refugees from the southern marshes), to Kuwait (to seek information on missing persons) and to Turkey (to talk to refugees and deserters who have entered northern Iraq). AH UN personnel must have Iraqi visas to enter any part of the country, including the areas under Kurdish control. Thus, although non-UN human rights organizations can enter Kurdish-controlled Iraq through Turkey (as long as the latter gives the requisite transit permissions), the Special Rapporteur cannot do so.
The report does mention the limited resources available to the Special Rapporteur. He, however, has put the matter in rather stronger terms. In his February 1994 report, he wrote:
Moreover, it must be said that these very modest activities
[of missions to surrounding countries in 1993] have not
133
CRITIQUE 1994
been achieved owing to the scarcity of resources allocated for the purpose and the very slow decision-making process within the United Nations. Consequently, the Special Rapporteur must record his disappointment that to date no staff have been assigned for specific monitoring purposes nor, so far as he knows, has any discernible and secure budget been allocated for the mandate.
The State Department notes that one part-time employee was added to the staff of the Special Rapporteur at the Human Rights Centre in Geneva in 1994. No designated human rights monitors for Iraq have ever been appointed. This minimal response suggests a considerable lack of political will on the part of the UN and its leading members. As the Special Rapporteur recommends in his November report:
That, irrespective of the Government of Iraq's position with regard to the stationing of human rights monitors within the country, the General Assembly approve the allocation of sufficient human and material resources for the sending of human rights monitors to such locations as would facilitate improved information flow and assessment and would help in the independent verification of reports on the human rights situation in Iraq.
The 1994 report repeats the conclusion of its predecessor that the government of Iraq engaged in war crimes directly related to the Gulf War of 1990-1991. On the charge of genocide, which Human Rights Watch/Middle East is preparing and which it hopes governments will bring before the International Court of Justice, the State Department report confines itself to stating that the US government is urging the Security Council "to study evidence of a broader range of war crimes, as well as crimes of humanity and possible genocide."
134
