	ISRAELI-OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
The tone of the 1994 State Department report is set in the introduction, which refers to "positive human rights developments, in addition to the implementation of the Israel-PLO agreements." This odd formulation conflates two different issues: the human rights situation and the latest US-backed diplomatic efforts to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. This is indicative of a less-than-candid approach to reporting on continuing violations of human rights, and of an assumption — not always borne out by the evidence — that these diplomatic efforts are having a positive effect on the human rights situation.
The impact of this assumption is most clearly visible in the section on political rights, which has completely deleted the following passage from the 1993 report:
The Government of Israel has ruled the West Bank and Gaza through a military government and civil administration . .. Municipal elections were last held in 1976 in the West Bank; most mayors elected were later dismissed. Palestinians appointed by Israel have filled most vacancies.
It remains true that the government of Israel rules most of the West Bank and a considerable portion of the Gaza Strip, and that elections have not been held in the West Bank since 1976. The omission of this paragraph from the 1994 report suggests that it is colored by an element of wishful thinking.
Additionally, the State Department has replaced a sentence stating that the people of the occupied territories do not enjoy the right of citizens to change their own government with the following:
Palestinians in the West Bank, Gaza and Jericho have not yet been afforded an opportunity to exercise this right. The DOP [Declaration of Principles] provides for an
135
CRITIQUE 1994
election for a Palestinian Council. The Government of
Israel and the PA [Palestinian Authority] are negotiating
an agreement for such elections.
This paragraph implies that an agreement on elections is a foregone conclusion, and ignores the fact that the deadline for elections to take place has passed.
The report also ignores important questions regarding the extent of the powers that will be exercised by the PA and the council, if and when it is constituted. Under the terms of the DOP, during a five-year interim period Israel will retain control over "Jerusalem, refugees, settlements, security arrangements, borders and relations and cooperation with other neighbors." In other words, many of the functions of government will continue to be exercised by an authority — namely the Israeli government — that the Palestinian residents of the territories have no ability to change. In addition, rather than noting such limitations on the powers of the PA, the report emphasizes the functions delegated to it by the DOP. Finally, while the powers of the elected Palestinian Council vis a vis the PA have yet to be determined, it appears likely that the council's powers will be little more than advisory, leaving the PA and its leader, Yasser Arafat, unaccountable to residents of territories under Palestinian jurisdiction. The report should have reflected the reality that Palestinian residents of the territories do not enjoy the right of citizens to change their government.
A lack of candor in reporting on human rights violations by the Israeli authorities is a perennial problem with the State Department's human rights reporting. For example, instead of simply stating that Israeli security forces are responsible for torture, the report cites "credible reports indicating that Israeli security forces are responsible for widespread abuse, and in some cases torture, of Palestinian detainees." In contrast, the report on Syria is categorical in stating: "The police and security forces continue to use torture systematically." While torture may be more prevalent in Syria than in the occupied territories, there is conclusive evidence of torture in both jurisdictions, and the report should reflect this. The choice of wording is especially unfortunate in light of the fact that the UN
136
_ISRAELI-OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
Committee Against Torture, after considering Israel's compliance report, concluded that Israel is in violation of the Torture Convention. The committee found that the Landau Commission guidelines, which allow "moderate physical pressure" to be used in interrogation, are "completely unacceptable." Further, Human Rights Watch has issued a comprehensive report exhaustively documenting the practice of torture during interrogations.
A similar obfuscation, again referring to "credible reports," is used to discuss the continuing involvement of undercover units of the Israeli Army in extrajudicial executions of Palestinians. The report also does not refer to the well-documented practice of "ensuring death." The Israeli human rights group B'tselem has reported on this procedure, which involves shooting an immobilized victim at close range in the head and chest to make sure that he does not survive. The Palestinian human rights group Al-Haq has also documented several summary executions by undercover units.
The report also errs in giving incomplete information about some issues, thus concealing continuing human rights abuses. For example, the report understates the extent to which judges in Israeli military courts are permissive of torture and abusive interrogation procedures. Until April 1994 no military court had never excluded a confession that a Palestinian had challenged as coerced. TTiis notable event was overlooked by the report which states, somewhat misleadingly, that "judges rarely exclude such confessions."
Similarly, the report focuses on the release of several thousand Palestinian political prisoners while failing to mention that almost 6,000 others remained in prison. It also fails to discuss the discriminatory manner in which the releases were conducted. Palestinians observed that most of those who were released were supporters of Palestinian political factions favoring the Israel-PLO agreements and the policies of the PA. Human rights organizations, including Al-Haq, the Mandela Institute and the Gaza Center for Rights and Law have reported that political prisoners have been
137
CRITIQUE 1994
forced to sign statements of support for the agreements as a condition of their release.
This is just one aspect of a pattern of suppression of even nonviolent opposition to the Israeli-Palestinian agreements in which both the Israeli government and the PA are complicit. Admittedly, these trends have become more pronounced during 1995, but the report can still be faulted for its failure to provide information about discriminatory treatment and restrictions on freedoms of opinion, expression, assembly and association that were apparent during 1994. For example, arrests of supporters of Islamic Jihad and Hamas by the Israeli Army were very widespread and apparently arbitrary. Among those arrested were many against whom there was no evidence of involvement in political violence. Of course, referring to the current diplomatic initiatives as "the peace process" implies that those opposed to the direction and the content of the negotiations are opposed to peace itself, which is far from being universally true. If the report is to avoid being distorted by the desire to portray US-supported policy in a favorable light, it should recognize that those opposed to the Israeli-Palestinian agreements have suffered human rights violations due to this opposition.
The State Department could avoid this pitfall by measuring human rights conditions in the territories against the consistent standard of applicable international human rights and humanitarian law. Too often, the 1994 report fails to state categorically that a particular practice violates international law. The result can be misleading if, as with administrative detention, the reduction in the prevalence of a particular violation is noted, but no objection to the continued practice of the violation is stated. Such relativistic reporting is contrary to the State Department's own guidelines for human rights reporting, and can leave the impression that violations of human rights not explicitly recognized as such are being condoned. In this regard, it is regrettable that the 1994 report omits from its introduction the statement that appeared the previous year:
The longstanding US position is that several Israeli
practices, such as the transfer of prisoners outside the
138
_ISRAELI-OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
occupied territories and the demolition and sealing of houses for security offenses as a form of collective punishment, contravene specific provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention.
The 1993 edition of the Critique criticized that year's State Department report because the fact that Israel's policy of sealing or demolishing homes is in violation of the Geneva Convention was mentioned only in passing in the introduction. Unfortunately, the 1994 report deletes even this brief reference. The section on arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home or correspondence now notes, "Many human rights groups maintain that the sealing or demolishing of homes is a form of collective punishment because such acts target families and children."
In the section on freedom of movement within the occupied territories, foreign travel, emigration, and repatriation, the State Department has deleted many statements regarding the problems resulting from curfews in the territories and closures of the borders between the territories and Israel and Jerusalem. The section no longer discusses how such closures restrict the ability of Palestinians to travel from the West Bank to East Jerusalem, from the north to the south of the West Bank, and from Gaza to the West Bank. It also omits any exposition of the economic impact of the closures, as well as a note that human rights groups criticize the curfews as a form of collective punishment, and the fact that the curfews do not apply to settlers. In the 1993 report, the section on freedom of religion explained how Palestinians were frequently prevented from worshiping in Jerusalem when the territories were sealed off. Although this practice continues, there is no reference to it in the 1994 report. In addition, the report fails to note that control over travel to and from the occupied territories was not delegated to the PA, as the Gaza Center for Rights and Law has pointed out. Nor does it note that Israel began to import foreign workers to take the place of Palestinian workers who were barred from Israel. These omissions are regrettable because one result of the creation of semi-autonomous Palestinian areas, in addition to the
139
CRITIQUE 1994
frequent use of closures, and the move toward separation of the Israeli and Palestinian populations, has been an exacerbation of problems associated with freedom of movement within the occupied territories, and between the occupied territories and Israel. These obstacles apply almost exclusively to Palestinians. Nonetheless, for the first time the report does note that despite the alleged security justification for the closures, "Israeli officials acknowledged that no Palestinian holder of a legal work permit has committed an act of terrorism in Israel."
Last year's Critique criticized the 1993 report for altering the section on arbitrary arrest, detention or exile by moving a discussion of warrantless arrests from the opening paragraph and deleting the statement that "[t]he vast majority of arrests are for alleged security offenses." In the 1994 report, this paragraph is returned to the introduction and the statement on security offenses is included. Also, the section now notes, "Palestinian suspects are sometimes kept incommunicado for several days after their arrest by Israeli authorities who do not inform the family of the detainees' whereabouts." These are welcome descriptions of longstanding and continuing problems.
The 1994 report also addresses the human rights practices of the newly constituted Palestinian Authority. The treatment of abuses by the PA is relatively comprehensive and even-handed. The report discusses the extrajudicial killing of Farid Jarbou, the establishment of a Palestinian "security court," the mass arrests without warrant of opposition figures, the mistreatment of prisoners, the suppression of a demonstration at Filistin Mosque that led to the killing of at least 16 Palestinians by the Palestinian police force, the closing of the pro-Jordanian newspaper An-Nahar and other limits on press freedom, and limits on the freedom of assembly.
One area to which the report gives short shrift is the targeting of opposition figures. This is another example of the report's omitting information about human rights abuses suffered by those opposed to the US-supported Israeli-Palestinian agreements. While the report discusses abuses such as warrantless arrests and the security court, it does not mention that the targets of most such abuses were Palestinians opposed to
140
_ISRAELI-OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
the terms of Israeli-Palestinian agreements. For example, the report's discussion of mass arrests says these were carried out "in response to acts or threats of violence against Palestinians and Israelis. These arrests were conducted without warrants against groups whose members have engaged in violence." This formulation appears to excuse such arrests as appropriate responses to violence, when in fact they were often targeted at Palestinians opposed to the peace agreement, regardless of their involvement in violent acts.
There are few countries or territories where the US government is so closely involved with the domestic political situation as in the Israeli-occupied territories. The task of reporting objectively on the human rights situation is therefore more encumbered by political pressures than elsewhere. In general, the report may be commended for its detailed and reliable exposition of many aspects of human rights problems in the territories. However, the report is flawed by its failures to characterize various Israeli practices as violations of international law, by its overly benign view of the impact of the Israel-PLO agreement on Palestinian human rights, and above all by its failure to report candidly on the suppression of dissent to current Israeli/PA policies.
141
CRITIQUE 1994
142
