	KENYA
The State Department's report on human rights in Kenya accurately reflects all of the critical events affecting human rights during 1994, and admirably provides many more specific examples than in years past of the human rights abuses perpetrated during the year. Yet while the report actively acknowledges continuing abuses by the Kenyan government, it is presented more as a recital of abuses rather than a cohesive description of the arsenal of weapons used in the Kenyan government's increasingly harsh crackdown on dissent.
Succinctly stated, the Kenyan government employed a dizzying array of tactics in attempts to silence its critics in 1994. In its introduction, the report strongly asserts that "many civil liberties" were "regularly interfered with" in such attempts to silence critics, and that "the Government continued to intimidate and harass those opposed to govemment/KANU [Kenyan African National Union] policies ..." Yet despite several such strong assertions throughout the report — for which the report should be applauded — the State Department manages to temper its overall tone and analysis in such a way as to minimize the significance and frequency of the abuses it describes.
As part of the overriding objective of silencing critics, state harassment of the independent press increased in 1994. The report properly notes that "[f]reedom of speech is often breached by security forces and undercut by broad interpretations of antiquated sedition and libel laws," but it fails to note the alarming fact that more journalists were taken to court and fined or incarcerated in 1994 than in any previous year. Not only does the report fail to recognize the significant chilling effect such arrests have on independent reporting, but it also blithely states that "government harassment of the press decreased noticeably after midyear." This statement is particularly questionable given that, in December, President Daniel Arap Moi publicly denounced Kenya's main daily newspaper. The Natiorty and the Minister of Information threatened to close the newspaper down for comments critical of the government. The report makes no mention of this public denunciation by senior Kenyan officials.
143
CRITIQUE 1994
Also in December, the Minister of Information announced that there would be no licensing of private radio stations in the near future because "all applications and requests to start independent electronic media are ill-intentioned." Indeed, he linked requests to establish independent radio stations to alleged opposition plans to launch guerrilla warfare from neighboring countries. While the report takes note of the fact that private licensing will not be allowed in the foreseeable future, it does not mention the government's peculiar justifications for such restraint, which reveal a profound antipathy—bordering on paranoia — toward uncensored speech. As the report properly notes, the government currently "controls the single radio station and its affiliate television station." It also points out correctly that "[rjadio is the medium through which most Kenyans get their news." As a result, the Kenyan government has a virtual lock on censoring the information that the majority of Kenyans receive until private broadcasting is allowed. Unfortunately, the Minister of Information has announced that the government will not license any new radio or television stations, irrespective of the recommendations of the Attorney General's Task Force on the Press.
The State Department report states that the printed press remained "vibrant and independent" in 1994, "though at least one former editor has charged that the papers are under pressure to self-censor." This latter quote grossly minunizes the pressure on papers to self-censor, which is flagrant and undeniable. The government's explicit threats in December to shut down The Nation leave no doubt that the papers are under significant pressure to exercise self-censorship. Indeed, shortly aiier Moi denounced The Nation, two Nation reporters were summarily dismissed for writing articles that allegedly brought two government officials into "disrepute." One reporter wrote a story alleging that a new office building had been sold to a government minister at considerably less than its market value. The second reporter was dismissed after he quoted lawyers as saying that Attorney General Amos Wako was the main stumbling block to the rewriting of Kenya's Constitution.
The pressure on newspapers to exercise self-censorship is particularly acute when it comes to coverage of judicial proceedings. One
144
_KENYA
major paper retracted a story on the trial of Koigi wa Wamwere, a well-known political dissident, because the magistrate in charge of the proceedings did not like the tone of the article. No paper has been able to risk offending the sensibilities of the magistrate or the prosecutor in that case for fear of losing the right to cover the popular proceedings. In the year's most notable case of censorship, both the editor-in-chief and a reporter for the weekly The People were each jailed for at least three months because a story quoted a human rights lawyer as saying that a court case involving striking university lecturers was a "judicial lynching" that "reeked of state interference." Imprisoning journalists for quoting a comment critical of the judiciary smacks of the worst kind of censorship. As mentioned above, numerous other reporters were arrested during the year pursuant to antiquated sedition laws after writing articles critical of government policies and/or government officials. All such arrests obviously put pressure on papers to self-censor. The chilling effect on freedom of expression of such arrests, combined with the government denunciation of The Nation and other forms of pressure, is hard to overstate.
The report is misleading in its characterization of the international media as operating "by and large . . . unfettered in Kenya." In July, the government deported an Australian journalist who worked for The Nation compiling a daily watchdog column commenting on government corruption and bureaucratic incompetence. According to a government minister, the expulsion was related to matters touching on state security and thus could not be publicly discussed. In September, the accreditation of an American correspondent for the London Daily Telegraph was withdrawn after articles he had written were deemed "unacceptable." One article he had recently published described Nairobi's high crime rate and was entitled "Nairobi is the New Mogadishu: Chaotic and Deadly." Under international pressure, the American's accreditation was later restored. The report also makes no mention of the government's practice of seizing and destroying articles in the international press critical of the Kenyan government before they can be publicly disseminated within Kenya.
145
CRITIQUE 1994
In its analysis of freedom of speech, the report states that the "degree of academic freedom was difficult to gauge" since the professors' strike had closed down institutions of higher learning for most of the year. Yet in the very next sentence, the report concedes that "the authorities fired 26 professors because of their participation in the walkout [of the striking professors]... effectively denying the professors tenure." The report also notes that on several occasions, the police "used force to disrupt student assemblies." There can be no question that academic freedom is significantly restricted in Kenya.
Curiously, in its analysis of freedom of movement both within the country and abroad, the report makes no mention of the fact that the Kenyan government deprived Sheikh Khalid Balala, a Kenyan-bom Muslim preacher based in Mombasa, of his Kenyan citizenship while he was traveling abroad. When he applied to renew his passport at the Kenyan embassy in Germany, the Kenyan government refused. While the report does mention this deprivation of citizenship under its discussion of exiles, it introduces the topic by stating that the Kenyan government "does not use exile as a means of political control," which is flatly contradicted by the facts.
Even more troubling is the report's positive spin on the efficacy of the three "security operation zones" which were established in 1993 in the areas hardest hit by ethnic violence. The report accurately notes that the Kenyan government "sought to prevent opposition [Members of Parliament], domestic and international human rights advocates, and most journalists from entering the zones, and arrested many who did so." The report does not mention that the Kenyan government has also outlawed the publication of any information about the zones or life therein without government consent. Despite the fact that the flow of information about what is happening in the security zones is controlled by the government, the report confidently states that "[ejthnic violence in the Rift Valley decreased considerably over the past year, following the government's establishment of security zones." Given the paucity of available independent and uncensored information about life in the security zones, such a positive interpretation on the zones is unwarranted.
146
_KENYA
On the other hand, the State Department should be applauded for its discussion of numerous topics, including torture, prison conditions, violations of labor conventions, and abuses by the police and city council security officers, or "askaris." In particular, the report deserves commendation for its analysis of the denial of fair public trials in Kenya. The report states without qualification that the Kenyan "judiciary is not independent" and publicizes the fact that the Office of the President declined in 1994 to renew the contracts of three High Court judges who had previously made rulings against the government. The report also notes that a senior principal magistrate was transferred out of Nairobi after acquitting six suspects in a political case, ruling that the police had used torture to extract the confessions. The practice of transferring magistrates to remote areas after they have issued rulings against the government, thereby effectively demoting them, destroys any pretense that the government is not actively influencing the outcome of legal cases.
The report's discussion of the Koigi wa Wamwere trial is much stronger than the analysis of his arrest in the 1993 report. This year, the report acknowledges that Wamwere, a former member of Parliament, "has been targeted by the government because of his popularity among Rift Valley Kikuyus" and describes his trial as "political." Without equivocating, the report states that the "state prosecutor in the trial finished presenting his case in September without producing credible evidence tying Wamwere to the alleged attack" for which he is being charged. While the report noted that leading human rights groups have named Wamwere and his co-defendants as probable political prisoners, it is unfortunate that the report does not use its own active voice to support the same conclusion.
The 1994 report also deserves praise for its discussion of the serious abuses by the Kenyan government aimed at depriving Kenyans of their right to peaceful assembly and association. The report provides several telling examples of the government's frequent use of force to break up both licensed and unlicensed meetings, and highlights the fact that meetings involving opposition figures are targeted specifically.
147
CRITIQUE 1994
One point the report fails to make is that state harassment of critics and political opponents steadily increased in 1994. Indeed, the increasing frequency with which opposition figures were being harassed prompted one opposition member of Parliament to lament "in 1993, it was much better for us." Despite its claims to the contrary, the Kenyan government is not improving upon its human rights record. Kenyans will not be able to come anywhere close to realizing their full civil and political freedoms until the Kenyan government makes significant strides in improving upon its human rights record.
148
