	LIBERIA
The State Department's 1994 report on Liberia does a relatively good job of assessing the complicated and increasingly fractured situation in that country. However, as in past years, the report fails to adequately portray the human rights performance of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Ceasefire Monitoring Group (ECOMOG). Nor does the report properly address the credible allegations that ECOMOG assisted the Liberian Peace Council (LPC) in the tatter's fighting with the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL). These and other criticisms again raise concerns about the report's bias in favor of ECOMOG. In addition, the report should have expanded on its limited discussion of the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) as well as the human rights record of the interim governments, initially the Interim Government of National Unity (IGNU), and, afïer March 1994, the Liberian National Transitional Government (LNTG). Finally, the report would have been strengthened by the addition of simple details, such as identifying and describing the various factions in the conflict.
Despite these shortcomings, the 1994 report was marked by two welcome improvements over its immediate predecessor. In particular, the description of ECOMOG and its evolution from a peacekeeping force to the de facto army of the successive interim governments comes as a notable improvement. The quality of the 1994 report has also been enhanced by the added description in the introduction of the plight of the vast majority of Liberians who have fled from their homes to other locations, either inside or outside Liberia.
The introduction to the report could easily have been strengthened by describing and characterizing the various groups involved in Liberia's complex civil war. The introduction should have also noted that these groups were quickly splintering, usually along ethnic lines, into various sub-factions, and that fighting within a group was just as fierce as the conflicts between different groups. A clear example is the United Liberation Movement for Democracy in Liberia (ULIMO), where factional fighting among the ULIMO-Krahns and ULIMO-Mandingos has actually
149
CRITIQUE 1994
created two distinct new entities. The report hints at the factional splits within various groups, and actually explains at a later point the division of ULIMO; however, it would have been much more beneficial to have this analysis coherently outlined in the beginning of the report.
The 1994 report, as in earlier years, also fails to properly describe ECOMOG's human rights record. The introduction paints a much rosier picture than that conveyed by the body of the report. In an implicit and unwarranted criticism of independent human rights monitoring, the introduction states: "Despite continuing criticism of ECOMOG behavior by human rights monitors, the majority of ECOMOG forces conducted themselves well during the year." Later in the report, however, the reader learns that ECOMOG soldiers committed extrajudicial killings, beat and humiliated persons stopped at ECOMOG checkpoints, and reportedly coerced confessions from suspects. Furthermore, the report states that ECOMOG detentions "frequently did not satisfy internationally recognized standards" and that ECOMOG soldiers engaged in "systematic looting." In short, the body of the report fails to support the positive picture presented in the introduction.
Equally disturbing, the report makes only passing mention of the credible allegations that ECOMOG assisted various factions fighting the NPFL. For instance. Human Rights Watch has found that the Nigerian contingent to ECOMOG reportedly supplied arms and ammunition to the LPC. Human Rights Watch has also cited reports of ECOMOG troops transporting members of the LPC, and of joint ECOMOG/LPC checkpoints. This assistance is particularly troubling because it appears to repeat a prior pattern of ECOMOG assistance to ULIMO and the Armed Forces of Liberia (AFL). The implications of this assistance to particular factions in the conflict are serious, and should have been addressed in greater detail.
Finally, as in past years, the 1994 report describes ECOMOG human rights abuses as mere allegations, while abuses perpetrated by other factions are presented as unequivocal facts. The cumulative effect of these inadequate descriptions of ECOMOG's role in the civil war indicates a
150
_LIBERIA
continued bias in the report in favor of ECOMOG. Previous editions of the Critique have also criticized the State Department for this bias, but it remains uncorrected.
The 1994 report also fails to include an adequate discussion of UNOMlL's role in the conflict, including its relationship with ECOMOG. The collaboration between UNOMIL and ECOMOG marks the first time that UN and regional peacekeepers have worked together. Consequently, the evolution and success of this collaboration are being closely watched by the international community. The report should have specifically discussed UNOMlL's reluctance to publicize its findings on human rights abuses. By failing to do so, UNOMIL is in breach of its own mandate. In addition, contrary to the State Department's own instructions to those preparing the Country Reports, the report on Liberia should have noted that the UNOMIL mandate was twice extended, and that in July the UN Security Council called for an acceleration of the disarmament process. Again, this criticism has been made in earlier editions of the Critique. Finally, the report should have noted that the UN Special Representative, Trevor Gordon-Somers, was replaced in November 1994 by Anthony B. Nyakyi.
Another shortcoming of this year's report is its minimal discussion of the human rights record of Liberia's interim governments — the IGNU and LNTG. The introduction would have been stronger had it gone into greater detail about human rights violations for which the interim governments have been responsible, including such cases as the death by starvation of a prisoner in Monrovia, which is mentioned only in the body of the report. In addition, this year's report again fails to address the human rights record of some of those serving in the government. Specifically, Issac Mussah of the NPFL, and ULIMO members George Duch and Jenkins Scott have dismal records of personal involvement in human rights violations.
In the section dealing with freedom of the press, the report is marred by some internal inconsistencies between statements made at the
151
CRITIQUE 1994
outset of the section and in the detailed supporting paragraphs that follow. The same criticism has been made in previous editions of the Critique, and while the inconsistencies in the 1994 report are somewhat more subtle than in the past, they nonetheless continue to be present. For example, the section opens with the positive statement that freedom of speech and the press is provided for in the Liberian Constitution, and that these rights are exercised in the capital city, Monrovia, while acknowledging parenthetically that some "significant limitations" apply. As the paragraphs that follow indicate, the limitations that prevent the press from operating in an open manner are significant indeed. Specifically, the report states that IGNU's and LNTG's calls for a more responsible press have had a chilling effect on journalistic freedom, that government and even ECOMOG leaders met privately with journalists after being offended by their reporting, and that journalists have been threatened by various warring factions. The report goes on to state that there was no overt general attempt to censor the press. It raises the question, however, of whether de facto censorship existed as a result of the Ministry of Information's highly discretionary licensing power that was used at one time to prohibit pro-NPFL papers from being distributed in Monrovia.
The State Department's instructions for the preparation of the Country Reports requires precise detailing of "self-censorship" as well as specific detail as to whether there have been any real penalties for offenders. Although the report states that journalists have admitted to self-censorship in favor of the interim governments, it does not specifically link this self-censorship to threats or activity by factions in the conflict or by governmental bodies. Nor does the report indicate whether the self-censorship in favor of the interim governments was a result of the media's natural sympathy toward those parties or whether it reflected outside pressure to report in a particular manner. Future reports would do well to shed greater light on these important issues.
152
