	MEXICO
The State Department's 1994 report correctly catalogues the long list of human rights violations, including impunity for perpetrators, which are widespread in Mexico. However, certain fundamental weaknesses, identified in previous editions of the Critique, are repeated. The result is a report which is incomplete.
The report appears to reflect both an honest attempt to publish more candid accounts of the human rights situation and the countervailing foreign policy considerations which unfortunately remain an influential factor. The tension between these contending interests is evident, both for better and for worse, in the subtle changes in language and substantive emphasis compared with the 1993 report.
For example, the introductory section continues to edge tentatively toward a more honest assessment of Mexico's political structure. In addition to boilerplate language on the Institutional Revolutionary Party's (PRI's) exclusive tenure in the presidency, the 1994 report states that many of the PRI's electoral victories over the last 65 years have been met with credible allegations of fraud. However, the State Department still fails to acknowledge the PRI's political control over institutional life, which exists on a level unmatched in the region outside of Cuba. In this context, the report's emphasis on last year's electoral reforms — which, though important, affect mainly the margins of the PRI's entrenched hegemony — is somewhat misplaced. Aside from the fact that it is scandal, not reform, that has done more to loosen the PRI's grip on government, any synopsis of Mexican government must address the PRI's multifaceted exploitation of power to the detriment of democratic functioning on many fronts, from labor rights to the administration of justice. Only then can the State Department's audience begin to understand the significance of the "culture of impunity" to which the report refers.
Indeed, the failure to explain the persistence of Mexico's twin human rights evils — a high level of violations and an equally high degree of impunity — continues to be among the most significant of the report's
153
CRITIQUE 1994
weaknesses. Mexico's Iiuman rights problems originate with and are nurtured by the government's consistent failure to create accountability at any jurisdictional level. The governing party's 70 years of tight control over the reins of federal, and most state, power deprives it of any excuse for the failure to provide justice in human rights matters. The report's relative lack of contextual information obscures the depth of the problem.
The Staite Department's tendency to tread lightly on troublesome issues is evident in the treatment of Mexico's highly publicized assassination cases. In the Colosio and Ruiz Massieu killings, the report characterizes the culprits as, respectively, "a lone gunman" and "a gunman." This Warren Commission-like pronouncement is torpedoed only a few paragraphs later by the revelation that President Zedillo was forced to order additional investigations into both cases because the official versions were perceived as lacking credibility. The report's characterizations would therefore appear to be premature.
Consistent with earlier US policy to downplay drug enforcement problems in Mexico while NAFTA was being negotiated, the report fails to mention the impact of widespread drug trafficking on official corruption and human rights violations. Drug traffickers have been implicated in the assassinations of Cardinal Posadas, presidential candidate Colosio, PRI-official Massieu and the murders and attempted murders of several high level police officials. State agents believed to be influenced by drug traffickers have been implicated in either the crimes themselves or obstruction of the investigation. The report's silence on this issue severely undermines its ability to convey an accurate picture of reality.
On the other hand, both the introduction and the section on political and other extrajudicial killings helpfully flag issues normally reserved for other sections of the atomized report structure. The short discussion of Mexico's dubious distinction as a world leader in violence against gays and lesbians is well done, including with the relevant facts the State Department's critical assessment of governmental efforts to address this serious problem.
154
_MEXICO
With one exception (discussed below), the report's treatment of torture is a marked improvement over last year's, both for its abandonment of misplaced confidence in the remedial efforts of the National Human Rights Commission (CNDH) and for its attempt to explain and illustrate the phenomenon in several different ways. Also strong is the discussion of prison conditions and illegal arrests, and the report's reference to the dismissal of 60% of Chiapas' state police officers for crimes well illustrates the scope of the problem posed by the security forces in parts of Mexico.
The State Department's appropriately more cautious attitude with regard to the CNDH is reflected in several instances; aside from omitting unwarranted praise, the report also includes assessments of the CNDH's follow-up (or lack of it) on allegations of abuse in individual cases. The conflict in Chiapas was a serious test of the commission's capacity and political will, a challenge that it did not meet satisfactorily. In addition to this year's acknowledgment of the CNDH's numerous failures to respond adequately to apparent violations, future reports should include an overall assessment of the commission's work. Moreover, the State Department should endeavor to assess the state-level commissions created in 1992 to which a lot of responsibility has devolved. This year's report is virtually silent on this issue. Given the obvious questions about the CNDH, future reports should temper their near-exclusive reliance on CNDH figures with information from Mexican non-governmental sources.
The State Department, however, utlilizes CNDH statistics in a manner that is highly misleading. CNDH officials confirm to the Lawyers Committee that its statistics refer only to those cases reported to the national office. They do not include any of those compiled by some 30 state commissions or that covering Mexico's Federal District. As they were intended to do, the state commissions now draw significant numbers of complaints from the national office, which has still not developed a means of consolidating and reporting information from all of these other offices. The State Department nowhere mentions this fact, choosing instead to note, for example, that torture complaints received by the CNDH declined in 1994 by 40% from the previous year. Even CNDH experts candidly
155
CRITIQUE 1994
acknowledge that this figure is useless without taking into account the cases reported to the other commissions. Next year's report should be more forthright and include an explanation of the reporting structure as well as available information from the various state commissions.
With respect to the Chiapas conflict, the report accepts at face value the stated intentions of the Mexican government to seek a peaceful negotiated solution. However there is good reason to doubt official pronouncements, especially in light of events subsequent to the drafting of the report. Given the large number of violations attributed to the armed forces during the conflict in 1994, the State Department should pay particular attention to the behavior of the military and police in its 1995 report.
Another consequence of the Chiapas revolt, which the report fails to mention, is the government's increased surveillance and, in some cases, harassment of indigenous organizations in other areas of the country — presumably to check the possible spread of the Zapatista revolt. For example, the Union of Indigenous Communities of the Northern Zone of the Isthmus [of Tehuantepec] (Unión de Comunidades Indígenas de la Zona Norte del Istmo: UCIZONI) in Matías Romero, Oaxaca has reported a greater presence of the military and the Office of the Attorney General (PGR) throughout the isthmus region. In 1994, UCIZONI's offices were searched by the army without a warrant and were the target of an anonymous drive-by shooting. The home of UCIZONI's legal affairs director was fired upon by individuals who were never detained. UCIZONI was compelled to relocate its office for reasons of safety.
The report also mentions numerous governmental efforts intended to be responsive to the needs of Mexico's indigenous populations, creating the impression that the government is undertaking substantial efforts to address the problems that led to the Zapatista revolt. However, the report fails to provide any quantitative information, either about the nature of the problems faced by indigenous populations or about the extent of the government response, which would permit a greater objective measure of the government's real effectiveness in this area. The reality is that many
156
_MEXICO
indigenous communities were among the hardest hit by the desperate austerity measures put into place by the government after its financial misdealings came to light.
The report fails to mention that in some indigenous areas state governments have created alternative municipal governmental entities, as a means of placating public dissatisfaction with the elected municipal government and defusing potentially violent situations. In such situations, the elected government's legitimacy is undermined by credible allegations of electoral fraud. In instances in which the elected government is not dismissed and the alternative exists as an official parallel entity, lines of governmental authority can become confusing. Such confusion creates a fertile environment for human rights violations.
For example, in San Juan Guichicovi, Oaxaca, which is predominantly populated by Mixe Indians, electoral conflicts led to the armed takeover of the municipal palace of government by a group of Mixes in early 1993. The state government intervened and offered to create a Municipal Collaboration Council (CMC) and close the municipal palace. The state government did not resolve the underlying electoral dispute or dismantle the official elected government. Instead, the CMC now governs from a public building in the Mixe community and the elected mayor governs from his home. Each splits the municipal budget received from the state government. Human rights problems arise because the elected mayor still controls the municipal police force which, the CMC alleges, is used to harass Mixes in sympathy with the CMC. Individuals are detained in a dank, dark, unfurnished cell with no toilet facilities in the basement of the municipal palace, which remains under the control of the elected mayor. The Ministerio Público, which has direct legal responsibility for detainees, refuses to assume responsibility for detention conditions, and the CMC refuses to negotiate releases with the elected mayor, since it does not recognize his authority. Detainees often languish until state authorities in the distant state capital of Oaxaca City order a release. In a few instances, CMC members have resorted to self-help to release a detainee.
157
CRITIQUE 1994
The report appears to endorse the efforts of President Zedillo to enact a package of judicial reforms designed to improve the performance and accountability of the PGR and the Supreme Court. Among other things, the package, which was approved in December, provided for reducing the number of Supreme Court justices from 26 to 11. All of the existing justices were retired, giving the president a free hand in nominating replacements who were more to his liking. The new court was installed on January 27,1995 following four weeks during which Mexico had no Supreme Court. The effectiveness of the entire reform package remains to be seen, but the restructuring of the Supreme Court and the ease with which it was accomplished demonstrate the continuing subservience of the judicial branch to the executive, which is a major factor contributing to human rights violations in the judicial area. The reforms by no means guarantee that this will change since they provide the president with exclusive appointment power over the Supreme Court in the event the Congress fails to approve those the president initially submits for confirmation.
The report's discussion of the August elections is extremely misleading because of its inclusion of a statement that US delegations, as well as a Mexican NGO, the Civic Alliance (Alianza Civica: AC), determined that the electoral results had not been affected by widespread irregularities. First of all, the US groups traveled to Mexico as "foreign invited guests," which meant, in effect, that they were electoral tourists with no power to investigate, question or denounce electoral irregularities. Second, the US delegations were very small in number, limiting their respective capacities to visit many polling places. AC's report was highly critical of the electoral processes. For Chiapas, the results reported by AC include incidents of violation of secret balloting in 67% of precincts, coercion of voters in 44% of precincts, and multiple voting and box stuffing in 11% and nine percent respectively. Although AC concluded that the many irregularities it documented probably had not affected the outcome of the presidential race, it warned that:
The triumphalism which seeks to qualify this election as
an example of transparency and cleanliness ... cannot be
158
_MEXICO
accepted , . . . There existed a pattern of systematic violation of ballot secrecy and pressure on voters in the entire country — including the main cities — reaching a level sufficiently high in the rural areas to question the results in those polling places.... The quantitative impact of these [various types of electoral fraud] . . . alters the correlation of electoral power of the parties at the national, regional and local level, the composition of the Chamber of Deputies and possibly the Senate, which creates an image of the government party [the PRI] as predominant.
The final section of the report, making up about one-fifth of its total length, is devoted to a discussion of workers' rights. This continues to reflect the same flaws contained in the 1993 report. Most of the text recites substantive and procedural aspects of Mexican labor law. The limited factual discussion omits a great deal, and mentions only a very few possible labor rights violations, which it associates with mere "credible allegations" and only "occasional" occurrences.
It is especially curious that the State Department fails to mention the fact that three complaints were filed on behalf of Mexican workers in 1994 before the US Labor Department's National Administrative Office (NAO), which is part of the remedial machinery created by the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) labor side agreement (formally known as the North American Agreement on Labor Cooperation). Each complaint alleged a variety of violations of Mexican labor law affecting maquiladora workers involved in union organizing activities at plants owned by three foreign companies: Honeywell, General Electric and Sony. The NAO's April 1995 ruling in favor of the 2,100 Sony workers in five different plants suggests that the issue deserves particular scrutiny.
The complaint involving the Sony workers alleged, inter alia, that Sony had interfered in a union election and unjustly dismissed workers for trying to organize an alternate slate of union officers, that police had violently suppressed a work stoppage called to protest the election and that
159
CRITIQUE 1994
the Mexican government had repeatedly denied efforts by an independent union to register as a bargaining agent. After conducting hearings, the NAO recommended that the US Secretary of Labor and his Mexican counterpart undertake ministerial consultations — the strongest sanctions available under the labor side agreement — on the union registration charge. The NAO also stated that "it appears plausible that the workers' discharges occurred for ... participation in union organizing activities." The NAO will therefore conduct its own study of the handling of unjustified dismissal claims by the Mexican Conciliation and Arbitration Boards. Finally, the NAO will formally ask its Mexican counterpart to submit its own report on the issue of police violence. Further NAO action can be expected in this matter and should be discussed by the State Department in future reports.
The State Department should be commended for its review of the tumultous events in Mexico during 1994. However, some of the most noteworthy issues received superficial coverage, which might have been improved by a more thoughtful approach to official sources, including the CNDH, and by more attention to a host of non-governmental sources available in Mexico. This would add to the report's catalogues of human rights violations a much-needed sense of the extraordinary context in which these events are taking place.
160
