	NIGERIA
The state of human rights in Nigeria, according to the US State Department's annual Country Reports, has deteriorated steadily in recent years. Rights were described as "circumscribed" in 1990 and 1991; the situation was then described as having "worsened" in 1993; now, the 1994 report characterizes the state of human rights as "dismal." Clearly, 1994 was an abysmal year for civil liberties in Nigeria. This year's report effectively documents many of the actions taken by the military government of General Sani Abacha to repress individual rights and to obstruct the institution of a democratic, civilian government. The Abacha government's repressive measures were all too frequent and significant in scope to pass unnoticed.
Despite the report's generally adequate description of the human rights abuses committed by the Abacha government, it would have benefited from placing the actions of that government in a more sharply defined historical and political context. The actions of the Abacha government are virtually impossible to understand without some reference to the preceding eight years of military rule by General Ibrahim Babangida and the economic collapse that accompanied it. By the same token, the adoption of successive constitutions in 1979 and 1989, with their extensive guarantees of fundamental liberties to all citizens, make explicit standards set by Nigerians themselves, which have now been suspended.
This year's report is careful to acknowledge early in its text that neither the 1979 Constitution nor the 1989 Constitution is currently in effect in Nigeria. In the past, the Critique has pointed out that frequent references to these constitutions by the State Department gave the incorrect impression that the rights guaranteed by them were enforceable in Nigerian courts. Despite its preliminary recognition of the unenforceability of Nigeria's two constitutions, though, the report still begins four different sections with the comment that the rights described in that section are protected by both constitutions. It is important that the report should stress consistently that the protections guaranteed by the 1979 and 1989 constitutions are unenforceable. The fact that the two constitutions, the
169
CRITIQUE 1994
former of which was suspended and the latter of which was never implemented, include protections of civil liberties does nothing to assist Nigerians whose rights have been violated.
As the 1994 report does note in its opening paragraph, the Abacha government itself has reminded critics on numerous occasions that the rights guaranteed by the 1979 Constitution were now suspended by military decrees. In 1994, apparently not satisfied that such pronouncements were sufficient, the Nigerian government reemphasized its complete immunity from the law with the promulgation of Decree 12. This decree states that "no civil proceedings shall lie or be instituted in any court for or on account of or in respect of any act, matter or thing done or purported to be done under or pursuant to any Decree or Edict..." Although this decree was presumably directed at two lawsuits filed to challenge the legality of the military government, its scope removes from the jurisdiction of the courts virtually any action taken by the federal military government. The State Department report should be commended for recognizing this decree's eradication of the right to a fair trial; this comment could even have been strengthened, since the decree essentially destroyed any possibility of redressing grievances against the state through the judicial system.
With no elections in sight, and no access to redressing grievances in courts of law, the remaining vehicles for Nigerians to oppose the Abacha government or to demonstrate their support for civilian democracy were extremely limited. The Constitutional Conference, which met throughout the second half of 1994, did offer a forum for some debate. The conference members, of whom slightly more than half were actually elected as opposed to being appointed by the military, did pass some measures that displeased the military government. Nevertheless, the conference's role, if any, in the future governance of Nigeria has yet to be decided. The State Department report notes that most Nigerians were "weary" of the military's continued promises of democratic rule. "Highly skeptical" would probably have been a more accurate characterization.
The Abacha government went to great lengths to prevent anyone from seeking to utilize Nigerians' only other outlet for opposition to
170
_NIGERIA
military rule: public demonstrations and publicity. The report should be praised for emphasizing the brutality of the crackdown against opponents of the military government with its forceful statement that "the regime committed numerous, repeated and egregious human rights abuses in its effort to prevent citizens from opposing it by peaceful political means." It is particularly distressing that year after year, many of the same individuals are detained by the government for political purposes. The names of Dr. Beko Ransome-Kuti, Gani Fawehinmi, Femi Falana, and, more recently, Ken Saro-Wiwa have consistently appeared in the same sections of successive State Department reports. The State Department should acknowledge and condemn in strong terms the continued harassment of such individuals whose efforts are recognized more often by their own government through imprisonment.
The Nigerian government's systematic attacks against the Ogoni people also received insufficient attention in the 1994 report. It acknowledges that the confrontation between the Ogoni and the government "increasingly turned violent," but cautions that accusations of a "genociaal campaign against the Ogoni are unfounded." Although use of the term "genocide" may well be exaggerated, it should not take a campaign of genocidal proportions to evoke a stronger condemnation from the State Department. Nigerian security forces raided more than 40 Ogoni villages and detained hundreds of Ogoni in 1994. Even more Ogoni have become refugees after the destruction of their villages by the security forces, and, as the report points out, both human rights groups and the Nigerian press have claimed that hundreds of Ogoni were killed by government troops in the raids. This repressive campaign deserves greater international attention, particularly in light of the international community's interest in the area as an important source of Nigeria's oil. The report should have recognized the flagrant violations of human rights that have accompanied the military government's campaign to suppress Ogoni opposition to continued drilling in their communities.
The remainder of the 1994 State Department report provides a very respectable summary of the year's events in Nigeria. A number of
171
CRITIQUE 1994
significant incidents are omitted, liowever, which will be described below. It is difficult at times to determine whether certain incidents have been included or not, given that the report at times omits specific names. The State Department should generally identify individuals in the report unless there is a risk of endangering them by doing so. For example, in the section on political and other extrajudicial killing, the seven people killed by police in Delta State on February 15, according to the Civil Liberties Organisation (CLO), were three brothers, Ebimoye, Douyi and Goddy Kebo, along with Mathais Omotayo, Flint Orogun, Ezekiel Fakura and Akpos Daria Ekiyo. All seven victims resided in the town of Patani in Delta State.
In one unusually detailed report on torture and arbitrary arrest, Oronto Douglas, legal secretary for the Edo/Delta chapter of the CLO, recounted how he, Uche Onyeagucha, a secretary of the Democratic Alternative, and Nick Ashton-Jones, a British citizen, were detained and tortured on June 26 when they visited Ledum Mitee in prison in Port Harcourt. Mitee, deputy president of the Movement for the Survival of Ogoni People (MOSOP), was arrested on May 22 along with Ken Saro Wiwa, MOSOP's president. Although they initially received permission to visit Mitee in prison during regular visiting hours, Douglas, Onyeagucha and Ashton-Jones were arrested when Major Paul Okutimo arrived and found them visiting with Mitee. Okutimo is the head of the special task force of Nigerian soldiers that has attacked Ogoni villages. According to Douglas, the three men were whipped by the police with an electrical cable, and Onyeagucha was kicked in the head. Douglas, Onyeagucha, and Ashton-Jones, along with their driver, Femi Durotoye, were placed into custody for several days in the Port Harcourt headquarters of the State Security Service (SSS). They were released on June 29. The report fails to mention this incident.
The report acknowledges that the Ita Oko detention camp "was most likely reopened" but does not explain the significance of this event. The Ita Oko camp was closed in the late 1980s after human rights organizations learned of its existence and revealed the horrendous conditions in which prisoners were confined there. The reopening of the
172
_NIGERIA
camp demonstrates a step backwards in the government's alleged efforts to improve prison conditions. Furthermore, the government made increased use in 1994 of detention facilities not authorized by Nigerian law, such as army barracks. For example, many of the Ogoni people arrested were detained in military barracks.
The Abacha government intensified attacks on Nigeria's bold press, particularly during the first anniversary of the aborted elections of June 12, 1993. The report incorrectly asserts that the government shut down the "Concord group newspaper Punch." In fact, the government closed two publishing institutions: the Concord Group and the Punch Group. The Concord Group, which is owned by Chief Moshood K. O. Abiola, the winner of the annulled elections of June 12, 1993, printed both a daily newspaper and a weekly magazine; Punch published daily and Sunday newspapers. The military government promulgated Decrees No. 6 & 7 of 1994 in August, officially proscribing the two newspaper publishers. Decree No. 8 of 1994 proscribed the Guardian newspaper group which, as the report does state, was closed by the government in August. Like the Concord Group, the Guardian stable published both a daily newspaper and a weekly magazine. Many Nigerians regarded the closure of the Guardian group as the most serious blow to press freedom, since its publications were widely respected for their professionalism and independence.
In its annual report. Attacks on the Press, the Committee to Protect Journalists lists a number of attacks on journalists which are not recorded in the State Department report. For example, on January 26, Femi Akintunde Johnson, editor of Fame magazine, was arrested in Lagos. Johnson was released after 10 days in custody. He was rearrested on September 7 along with Fame colleagues Kunle Bakare and Dayo Asaju. The three Fame reporters were later released without charge. In addition, Alex Kabba, bureau chief for The News, was arrested on April 4 and held in custody for several weeks. Kabba was charged with extortion and subsequently released. He had written an article alleging the involvement of a government official in an illegal land deal.
173
CRITIQUE 1994
Dapo Olorunyomi, deputy editor-in-chief of The News and Tempo, was arrested three times during 1994. After his second arrest in September, Olorunyomi was beaten by the military intelligence agents who arrested him. He was again beaten after being arrested for a third time on September 22. Authorities attempted to force the deputy editor to reveal his sources for an August 11 article in Tempo that described preparations being made in northern Nigeria for civil war between North and South. Finally, Olorunyomi's colleague at The News and Tempo, Bayo Onanuga, was arrested on September 26 and charged with libel. He was released on bail after two days in detention.
Even members of the Nigerian judiciary abused their authority to intimidate the press. Judge Oni-Okpaku, head of the Miscellaneous Offences Tribunal, issued an arrest warrant for nine reporters for the magazine Newswatch, after it printed a story alleging the judge's complicity in connection with a drug scandal. Six of the reporters were arrested and detained for several days. They were Wale Akin-Aina, Soji Akinrinade, Mike Akpan, Tunde Asaju, Ray Ekpu and Sam Olukoya. Although they were actually charged with libel and contempt of court, the charges were later dismissed.
Foreign journalists were also not immune from harassment and censorship by the government. In May, Geraldine Brooks, a reporter for the Wall Street Journal, was detained and interrogated for two days by the State Security Services while attempting to interview a military official about attacks on the Ogoni by security forces. Ms. Brooks was then deported for "security reasons."
With respect to freedom of peaceful assembly and association, the Abacha government continued to target students and, in particular, student leaders for detention after protests against the regime broke out across the country in August. For example, more than 40 students were arrested at the University of Benin, including Austin Onoriode Abada, a former secretary-general of the Students' Union. Later in the same month, police arrested three student activists at the River State University of Science and Technology, including Amassoma Isaba, president of the Students' Union.
174
_NIGERIA
In addition, the government closed universities for most of the last academic session — repeating a tactic frequently employed by the Babangida government. This extremely serious attack on academic freedom warranted much greater emphasis than it receives in the report.
In its section on freedom of movement, the report notes that government officials seized the passports of Chief Sobo Sowemimo, an attorney and Senior Advocate of Nigeria (SAN), Wole Soyinka, Nobel Laureate, and Priscilla Kuye, president of the Nigerian Bar Association. In addition, state security officials seized the passport of Adebayo Adedeji, former secretary general of the Economic Commission for Africa. All four individuals were prevented from leaving the country. (Soyinka did, however, leave Nigeria later — without a passport.)
In its list of non-governmental human rights organizations active in Nigeria, the State Department includes the Human Rights Committee of the Nigerian Bar Association (NBA). In fact, the national structure of the NBA remains in disarray after the military government of General Babangida removed its executive in 1992 and replaced it with a "Body of Benchers." This executive board was subsequently restrained from managing the NBA by a court order. Nevertheless, some state and local branches of the NBA still function, and there are human rights committees on the state and local level. The most active of these is the Human Rights Committee of the Lagos branch of the NBA.
Finally, in discussing the issue of children's rights, the report notes that Nigerian law "stipulates that 'no child shall be ordered to be imprisoned.'" No citation to any law is given, and it appears that no such provision exists in Nigerian law. The Children and Young Persons Act of Nigeria defines a "child" as a person under age 14, and a "young person" as a person between the ages of 14 and 17. The act does require that juvenile offenders be incarcerated in separate institutions from adult convicts; however, as the State Department acknowledges, this is often not the case in practice. In addition, in 1993, the CLO reported that children and babies were incarcerated in women's prisons along with their mothers;
175
CRITIQUE 1994
some of the babies had actually been bom in prison. The CLO visited five prisons for its report on women and children in prison, and it found children in prison with their mothers at all five. The State Department should press Nigerian authorities for statistics on children incarcerated with their mothers and should include a stronger statement on this issue in future reports.
176
