SOUTH AFRICA
The year 1994 marked the first all-race elections in South Africa and the implementation of a new Interim Constitution including South Africa's first-ever Human Rights Charter. The Interim Constitution clearly stipulates a broad departure from the past by declaring the primacy of individual rights and the end of the former conception of group rights. Together, these steps mark the de jure end of the apartheid system. De facto, however, the country still has a long way to go. In 1994, South Africa took important steps to redress the legacy of apartheid, implementing new laws and procedures in the negotiations for a permanent Constitution. The State Department's 1994 report correctly notes the general progress made toward the recognition of civil and political rights in South Africa. It fails, however, to emphasize the challenges to the new government contained in the Interim Constitution. And it does not adequately address the fundamental socioeconomic inequalities that persist among South Africans of different racial backgrounds.
The report correctly states that political and extrajudicial killings, though reauced in number, remained high. The Human Rights Committee of South Africa (HRC) reported 2,687 deaths as a result of political violence in 1994, with 1,631 of them occurring in a period of less than four months prior to the election. (In 1993, 4,398 people died in political violence.) Criminal violence continued to rise. Despite noting the pledges of change by the South African Police Service (SAP), the report fails to emphasize police involvement in continuing violations of human rights. Amnesty International has reported that in Northern KwaZulu/Natal, police officers and others allegedly acting with police acquiescence continued to murder political rivals, attack homes and mistreat and assault detainees. At the same time, however, the State Department does correctly report the systematic use of torture by police officers in the Vaal Triangle area, south of Johannesburg.
While the effectiveness of measures designed to reduce violations by the SAPS remained in question, the majority of the population did not have adequate police protection. The report fails to highlight various
229
CRITIQUE 1994
obstacles to effective policing, including lingering community distrust, insufficient human resources and the high death rate among police officers — averaging one death per day during the first six months of 1994. While local groups such as the local Peace Committees (which are part of the National Peace Structure created by the National Peace Accord) were active in trying to improve police/community relations, much work remains to be done in this area.
The State Department report briefly notes the continuing presence of a "third force" involved in political killings. Approximately 13,000 (mostly black) South Africans were killed in politically motivated violence within the four-year period between the unbanning of the African National Congress (ANC) and the April 1994 elections. Rather than leave the misleading impression that these deaths were the result of "black on black violence" — as they were commonly reported at the time — the report should have stated clearly that government security forces, including some members of the SAP and the Internal Stability Unit (ISU), were directly involved in encouraging violence in the black townships.
The report refers to the criminal charges against Colonel Eugene de Kock, a police training unit commander, resulting from his involvement in clandestine "third force" activities. It fails to note, however, that Col. de Kock and approximately 70 other policemen were paid a total of between R12- and R20 million (about US$3.55- to 6 million) as an inducement to leave the SAP.
The report should have commented on the failure by members of the Internal Stability Unit to provide impartial policing. In February 1994, for example, the South African Defense Force (SADF) was deployed to assist the South African Police in the East Rand area near Johannesburg. The deployment of the SADF came only after repeated complaints by community leaders and the ANC, who had demanded the removal of the ISU from the area on the grounds that its forces had been widely implicated in the local escalation of violence.
The report also fails to note a general and widespread lack of
230
SOUTH AFRICA
accountability for offenses committed during the past. According to a Transitional Executive Council (TEC) task force, "a significant proportion of those who died in political violence in Natal/KwaZulu" were the victims of hit squads. Another report by the TEC points to the presence of paramilitary training camps set up by Inkatha in KwaZulu in 1993 and 1994. Despite these task force reports, a number of actors implicated in the allegations were elected as Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) representatives to both national and regional assemblies. It is important to note, however, that this lack of accountability was not limited to the IFP. A prime example of this was Winnie Mandela, the convicted kidnapper of a boy who was subsequently murdered, who was elected as an ANC representative and served as a government minister. Joe Modise, the current defense minister, serves as another example of the general lack of accountability. Modise was found guilty by an ANC-appointed commission of inquiry, of allowing the maltreatment of prisoners held in detention camps. Other ANC members personally responsible for mistreating detainees have also not been brought to justice.
The negotiated transfer of power which took place in 1994 allowed both administrators and enforcers of apartheid to remain in government with a constitutional guarantee against dismissal for at least five years. The Interim Constitution states that, in order to advance "reconciliation and reconstruction, amnesty shall be granted in respect of acts, omissions and offenses associated with political objectives and committed in the course of the conflicts of the past." Such clauses allow little room for prosecuting government officials who sanctioned or committed murder or torture.
The Interim Constitution also remained notably silent on the issue of the death penalty, as it did on the increasingly controversial question of reproductive rights — which the report, as in previous years, fails to mention. (Since the publication of the Comtry Reports, however, it should be noted that the Constitutional Court has ruled the death penalty unconstitutional.)
In its discussion of political and other extrajudicial killings, the
231
CRITIQUE 1994
report mentions the deaths of 50 people in Johannesburg on March 28, in front of Shell House, the ANC headquarters, during a march by Inkatha supporters. The report should have highlighted the ANC's initial refusal to cooperate with police. In July, Sydney Mufamadi, the new police minister, acknowledged that an attack had been "launched from within" Shell House and from the roof of another nearby building. The ANC did not honor a promise to hand over weapons found inside its headquarters until July, when a potential cover-up was widely reported in the press.
While the report alludes to the issue of squatters in the context of its discussion of arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home or correspondence, it does not adequately discuss the violence surrounding conflicts over alleged illegal settlements. Many areas remained without adequate water supplies and electricity and had no access to such services as police protection or fire control. Conflicts over squatter areas, as well as over rents and services, persisted, posing a serious challenge to the new government. Of the many homes promised by the new government within five years, fewer than 1,000 had been built by year's end. The unemployment rate among blacks remained at least 41%. With housing, basic services and employment still lacking, fundamental social and economic rights remain no more than a promise to millions of South Africans.
The report also fails to mention the crucial issue of land redistribution. Between 1960 and 1980, some 3.5 million people were forced to vacate their land and resettle in reserves set up by the minority government. While the Reconstruction and Development Program set forth by the ANC pledges to redistribute more than 50% of the agricultural land in five years, such promises remain difficult to realize. A Land Claims Court has been established, but it had not made any significant reallocations by the end of 1994. The Interim Constitution provides that land cannot be expropriated without "just and equitable" compensation. Another critical related issue, also neglected by the report, is the disproportionate effect that land policies have had upon already disenfranchised black women. This group, which comprises the greatest part of the rural population, faces not only the legacy of apartheid land
232
SOUTH AFRICA
policies but also traditional laws which often made it impossible for women to acquire land or property. Their plight should have been properly examined by the State Department report.
Harassment of the press occurred in a number of cases during the pre-election period. No incidents were reported, however, after the vote. The report understates the number of such incidents and also mentions only those that involved right-wing whites. A number of other incidents should also have been noted. On February 24, for example, youths in Soweto armed with a gun and a knife dragged a German television reporter from his car. On February 27, white journalists attending a funeral at Umtata in the Transkei were also harassed, when supporters of the Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC) encouraged members of the Azanian People's Liberation Army (APLA) to shoot the journalists; random shots were fired. The report is also wrong to state that there were no incidents of police-sanctioned harassment of the press; one such incident occurred in Bophuthatswana on March 10, when three representatives of Reuters were stopped by police, forced out of their car and beaten with batons and whips.
Although the report describes the April general election as "substantially free and fair," some serious problems did compromise the validity of the reported results, particularly in KwaZulu/Natal. There were also allegations of ballot-stuffmg, frequent intimidation and the existence of pirate voting stations in KwaZulu.
A number of other miscellaneous points of considerable significance are omitted from the State Department report. First, the report should have mentioned the tremendous contribution toward stability made by the nationwide local peace committees established under the terms of the National Peace Accord. Second, while the new government has provided free school lunches and free child care, the report should have noted that medical care remains beyond the reach of many South Africans. Third, although the 1994 report includes greater detail than did its predecessors about prison conditions, it again neglects to mention the reported detention of 12,000 children in adult prisons (despite corrective
233
CRITIQUE 1994
action by the new government).
Finally, the 1994 report contains more information than before about discrimination based on gender. The same cannot be said, unfortunately, for its coverage of vulnerable farm, domestic and public sector employees. Future reports should provide more detail about their conditions of employment and the prevalence of rights violations against them, despite new labor laws accommodating these workers.
234
