Bosnia and Herzegovina
n many ways, the State Department's 1995 report on Bosnia •and Herzegovina stands out as the best of the four annual reports issued so far on that country. It provides a refreshing example of the potential of the Country Reports in general to present a forthright, compelling and well conceived account of the human rights situation in a particular country. The report has three main strengths. First and most important, it is much more tightly organized and better written than the 1994 report. The introduction sets forth key themes and events which the following subsections consistently echo and illustrate. The overall tone and use of language is also much more powerful and evocative, with the result that the Bosnia report almost succeeds in overcoming the perennial problem, common to all the State Department reports, of reading like a disjointed laundry list of unrelated facts. The 1995 Bosnia report actually manages to convey a "story." The themes of that story are brutal and the details are horrific, but that is the sad truth in this devastated piece of the former Yugoslavia, and the drafters of the^ 1995 report were generally bold and effective in telling it.
A second strength of the report stems from its comprehensiveness. The report identifies most of the important issues and events of 1995 in Bosnia and presents closely detailed accounts of the year's more high-profile military campaigns, such as those waged in Srebrenica in the summer and Banja Luka/Prijedor in the fall. It also presents a more coherent discussion of the phenomenon of ethnic cleansing in its various forms and recognizes several categories of human rights violations which have become more prevalent as the war has gone on. These improvements are directly responsive to criticisms made in last year's Critique.
The report's third strength stems from the inclusion of facts and details which suggest that the drafters have read and drawn upon the findings of the United Nations Special Rapporteur and non-governmental human rights organizations. This is a very welcome development, and responds both to specific criticisms made in the Bosnia chapter of the 1994 Critique and to a longstanding complaint about the Country Reports generally.
11
Critique 1995
In other respects, however, the 1995 report is disappointing. First, it fails to discuss the situation in Mostar in any detail. To note that it is "tense" as it does in the introduction, is to understate the problem, for Mostar is still a completely divided city. Throughout 1995, freedom of movement across the dividing line which separates East and West Mostar was minimal at best. In July 1995, the U.N. Special Rapporteur noted that only 250 people per day were able to cross from one side to the other and that no progress had been made on the establishment of a police force. As a result, levels of criminality in the city remained high and the general security of all citizens was diminished. The U.N. Special Rapporteur also noted that minority groups suffered discrimination in terms of inequitable distribution of humanitarian aid by local agencies, Serbian Bosnians being most affected since they do not have a humanitarian organization of their own. Reports also suggested that Serbs and Muslims in Mostar received notice to enlist in the Croatian Defense Council (HVO • the army of the Bosnian Croats), which forced them to go into hiding to avoid such forced conscription. As one human rights observer noted, "the Croatian entity of Herzeg-Bosna is still very much there and is unlikely to go away, despite what Dayton says, and should not be referred to in the past tense" as the report does.
The report also avoids controversial aspects of several key issues and events. One of these was the total failure of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) and, by extension, the entire international community, to protect the Bosnian Muslims living in the safe areas of Srebrenica and Zepa from being overrun and slaughtered by Bosnian Serb forces in early )uly. Another is the continuing reluctance of the NATO Implementation Force (IFOR) to engage in activities necessary to support the work of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. This includes the unwillingness of IFOR troops to prevent Serbian forces from destroying the sites of mass graves throughout the fall of 1995 or to assist the tribunal in locating and detaining indicted war criminals.
This unwillingness to address the controversial subject of IFOR's proper role prevents the report from reaching the obvious, but politically unpalatable, conclusion about the prospects for peace in Bosnia under the
12
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Dayton agreement. The key to ending the bloodshed and genocide in the Balkans lies in ending the cycles of violent retaliation; a goal that cannot possibly be realized without more substantial intervention by IFOR and the international community. The report observes that by "punishing the individuals responsible for the atrocities, victims will fee! less need to take revenge in their own hands and attack innocent members of other ethnic groups" and recognizes that the war crimes tribunal must play an important role in that process. But at no point does the report explain how the tribunal can mete out such punishments in light of the destruction of evidence by the perpetrators of violations and the fact that indicted war criminals continue to hold positions of power.
As noted above, the report's most notable strengths stem from its tight organization, bold writing and comprehensive scope. These strengths are established in the introduction which, in a welcome departure from the State Department's instructions, is fairly lengthy and makes an admirable attempt to anticipate and synthesize what follows. The introduction opens with a brief summary of the history of the Balkan conflict, then moves smoothly into a recapitulation of the main events and players in 1995. The overall behavior of each of the Bosnian factions is concisely — and for the most part accurately — summarized in bold and evocative assertions which are consistently supported in the ensuing subsections.
Addressing the overall conduct of Serbian factions for example, the report notes that:
The Serbs continued to lay siege to cities, deliberately shell civilian areas and hospitals, withhold food deliveries, and cut off utilities. They also continued to execute non-combatants and run detention camps in which they executed some prisoners and tortured others. They employed rape as a tool of war, forced large numbers of civilians to flee to other regions, razed villages to prevent the return of displaced persons, and blockaded international relief efforts, including attacks on relief personnel.
13
Critique 1995
The drafters bluntly describe the Serb assault on the "safe area" of Srebrenica in July as "one of the worst single reported incidents of genocidal mass killing of members of an ethnic or religious group in Europe since World War 11"; as "the most massive and savage single act of ethnic cleansing in the four-year history of the war"; and as a major catalyst for the NATO military intervention which led eventually to the Dayton peace tallcs. The seizure of Srebrenica is recounted at length with a level of detail which closely resembles the findings of both the U.N. Special Rapporteur and international human rights monitors, strongly suggesting that the drafters drew on the work of these invaluable resources in preparing the report. The introduction also highlights the Bosnian Serb attack on the "safe area" of Zepa in July and the continued ethnic cleansing of areas under Bosnian Serb control. Detailed descriptions of the human rights violations which accompanied each of the foregoing events are then set forth in the appropriate subsections.
However, the report maintains a resolute silence on the subject of why or how these "safe areas" were so easily overrun. It refrains from drawing the conclusions that were apparent to non-governmental monitors such as Human Rights Watch, which commented:
The fall of Srebrenica and its environs to Bosnian Serb forces in early July 1995 made a mockery of the international community's professed commitment to safeguard regions it declared to be "safe areas" and placed under United Nations protection in 1993. Senior United Nations peacekeeping officials were unwilling to heed requests for support from their own forces stationed within the Srebrenica enclave, thus allowing Bosnian Serb forces to overrun it easily and — without interference from UN soldiers — carry out systematic, mass execution of hundreds, possibly thousands, of civilian men and boys and to terrorize, rape, beat, execute, rob or otherwise abuse civilians being deported from the area .... The international community grievously failed the thousands of Bosnians who trusted its promise of safety.
14
Bosnia and Herzegovina
The mainly Muslim inhabitants of Srebrenica and neighboring areas such as Zepa were victims of the worst war crimes since the beginning of the Balkan conflict because UNPROFOR was understaffed, undersupplied and undersupported. The magnitude of the failure of this U.N. mission led U.N. Special Rapporteur Tadeusz Mazowiecki to resign in frustration and disgust. In an unusually candid letter of resignation submitted in August 1995, Mazowiecki bemoaned the international community's passivity in the face of Serbian aggression, noting:
One cannot speak about the protection of human rights with credibility when one is confronted with the lack of consistency and courage displayed by the international community and its leaders .... Crimes have been committed with swiftness and brutaUty and in contrast the response of the international community has been slow and ineffectual .... The present critical moment forces us to realizefthe true character of those crimes and the responsibility of Europe and the international community for their own hopelessness in addressing them.
In discussing the conduct of the Bosnian Army (a multi-ethnic fighting force comprised predominantly of Bosnian Muslims), the report observes that they demonstrated "general respect" for human rights, although "some violations" were committed. This assertion is consistently supported by discussions in the body of the report and generally concurs with the observations made throughout the year by the Special Rapporteur and international human rights monitors. Where the Bosnian Army is responsible for violations, the report describes these forthrightly. For example, on several occasions it cites reports of Bosnian Army forces, assisted by the Croatian military, harassing and murdering followers of the Bosnian Muslim renegade Fikret Abdic who were sheltered in a Croatian refugee camp. Similarly, it notes that govémment forces seized over 100 Serbian males from Hrasnica, an area outside Sarajevo, for forced labor on the front lines, and that the majority were killed in the line of fire.
15
Critique 1995
Regarding Croatian factions based in Bosnia, in the so-called Herzeg-Bosna area, the report alludes to decisive military campaigns such as the Croatian recapture of Western Slavonia in May, and observes that the HVO "was credibly accused of human rights abuses against Bosniaks and Serbs and ... on occasion killed civilians and shelled civilian areas." The report is also forthright in noting that the HVO "appears to be directly under the command of the army of Croatia" and in questioning the degree of independence which the Bosnian Croatian political party (the Bosnian branch of the Croatian Democratic Union — HDZ), maintains from Croatia. Again, discussions in several of the report's subsections give details which generally support these observations, although the extent of atrocities committed by Croatian factions against Serbs during the recapture of Western Slavonia and later of the Krajina region has not yet been satisfactorily documented and is probably understated.
As noted above, throughout the various discussions of human rights abuses committed by all three factions, the report recognizes and highlights forms of human rights abuses which have grown more prevalent as the war has gone on. Many of these have become the latest tools of ethnic cleansing and it is gratifying to see the report acknowledge this fact. For example, the report repeatedly describes incidents in which Serbian forces deliberately shelled civilian areas (particularly hospitals) and interfered with humanitarian aid and the flow of supplies. The report also identifies the Serbian propensity for strangling cities by cutting off water and utility supplies, and describes reports of "grotesque cruelty" to non-Serbs such as slitting the throats of victims, beating prisoners to death, forcing captives to walk across minefields and denying prisoners access to medical treatment. The report properly notes that all sides to the conflict arbitrarily seized civilians who were then used in exchanges for prisoners of war, a blatant violation of the Geneva Conventions. It is also gratifying to see the 1995 report give more thorough attention to the plight of children, addressing particularly the long-term effects that four years of war and loss will undoubtedly have on young children. The report also expands its discussion of the human rights violations inflicted on women in Bosnia in 1995, and correctly recognizes the continuing
16
Bosnia and Herzegovina
widespread use of rape as a tactic of terrorization and ethnic cleansing, mostly by Serb forces.
However, while the report generally offers a well organized and well illustrated synthesis of most of the important issues and events of 1995, it entirely misses the opportunity to draw a clear Unk between the atrocities committed during the various military campaigns and the cycles of retaliation which ensued. For example, the Croatian recapture of Western Slavonia in May caused an estimated 10,000 to 15,000 Serbs to flee for Bosnian Serb-held regions, particularly the Banja Luka area, where, according to officials from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), they retaliated by attacking and destroying Catholic churches and monasteries and beating, robbing and murdering Croats. This same flood of Serb refugees into northeastern Bosnia also incited Bosnian Serb forces to retaliate by slaughtering Muslims supposedly sheltered from harm in the "safe areas" of Srebrenica and Zepa in July. In August, the Croatiar\ and Bosnian armies and the Bosnian Croat militia counter-retaliated against rebel Serb-held areas in the Krajina region in an offensive that displaced some 200,000 Serbs. Bosnian Serb factions responded throughout the fall of 1995 with a campaign of terror against Bosnian Muslims and Croats in northwestern Bosnian cities such as Banja Luka, Prijedor and Sanski Most, leaving a bloody trail of civiUan corpses and a slew of disappearances. None of these operations occurred in a vacuum; each laid the seeds for the next round of retaliation. If the drafters of the report comprehend this truth, they fail to state it.
More importantly however, the report fails to link these cycles of violence to the larger issue of the success of the Dayton peace agreement. The report gives a clear and concise summary of the terms of the Dayton agreement, the structure and functions of IFOR and the role of the Yugoslav War Crimes Tribunal. It also observes that "respect for human rights is a fundamental part of the Dayton agreement and a key to the reconciliation process," and, as noted above, recognizes that the work of the tribunal is central to mitigating the drive for revenge. Yet the report fails entirely to recognize that the tribunal cannot successfully prosecute war criminals in absentia or when the evidence of their atrocities is being
17
Critique 1995
systematically destroyed. Throughout the fall of 1995 and into 1996, European Union monitors and Bosnian war crimes investigators identified six mass graves in northwestern Bosnia containing approximately 240 bodies of persons suspected to be victims of ethnic cleansing by Serbian forces in 1992; during this same time period, reliable reports began to emerge indicating that Bosnian Serb forces were exhuming these mass graves, thereby destroying this crucial evidence of genocide. Despite such reports, NATO commanders refused to intervene. As one commander put it, "Our job is to separate forces, not look for mass graves.... It would be a diversion of soldiers from our main goal." IFOR's refusal to become more pro-active has sent the message to war criminals that there are no repercussions for the slaughter of innocent civilians. This message only encourages the various Bosnian factions to seek retribution themselves by perpetuating the cycles of revenge and violence which have fueled the current conflict from the beginning.
In sum, the State Department's 1995 report on Bosnia presents a forthright, compelling and well conceived account of the human rights situation in that war-torn country. It is tightly organized, well written and employs powerful and evocative language which conveys a "story" of a group of people rather than a fragmented series of facts. It is also more comprehensive than previous reports and draws more heavily on the findings of U.N. mechanisms and other international human rights monitors. Its principal faults are threefold: first, it entirely avoids politically controversial subjects; second, it fails to identify the powerful cyclical character of the violence; and third, it declines to recognize that peace remains a pipe dream until these cycles are broken — something that will only happen once those responsible for the atrocities of the past five years are removed from power and held accountable for their crimes.
nr.
Jl (
