Belarus
*he State Department's 1995 report œrrectly underscores the significant deterioration of the human rights situation in Belarus during the last year. This deterioration is attributable to the authoritarian practices of Belarusian President, Aleksandr Lukashenko, who has exploited the strong powers granted to the executive branch by the Constitution to rule by presidential decree. The tendency of the report, however, to place responsibility for many of the abuses on President Lukashenko without a discussion of the overall sodal, legal and political environment, obscures the more systemic causes for human rights violations: a Constitution which grants too much power to the executive, a legal system which does not yet provide an appropriate check against abuses of power, vaguely drafted legislation which creates loopholes for abuses, and the fragility of democratic institutions in Belarus.
While the report notes that President Lukashenko "repeatedly ignored limits on the authority of the executive branch," it fails adequately to convey the magnitude and scope of the president's ongoing confi"ontation with the legislative and judicial branches of government. In 1995, the Constitutional Court ruled several presidential decrees unconstitutional. These included decrees suspending trade unions, eliminating parliamentary immunity for deputies and recalling diplomatic and official passports. Accusing the Constitutional Court of "political intrigues," President Lukashenko declared that he would ignore its decisions and issued formal instructions to executive branch agencies that all presidential decrees must i^e obeyed. One of the decrees struck down by the Constitutional Court vested the president with the power to determine the salary of the court's chairman. In December 1995, the director of the president's office advised the Chairman of the Constitutional Court, Valerii Tikhinia, to resign voluntarily from his position or face a direct call by the president for his removal. Such external pressure on the Constitutional Court is expressly prohibited by Article 126 of the Belarusian Constitution, and, in response, approximately 125 members of parliament signed a letter to the president protesting his attempt to interfere with the work of the court. In a country lacking a tradition of judicial independence, the president's
Critique 1995
blatant refusal to submit to the rulings of the nation's highest court for constitutional matters does little to develop respect for the courts among Belarusian citizens and does not bode well for achieving a state based on the rule of law.
President Lukashenko's protracted conflict with the parliament has led to political paralysis and stalled political and economic reforms. However, because the report's description of actions taken by the executive branch against the parliament are scattered throughout its various sections, the report fails to portray the full extent of the president's assault against the legislative branch.
President Lukashenko discouraged voters from participating in the May parliamentary elections, denigrating parliament, and using his domination of the state-owned media to campaign for several referendum questions that were placed before voters at the same time as the elections. The 600,000 Belarusian rubles (about $50) allotted by the government to each candidate for campaign expenses was woefully inadequate. The elections were also put at risk because the government was slow in releasing funds. Aleksandr Abramovich, head of the Central Electoral Commission, appealed publicly to the president several times to release funds so that workers verifying candidates's signatures could be paid. A total of 20 billion Belarusian rubles (about $1.67 million) had been budgeted for the parliamentary elections, while 100 billion Belarusian rubles (about $8.33 million) were spent on World War II victory celebrations that took place just before the elections. In March 1995, President Lukashenko signed a decree calling on local authorities to prevent unauthorized rallies. The decree prevented parties and individuals from organizing large campaign rallies, and the Committee for State Security (KDB) reportedly intimidated candidates and interfered with the elections. President Lukashenko lobbied for a referendum question to be put to the electorate that would have given him the power to dissolve parliament if it "systematically or seriously violates the constitution." On April 11, President Lukashenko put the referendum issue before parliament. In protest, a group of eighteen deputies held a hunger strike the next day on the floor of parliament. As the report notes. Lukashenko ordered the striking deputies removed by the police.
Belarus
Parliament then agreed to put the referendum on the ballot, but as a non-binding one. Later in an interview President Lukashenko defended his actions against the striking deputies, stating that he would act in the same way should the situation be repeated.
The two rounds of voting held on May 14 and May 28 failed to fill two-thirds of the seats necessary to form a new parliament. President Lukashenko refused to work with the old parliament, declaring it illegitimate because it had exceeded its five-year term, despite a ruling by the Constitutional Court that the existing parliament remain the highest legislative body until a new parliament was elected. In the meantime, the president issued a number of decrees aimed at intimidating deputies and interfering with the functioning of the parliament. These included decrees eliminating parliamentary immunity for deputies; recalling diplomatic and official passports; abolishing privileges of all deputies and government officials; amending the state budget (which would reduce funding to the parliament); giving the President the power to set the salaries of senior parliamentary officials (the Law on the Parliament sets the chairman's salary at 95% of the president's); and finally, governing rules on elections to fill the seats left empty in the May elections. The report fails to mention a number of these decrees.
On the eve of the repeat parliamentary elections, which were held in December 1995, President Lukashenko vowed to dissolve the parliament and rule by decree if voter turnout was less than the 50% required by law to make the election valid. As he cast his vote, the president said, "This is the last parliamentary vote in the country for the next five years," adding, "1 am not going to waste any more billions of the people's money for some stupid elections ignored by the people." Although the report notes that the December 1995 elections were not held under optimal conditions, it fails to mention that there were instances of intimidation of candidates, including some beatings. However, despite the efforts of the Lukashenko government to disrupt the elections, sufficient voters turned out to seat a new parliament at the beginning of 1996.
The report accurately describes the abusive practices prevailing in Belarusian detention centers and prisons. However, it fails to mention that, according to the Belarusian League for Human Rights, prisoners are
Critique 1995
often sent to serve their sentences in areas contaminated by the Chernobyl nuclear accident. The report also should have provided some specific examples of police brutality. It could have noted, for example, the beating of member of parliament Vladimir Nester while in police custody in connection with his participation in an unsanctioned Independence Day procession in Minsk on July 27. The report does an accurate job of describing the instances of exceedingly long pre-trial detention (in some cases more than two years) and restrictions on the ability of detainees to consult freely with lawyers.
As in 1994, the 1995 report unfortunately omits any focussed discussion of the Belarusian police and security forces. Belarus is one of the few former Soviet republics which did not liquidate its secret police agency, the KDB. In 1994, President Lukashenko transferred the supervision of the ICDB and the Ministry of Internal Affairs from the parliament to his own office. This alarming reorganization has given President Lukashenko a free hand in using the two agencies' forces to suppress internal dissent. In 1995, in an effort to appease the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the president reinstated privileges previously granted to its employees (such as rent subsidies) that had been abolished by an earlier presidential decree.
The report provides a satisfactory account of the government's crackdown on the activities of Belarusian trade unions, although it leaves out some important facts. During the August 21 Minsk metro strike, special police forces not only dispersed strikers but also beat them. In addition to Gennady Bykov and Sergei Antonchik, two other trade union leaders, Nikolai Kanakh and Vladimir Makarchiuk, were also arrested by the police and held incommunicado. Kanakh was sentenced to 10 days administrative arrest, and Makarchiuk to 15. Moreover, in the wake of the Minsk metro strike, government harassment and surveillance of trade unions increased. For example, in early September 1995, the bank account of the Belarusian Independent Trade Union of Miners in the dty of Soligorsk, Minsk region, was blocked by the authorities without any explanation. Other trade union activists in the same city were "invited for a talk" at the local 1<DB offices.
Belarus
In a glaring omission, the report does not discuss the government's restrictions placed upon freedom of association in Belarus, stating only that "the Constitution provides for freedom of association." In October 1994, the parliament passed the Law on Public Associations {obshchenstvennye organizatsii) which requires, among other things, that all public associations register with the government. The parliament also adopted a resolution "On Implementing the Law on Public Associations," which mandated that public associations previously registered undergo re-registration with the Ministry of Justice before April 1, 1995. While the language of the resolution would appear to require that the ministry automatically issue new registration certificates to all currently registered public associations, in practice it is using the resolution as an opportunity to disband certain public associations. The ministry is requiring certain public associations to repeat the formalities of holding an organizational meeting, adopting a charter and electing officers before their applications for re-registration will be considered. According to the Belarusian League for Human Rights, as a result of the re-registration requirement, the number of officially registered public associations in Belarus has declined from 700 to 400.
The re-registration procedures mandated by the parliamentary resolution have caused difficulties for the Belarusian League for Human Rights, a non-governmental organization founded in 1992. The League had encountered obstacles when it initially registered with the Ministry of Justice, having to submit its application six times before it was finally accepted. The ministry is now requiring that the League's executive committee adopt a resolution liquidating itself and requesting its removal from the state register. Only then will the ministry accept the League's application to re-register. Furthermore, the ministry has demanded that the League delete a provision of its charter authorizing its members to disseminate information on human rights abuses in Belarus.
While the report does briefly discuss the government's attitude toward non-governmental investigation of alleged violations of human rights, it completely ignores the more fundamental issue of the ability of NGOs to become legally established. This is surprising since the State Department's instructions specifically direct the drafters of the report to
Critique 1995
address the ease with which public associations may organize and, if required by law, register.
On January 4, 1996, President Lukashenko issued a similar insmiction mandating re-registration of all branches of the media, which included all state-owned and independent periodicals published in Belarus and all television and radio companies. This action followed more than a year of harassment of the media and suppression of opposing views by the Lukashenko government. For the most part, the report accurately details the government's interference with the print and broadcast media. As it notes, following a common practice in the former Soviet republics, the government has in place a defamation law which applies identical standards of liability for public and private persons, and uses it to harass and intimidate the media with litigation and the imposition of fines. The participants in the first Belarusian Conference of Publishers of the Independent Press held in March 1996 called for amendments to the existing law on the press and other mass media to protect journalists from a succession of defamation lawsuits brought by government prosecutors on behalf of public officials.
The report states that in December 1994, the Lukashenko government ordered the state printing house to cancel contracts with three leading independent newspapers — Belorusskaia Delovaia Gazeta, Imia and Svaboda. In fact, at least five and perhaps as many as ten newspapers had their printing contracts canceled. Some of these newspapers are now forced to print in neighboring Lithuania. As the report notes, President Lukashenko issued decrees replacing the editors of four leading state-owned newspapers following their attempts to publish excerpts of a speech delivered in parliament on government corruption. According to the Committee to Protect Journalists, losif Seredich, the editor of Narodnaia Gazeta and a member of parliament, was dismissed by order of President Lukashenko for publishing a letter criticizing the government's pro-Russian policies. The president's decree stated that the letter "incited violence and civil unrest."
In its discussion of press freedom, the report fails to mention a Presidential Decree of October 1995 obliging ministries and other sute bodies to disseminate information only through BelTA, the Belarusian
6
Belarus
state information agency, thereby depriving non-BelTA journalists from obtaining and disseminating information directly from official government sources.
In both the May and December 1995 parliamentary elections, the Lukashenko government virtually eliminated access to the media by opposition candidates. The report states rather vaguely that "[i]n November President Lukashenko attempted to halt broadcasting of television programs featuring candidates for the upcoming parliamentary elections. The candidate [sic] made efforts to obtain air time on other television channels. Some succeeded." According to the Belarusian League for Human Rights, however, no independent candidate was given any broadcast time on television or radio channels of the state-owned Belarusian Television and Radio Company, even though by law the company must provide each candidate access free of charge. At the same time, the state-owned television stations carried programs directed against candidates who opposed Lukashenko's policies. The Chairman of the Parliament, Mechaslav Grib, was forced to resort to the foreign media in order to address Belarusian citizens. Grib's appeal to the public to take part in the parliamentary elections was broadcast by the Belarusian service of both Radio Liberty/Radio Free Europe and the Russian Television and Radio Company. On December 8, a Radio Russia correspondent and one of the candidates. Professor Shushkevich, were denied access to the Belarusian State Radio Complex Studio for an interview with Radio Russia which leases space in the building. Such infringements on access to the media should have been included in the report.
The report also fails to add that the government has interfered with the ability of Belarusian journalists to travel abroad. On December 8, four Belarusian journalists, Pavel Zhuk of Svaboda, Nikolai Aleksandrov of Brestskiy Kurer, and Alexander Valvachov and Aleksandr Mikhakchuk of Belonisskaya Gazeta, were not permitted to leave Belarus to attend an international conference in Prague.
President Lukashenko attempted to extend censorship to the academic sphere by issuing an instruction to the Ministry of Education that it return to using Soviet-era textbooks in Belarusian schools.
7
Critique 1995
(Lukashenko, whose policies are oriented toward reintegration with Russia, has said he believes that the post-Soviet textbooks treated Belarus as "too separate" from Russia). The report states only that Lukashenko "reportedly" signed the instruction. However, after he had denied issuing the instruction, an opposition newspaper published a copy bearing the president's signature.
The report does not provide a complete picture of the status of freedom of religion in Belarus, particularly with respect to the government's policy toward the Roman Catholic Church. Nevertheless, the 1995 report is an improvement over its immediate predecessor, which asserted there was no interference in the practice of Roman Catholicism. Belarus has a significant Roman Catholic population, residing primarily in the western part of the country. In the post-Soviet period, the Roman Catholic Church has relied on an influx of Polish priests to assist in serving reopened parishes. Some government officials are concerned that the Church is being used to promote Polish political and cultural influence among Belarusians. During the last five years, the number of Roman Catholic parishes in Belarus has grown from 103 to 350, but the present government-imposed quota for Roman Catholic priests from Poland is only 50. It is common practice for state-owned newspapers to carry articles complaining about the presence of too many foreign clergy in Belarus. Relations between the Polish Catholic priests and state authorities worsened during 1995, and officials have attempted to expel such priests from Belarus. In one case, a Catholic priest. Father Edward Loeck, who serves in the Shereshevsky parish of the Brest region, was summoned to the official Regional Religious Council and accused of organizing an illegal religious procession because he had failed to get special permission from the local authorities. Father Loeck was threatened with deportation. The incident was resolved only after members of the parish and the procurator's office intervened on the priest's behalf In December 1995, without explanation, officials of the Belarusian Television and Radio Company shut down the radio broadcast of "Voice of the Soul," a weekly program prepared by Father Vladiislav Zavalnyuk, a Roman Catholic priest.
Belarus
In general, the 1995 State Department report describes many significant events affecting human rights in Belarus. However, it does not provide sufficient analysis of these events that would allow the reader to come away with a fuller understanding of the overall human rights situation. The report's treatment of certain categories of human rights such as freedom of association and freedom of religion is clearly inadequate. Also, the report should have looked more carefully at domestic legislation which has a negative impact on human rights.





I;
