China
n December 1995, a Chinese court sentenced Wei Jingsheng, • China's most prominent dissident, to 14 years in prison for the peaceful expression of his political beliefs. In many ways, Wei's latest odyssey — from protracted incommunicado detention to a courtroom closed to foreign observers — epitomizes the state of human rights in China today. Wei's warrantless arrest in 1994, his 20 months of detention without charge, and his hasty trial for conspiracy to overthrow the government reflect the deficiencies of Chinese legal process. His harsh sentence symbolizes the government's continued intolerance of internal dissent and its resistance to international human rights scrutiny.
In describing the plight of Wei Jingsheng and other Chinese citizens, the State Department's 1995 report on China accurately and critically captures the deplorable human rights situation in the PRC. As the report correctly observes, by the end of 1995 "almost all public dissent against the central authorities was silenced by intimidation, exile, or imposition of prison terms or administrative detention." Overall, the report gives a well rounded portrayal of the variety of human rights abuses in China, and the ineffectiveness of the Chinese legal system as a means of controlling those abuses. Compared to the previous year's report, the 1995 report takes a big step forward in expressly recognizing the emptiness of the Clinton administration's premise that "constructive engagement" with the Chinese government to encourage economic liberalization will naturally lead to an improvement in the human rights situation in China. The report comments:
The experience of China in the past few years demonstrates that while economic growth, trade and social mobility create an improved standard of living, they cannot by themselves bring about greater respect for human rights in the absence of a willingness by political authorities to abide by the fundamental international norms.
While the 1994 report strained to characterize China's human rights record as "diverse," the 1995 report clearly indicates that the scope of
27
Critique 1995
ongoing political, social and religious repression in China far outweighs the few points of progress made over the last year.
A particularly strong part of the 1995 report is the section on arbitrary arrest, detention or exile. This section benefits from the State Department's new policy of beginning each section with a summary of applicable laws. Rather than recite information about individual cases, the section does an excellent job of recognizing recent patterns of arbitrary arrest and detention on pretexts of parole or criminal violations or under the pretense of compulsory "vacations." This section might have been made even stronger, however. In discussing how officials kept Chinese dissidents away from the September 1995 Beijing Women's Conference by detaining them under questionable charges, the report should have clarified that the brief list of individuals named in the report was not exhaustive. Others not mentioned in the report — including activists Xu Shuiliang, Qi Zhiyong and Jiang Qisheng — were also detained for questioning for the duration of the conference.
In addition, this section in the 1995 report fails to correct one of the oversights noted in the 1994 edition of the Critique with regard to detention under "supervised residence." The report should have noted that the provision for "supervised residence" in Article 38 of the Criminal Procedure Law seems to justify house arrest only at the defendant's own home. This article states that: "A defendant under surveillance on his residence cannot leave the designated area. The order to impose surveillance on the defendant's residence shall be carried out by the local public security station, or by an entrusted people's commune, or by the unit to which the defendant belongs." The fact that the Code envisions surveillance by local officials or work unit colleagues demonstrates that the provision was originally intended to authorize house arrest at the defendant's own place of residence. Moreover, Article 38 poses a clear distinction between taking a defendant "into custody," and imposing surveillance on his residence. Therefore, recent instances in which the police have purported to use "supervised residence" orders to arrest and remove dissidents like Wei Jingsheng or Liu Xiaobo to undisclosed locations appear to exceed the proper scope of the provision. (Liu Xiaobo was released in January 1996 after nine months of detention).
28
China
With respect to the lack of due process in capital cases, too, this year's report repeats an oversight alluded to in last year's Criticfue. The report fails to link the exceptional speed with which various death sentences have been imposed, reviewed and carried out, to 1983 regulations that accelerate the adjudication of certain serious criminal cases. A cross-reference to these regulations would have clarified the legal pretext for several cases mentioned in the report in which defendants were convicted and executed within a matter of days.
In other areas, however, the 1995 report successfully incorporates changes suggested by last year's edition of the Critique. Most importantly, it clarifies the way in which January 1994 regulations on church group registration have enabled the Chinese authorities to tighten state control over unofficial religious activity. The 1995 report also acknowledges that the Chinese government has imposed an outright ban on at least one unauthorized religious sect, the Shouters. On the topic of eugenics, this year's report clarifies that the current Maternal and Child Health Care Law not only recommends but actually mandates abortion or sterilization for persons suffering from certain hereditary, contagious or mental disorders. Finally, the 1995 report makes another welcome change in incorporating a description of relevant International Labour Organisation (ILO) actions into its discussion of worker rights. The ILO proceedings may provide a much-needed window into the status of worker rights in China, particularly given the crackdown on independent union organizers in recent years. Next year's report should continue to make greater use of China-related findings by the ILO and other intergovernmental bodies.
One of the most fundamental weaknesses in the 1995 report is its frequent failure to illuminate the connections between different categories of violations. A principal example of this weakness is the report's treatment of freedom of movement and worker rights. Specifically, the report fails to relate the government's restrictions on freedom of movement to the inability of unauthorized migrant laborers to enforce their rights as workers. The inadequate enforcement of labor regulations is not just a result of occasional corruption or inadequate inspection regimes, as the report implies. On the contrary, China's household registration requirements systematically condemn a large part of the labor
29
Critique 1995
pool to illegal work status when rural residents or minors (who are too young to be eligible for the identification cards and residence permits that would allow them to work) migrate without government permission in search of work in more developed areas. Because they lack the proper registration, these migrant laborers fall outside the protections of the All-China Federation of Trade Unions, China's new Labor Law and local minimum wage standards. As a result, they have no legal recourse against abusive employers or corrupt officials. In some cases, the work situations of undocumented migrant laborers may be so coercive as to amount to forced labor. Future reports should take this possibihty into account in their discussion of compulsory labor.
Another example of thematic disjunction is the report's failure to discuss the link between the government's repression of independent religious activity and its crackdown on political dissent. While the report makes the connection between religious and political dissent in the contexts of Tibetan and Muslim unrest, its analysis of abuses in Han-dominated areas treats the authorities' infiingements of religious freedom and free speech as unrelated phenomena. As a result, the report fails to recognize the overlap between the dissident religious and political communities. Furthermore, it artificially separates related elements in the government's campaign against all dissident expression, especially that which the government suspects of exhibiting subversive foreign influence. This artificial separation plays into the government's interest in atomizing dissident activists to prevent them from making common cause.
Another recurrent weakness in the report is that it cites a number of ostensibly progressive laws or regulations without providing information about the effectiveness of those provisions. For example, the report mentions favorably the passage of implementing regulations for the State Compensation Law which came into force January 1, 1995, allowing citizens to sue government actors for malfeasance and recover damages. The report does not speak to the actual use of the law, however. Even assuming that no data is yet available on the implementation of the law, the report could have discussed potential practical constraints on the effective use of the new law, in the same way that it points out systemic barriers to the effective use of the 1990 Administrative Procedure Law
30
China
permitting detainees to challenge the legality of their detentions. Similarly, substantive information about enforcement of the December 1994 prison law, which the report mentions, would be helpful in assessing whether the extensively documented human rights abuses in Chinese prisons occur in an atmosphere of impunity. On this topic, the 1995 report might have noted that prison officials at the Hewan Labor Camp took no corrective action after political detainee Tong Yi reported her January 16 beating at the hands of fellow inmates who had been designated by prison officials as camp "trustees."
In many areas, the State Department's 1995 revisions to its instructions to those drafting the Country Reports has raised the standard of reporting. The result is that coverage that might have been considered adequate in the past is no longer satisfactory. For example, the report's fairly detailed coverage of the status of women does not meet the new requirements for reporting on this topic. According to the 1995 instructions, the section on women's rights should describe the nature and effectiveness of the government's programs to redress problems of economic and social inequality. In accordance with these guidelines, the report should have discussed in greater detail the Chinese government's failure to combat effectively employment discrimination against women. In particular, the report could have underscored the absence of proactive government programs to redress the disparate impact of economic reforms upon working women; the government's own unequal treatment of female and male employees through "protective" legislation for female workers; and the ways in which government registration requirements constrain the formation of independent women's advocacy groups and unions.
Problems of violence against women also merit greater coverage. In accordance with State Department guidelines concerning the problem of trafficlcing in women, the report should have described China's 1991 legislation against the abduction and sale of women. As the Critique noted last year, discussion of the 1991 anti-trafficking provisions should take into account the failure to criminalize the intentional purchase of women generally, without regard to whether the buyer knows that the woman has been abducted or whether he agrees to release her within a certain period of time. Future reports should also address government action against
31
Critique 1995
domestic violence. While the report notes that volunteers in Beijing have established a telephone hotline for victims of domestic violence and that domestic violence can be grounds for criminal prosecution, a more meaningful portrayal of the government's response needs to include specific information about preventive programs, support for abused women, and the nature of the criminal or administrative enforcement regime (including whether Chinese law imposes the same penalties for domestic violence as for violence against strangers).
On the question of political representation, the 1995 report satisfies the State Department's requirements with respect to women's participation, but fails to include any information about the representation of China's ethnic minorities in the government. Next year's report should rectify this omission.
The report's coverage of children's rights and welfare does a good job of noting the variety of abuses raised over the last year, such as sex-selective abortion, female infanticide, trafficking in children and conditions in orphanages. The report's overview of child welfare legislation is also satisfactory. In order to satisfy the revised guidelines, however, next year's report should also discuss sex discrimination in the government's provision of education and health care services to children.
While the report's coverage of extrajudicial killings in 1995 is adequate, the revised State Department guidelines also require updates of cases outstanding from previous years. To this effect, the report should have noted developments (or the absence thereof) in several cases reported in 1994 from Tibet, Fujian and Guangdong, where the outcome of investigations or prosecutions was unclear. In addition, State Department guidelines specify that the rubric of arbitrary or summary executions includes the imposition of capital punishment "where the accused is not allowed to present a defense or is denied basic due process rights." Under this definition, the Chinese authorities' custom of holding mass public rallies where multiple defendants may be tried, sentenced and executed in one combined ceremony might qualify as summary executions. For example. Amnesty International reported that on February 14, 1995, Yunnan officials announced death sentences for 26 accused drug traffickers, then had them executed immediately afterward
32
China
— apparently with no chance to appeal. On May 16, simultaneous drug sentencing rallies held throughout Guangdong province resulted in the immediate execution of 51 people, with another 219 individuals given suspended death sentences or fixed prison terms. In the past, the U.N. Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial, Summary or Arbitrary Executions has expressed concern about China's use of the death penalty after summary trial proceedings. Future reports should incorporate any relevant findings of the Special Rapporteur on this subject.
On the question of the integrity of the Chinese judiciary, the report correctly observes that political pressure, corruption and conflicts of interest may contaminate judicial decisionmaking. The report might have further highlighted these problems by noting the lack of judicial independence in the introduction to the report, as required by the State Department's revised reporting instructions. In addition, next year's report should address the effects of 1995 legislation designed to professionalize the judiciary and law enforcement bureaus.
In its discussion of governmenf interference with privacy and family rights, the report should have noted the Chinese government's plan to force the resettlement of over one million people to accommodate construction of the Three Gorges Dam. Next year's report should note new developments in this area.
In a number of areas, the report satisfies the letter of State Department guidelines but omits mention of key cases. For example, the report accurately states that the government intensified its control over the expression of unauthorized views in 1995. As an example, the report might have noted an October incident in which a peaceful park demonstration by the immediate family of imprisoned pro-democracy activist Chen Ziming ended in the detention and questioning of his wife Wang Zhihong, three Hong Kong journalists and a CNN cameraman who had covered the protest. The report should also have discussed a 1995 crackdown on television stations and producers. As the Committee to Protect Journalists reports, in November 1995 the Ministry of Radio, Film and Television moved to shut down stations in Hunan and Yunnan provinces for broadcasting "pornographic or politically sensitive" programs. In the course of the same campaign, the ministry fined at least
33
Critique 1995
four other stations across the country and barred them from broadcasting locally produced programs in the future. In December, the Ministry announced a series of new regulations targeting independent television producers. Designed to censor programs deemed "crude, excessive or detrimental to society," the regulations limit the establishment of new television production firms and require all producers to apply for licenses and submit annual production plans for government approval.
As with the section on freedom of the press, the report's depiction of religious repression and persecution omits significant information. It notes a number of incidents of official persecution of Chinese Christians, then concludes with the statement that: "Elsewhere, authorities tolerate the existence of unofficial Catholic and Protestant churches as long as they remain small and discreet." This statement misleadingly suggests that the report catalogues all the Chinese government's most egregious actions against unofficial churches. In fact, the report omits any mention of the government's Easter raids on unofficial "house churches" across the country. For example. Amnesty International reported the Easter arrests of between 30 and 40 Roman Catholics at Yijiashan in Jiangxi province. Many of the detainees sustained police beatings during their detentions. According to Amnesty, two of the women detained, Gao Shuyun and Huang Guanghua, were so badly beaten they later needed help in feeding themselves. Another major incident omitted from the report was an April 18 raid in Hubei, reported by Human Rights Watch/Asia, in which security officials armed with electric batons broke up a training class for new pastors and arrested at least 67 Chinese and three foreign Protestants. The report should also have noted government persecution . of Roman Catholics in Hebei where, among other incidents, police reportedly detained for six months and severely beat the priest Chi Huitian for refusing to cancel an unofficial Easter Mass. In light of the March 1995 arrests of 11 Beiliwang sect leaders in Guangdong for "cheating people out of their property" and "sexual promiscuity," future reports should take note of whether the police step up their use of common criminal charges to intimidate religious leaders, as they have tried to do with political dissidents in recent years. Finally, future reports should also be alert to the government's attempts to curtail public
34
China
worship by physically restricting the size of church accommodations, as was done in June 1995 in Xinjiang; or by demolishing churches, as was done in Gang diocese, Guizhou, in July, and in Baoding diocese, Hebei, in November.
The report is basically fair and accurate in its depiction of abuses in Tibet in 1995. Strong points in this section include the acknowledgment of widespread employment discrimination against Tibetans and a discussion of government efforts to control the growth and operation of Tibetan monasteries. As an example of the latter, the report should have mentioned that China has begun expelling monks from their monasteries for "political reasons." According to Amnesty International, the March 1995 expulsion of an abbot and teacher from Yamure monastery in Medro Gongkar county was the first such expulsion in recent years. In a crackdown on demonstrating monks at the Nalanda monastery in Penpo Lundrup county, 64 monks were reportedly expelled by a "reeducation team" of Chinese authorities.
In addition, the report fails to mention some key cases that would have bolstered its assertion that the Chinese government continued to be responsible for widespread human rights abuses in Tibet during 1995, including torture and intensified controls on freedom of speech. While the report relates the case of Gyaltsen Kelsang, a young Tibetan nun and political prisoner who reportedly suffered from prison beatings and hard labor, and died shortly after her medical release from prison, it should also have cited the similar case of Sherab Wangpo. According to the Dalai Lama's government-in-exile in Dharamsala, India, the 18-year-old novice nun died in April soon after her medical release from a three-year political sentence. She was reportedly tortured and severely beaten during her detention in Drapchi Prison.
Similarly, the inclusion of more information about police beatings of detainees would have substantiated the report's general statement about the lack of safeguards for prisoners in Tibet. For example, Amnesty International reported that two monks from Lhasa's Jokhang Temple were arrested without explanation, detained for three days, and severely beaten by police at the Gutsa Detention Center in Lhasa in January. The police reportedly threatened the monks with further punishment if they
35
Critique 1995
told anyone what had happened. The report might also have included mention of other specific instances of police violence and extortion throughout the year, such as the incident reported from Gyab-drag nunnery in which police officials demanded that the families of 13 nuns detained for protest pay 2,000 yuan to secure the release of each one.
Despite the specific weaknesses detailed above, the 1995 report is a generally accurate and hard-hitting portrayal of the decline in the human rights situation in China over the last year. The 1996 report should continue this year's critical focus, while doing more to recognize the connections between different categories of rights violations and while making an even greater effort to raise its reporting level to meet the State Department's elevated standards for dealing with issues such as women's rights, discrimination and governmental impunity. Even as the Chinese government continues to try to preempt international scrutiny of its human rights record, the continued emergence of China as an economic and political superpower demands that careful attention be paid to its record of compliance with international norms of behavior.
36
I:
