Colombia
n 1995, Colombia did little to improve its dismal human rights • record. Despite President Ernesto Samper's repeated affirmations of his nation's commitment to the respect of human rights and his well-publicized increase in Colombia's already enormous governmental human rights bureaucracy, the right to personal safety and humane treatment in Colombia remained seriously imperiled. The impunity which pervades all aspects of Colombia's human rights situation remained institutionalized, and the efforts of the Samper administration to bolster the Colombian government's sagging public image failed to curb the pattern of chronic human rights abuses.
Like previous State Department reports, the 1995 report assigns disproportionate responsibility for human rights violations to guerrillas, narcotics traffickers and paramilitary groups, and fails to implicate the state sufficiently for its active role in such abuses. The State Department's choice of words and phrasing throughout the report blinks at the voluminous information linking the government to widespread abuses, and fails even to acknowledge the evidence linking the head of the country with some of the world's most violent and dangerous drug traffickers — and, by implication, the violence associated with them.
The report is not lacking in hard information about the human rights abuses that took place in 1995, and in some places offers a provocative analysis of the human rights situation. Yet the overall tone is almost schizophrenic, and the report departs from reality in several spots in an apparent effort to limit institutional criticism of the government and the armed forces. At times, the report sets forth facts and circumstances that all but compel a conclusion which is contradictory to that which it states or implies. For instance, the report takes note of the more than 2,000 murdered members of the leftist Patriotic Union party {Union Patriótica, UP) but characterizes this situation as "what the UP perceives as a campaign of assassination waged against its leadership." What the State Department perceives of this state of affairs is never stated, but where the facts are so overwhelmingly clear, the State Department should have affirmed the UP's own conclusion or offered some explanation for its diffidence.
37
Critique 1995
Other examples reflect the apparent tension between the State Department's desire to mute its criticism and its knowledge of the very ugly nature of the human rights situation in Colombia. For example, the report states that "Colombia does not imprison citizens for political beliefs or expressions of political convictions," but adds: "[H]owever, the [International Committee of the Red Cross] reported that it monitored 1,800 cases of citizens imprisoned under accusations of rebellion or aiding and abetting the insurgency, which are punishable under law." Many of these prisoners were non-combatants who in some cases were held for months before formal charges were filed.
Aside from the fact that the situation concerning those accused of "political" offenses is significantly worse than the report acknowledges, the State Department does not attempt to reconcile or explain the outcome of these apparently contradictory statements. Equally hard to fathom is the report's assertion that "[t]he Government generally did not interfere with the work of human rights NGOs." In fact, such organizations, the report notes, "were often threatened and intimidated" by the guerrillas, paramilitary forces or individual members of the police and military forces. In addition to inverting the proper order of those most likely to harass and intimidate human rights groups, the report again takes the liberty of implying that soldiers' actions against human rights organizations are somehow not associated with the military's historical institutional hostility toward and violence against the human rights community.
Internal contradictions resonate in several major themes throughout the report, including: (i) implicit acceptance of the notion of separation of government action from the actions of paramilitary groups and the uniformed services; (ii) praise for the Colombian government's repeated attempts to implement initiatives for the protection of human rights; and (iii) sympathy or understanding for the government due to its lack of the necessary resources to combat the paramilitary forces, guerrillas and narcotics traffickers.
Perhaps the most troubling of these are the State Department's repeated attempts to draw an artificial distinction between human rights violations committed by the state and those of the military and national
38
Colombia
police, as if the latter two were agencies unrelated to the government. One example is the report's statement that "[djespite protective efforts by the Government, Indians were frequently the victims of violence throughout the year by the government security forces, paramilitary groups..narcotics traffickers, and guerrillas." And as noted earlier, the discussion of attacks on NGOs attempts to make an artificial distinction between the government and the army, and between individual soldiers and their institution. The report contends that the government respects the rights of peaceful assembly and association in practice, though in 1995, the national police periodically shot, arrested, harassed and used excessive force against peasant protesters.
The report's portrayal of the state, military, security forces and national police as individual parts without any relation to a whole, allows the State Department to praise the government for its human rights efforts while pointing a fìnger at the uniformed forces. The report has liberal praise for the government for,^among other things, acknowledging state responsibility for the 1989-1990 Trujillo massacres; announcing the formation of special task forces to combat paramilitary violence; appointing an anti-kidnapping czar; opening special human rights units; and attempting to negotiate with guerilla organizations. When the report proceeds to point out that, in spite of such efforts by the government, the police and the armed forces were responsible for "widespread human rights abuses"; that the military continued to cooperate with violent paramilitary groups; and that such groups engaged in social cleansing, it also distances the perpetrators from the government.
In many instances, the report cites only half-year statistics, inevitably making the pattern of human rights violations appear less extensive than when viewed as a whole. For example, the figures for murders, complaints of threats and forced disappearances, and "social cleansing" victims were cited for January through June only, despite the abundance of full year statistics offered by NGOs. The report's March 1996 publication date should permit the Department of State to obtain data and information for the full calendar year of 1995.
As in the past, the report fails to condemn human rights abuses in its own voice or to criticize the perpetrators directly. Rather, it often speaks
39
Critique 1995
only of "allegations" or "claims" by others, even where such claims are demonstrably credible.
The report also omits relevant examples of the government's serious violations of human rights. The most notable include the murders by paramilitary forces of 11 civilians direcdy in front of a local police station {without any police response) in Apartado on May 14, 1995, and an attack by military helicopters and planes on the village of Puerto Trujillo, Meta, killing and injuring women and children. The army claimed there were guerrillas in the latter village, despite the fact that there was no return fire. The matter-of-fact reporting style diminishes the actual horror and extent of such abuses.
The report is also quick to state that there were arrests of individual officers but rarely acknowledges that there was generally no subsequent prosecution or conviction. The mere statement that an investigation "resulted in the arrest of an army major who commanded the army base"; or that as the result of the formation of a special task force, "several paramilitary leaders were arrested"; or that following massacres in Meta, the government established a special commission to seek a solution to the violence, gives the false impression that the government is moving forward with respect to prosecuting the perpetrators. The State Department is well aware that in less than one percent of such cases is a soldier successfully prosecuted.
Set against this record of impunity were those government measures which actively stripped Colombians of fundamental rights, such as the due process guarantees recognized by the Colombian Constitution. Such measures include the continued and widespread use of the "public order" or "regional" justice system and the imposition, on two occasions in 1995, of states of exception.
The report observes that in 1995, "[hjuman rights groups continued to charge that [the regional justice] system violated basic legal norms and procedural rights," but makes few critical judgments of its own about the regional courts and generally fails to give such allegations the attention they merit. The report obscures the fact that many of the regional courts' particular attributes — closed proceedings; secret evidence; anonymous witnesses, prosecutors and judges; and the widespread use of the military
40
Colombia
for police functions — have failed to achieve their stated purpose. And even if these courts were to succeed in their own terms, this still evades the fundamental question of whether this "success" would justify such systematic abuses. As the Lawyers Committee has indicated elsewhere:
[T]he well-known procedural deficiencies of the judgment phase, including the anonymity of judges, prosecutors and witnesses, are nearly overshadowed by one central fact: in large areas of the country, the Government has effectively handed police powers to the military, which now arrests and detains suspects based on evidence to which the defense can rarely even gain access .... With prosecutors failing to exercise appropriate control over the military's arrest and detention practices, and judicial review so decimated that Colombia's Supreme Court considered it unconstitutional for a judge to scrutinize an order of pre-trial detention, the justice system^ is in reality distorted beyond reasonable recognition.
The report's short section on torture refers to individual incidents but does not capture the pervasiveness of torture throughout the country, or the state's role in fostering the environment in which it flourishes. To do so, the report might have added, for example, that the Colombian Commission of Jurists (formerly known as the Andean Commission of Jurists) notes that a person is tortured every 48 hours in Colombia, and "[a]ll available information indicates that military and police agents, in addition to their paramilitary allies, are the principal parties responsible for acts of torture in Colombia." One NGO case study concluded that 93% of persons detained by the police or armed forces were subjected to physical and/or psychological torture before being formally charged or released. In essence, the information available regarding the use of systematic torture paints a much different portrait of the level and pervasiveness of such atrocities in Colombia than does the report.
It would also have been useful for the report to discuss how torture is connected to other forms of abuse. For example, during the period between October 1994 and September 1995, Colombian human rights
41
Critique 1995
NGOs counted 418 extrajudicial executions preceded by torture. The victims of such executions displayed various wounds, ranging from bums to mutilations, and many of the women had been raped. A discussion of the rampant impunity enjoyed by perpetrators of such offenses also would have been informative.
In short, although the report makes an effort to catalogue the wide variety of human rights abuses that remained unabated in Colombia in 1995, as in 1994, the report fails to come to terms with the complex ways in which these various abuses are interconnected. A more comprehensive approach would have documented the pivotal role the government has played in perpetuating the human rights disaster which Colombia has become. The State Department's instructions for the drafting of the Country Reports note that "[i]t is important... to make a conscientious effort to report what the available evidence shows and, where it is ambiguous, to report that." The report has failed to follow this guideline.
Although the report accurately acknowledges that certain actions taken by the Samper administration were likely to condone human rights abuses, it generally oversells the government's measures to confront Colombia's human rights crisis. For example, the government "took steps to reduce human rights violations," such as acknowledging responsibility for the 1989-90 massacres in Trujillo. The government's admission is welcome. However, the acknowledgment, however unprecedented, by a president who was not head of state during the period in question is no substitute for actions designed to curb current and future abuses, particularly when President Samper later publicly denies that such abuses continue. When the Colombian government began to study reforms for the military justice system in 1995, one set of such proposed reforms suggested major systematic changes to better protect human rights, while the other set maintained the current military characteristics (including the power to handle cases involving extrajudicial execution, forced disappearance and torture). President Samper supported the latter proposal, continuing, in the words of one human rights organization, the Colombian government's tradition of "winking at impunity." The president compounded matters in an October 1995 speech, stating that allegations that security forces committed human rights violations were
42
Colombia
"without foundation, presented by their enemies," and vowing to defend military jurisdiction.
Rather than exposing the failure of the Colombian judicial system to address abuses, the State Department comes close to appearing to justify them. More than once, the report notes that the judiciary and police have insufficient resources, especially funds, to properly investigate most killings; suggests that the judicial system has "continued to experience growing pains as the various courts, prosecutor's offices, and ministries attempted to define their roles and streamline their operations" following the 1991 judicial reorganization; and maintains that the judiciary remained "overburdened and in a state of chaos, staggering under a backlog of over [one] million cases." These are accurate statements, and in the case of court backlogs, one of the greatest reasons for due process violations. However, they are both a predictable result of other governmental policies, such as widespread arbitrary detentions, and to a large extent, irrelevant to the problem of impunity in military tribunals.
In the areas of arbitrary detention, the right of citizens to change their government and freedom of political association, the report tends to focus on the laws on the books rather than on day-to-day practices. With respect to detention, the report notes that the Colombian Constitution prohibits illegal detention, and that those detained have the right to be brought before a judge within 36 hours of arrest, as well as the right to petition for habeas corpus, which petition must be acted upon within 36 hours. Taking understatement to misleading extremes, the report simply states that "instances of arbitrary detention continued."
The report offers a straightforward treatment of the imposition in 1995 of two states of exception by the Colombian government. As it notes, these resulted in widespread violations of human rights, including what would otherwise constitute illegal detentions and searches, while the government apparently ignored the impact which its declaration of a state of emergency would have on "a judicial system that could not even address the needs of citizens under normal circumstances."
In addition, when discussing prison conditions in Colombia, the report accurately assesses these as "harsh," especially for those prisoners
43
Critique 1995
with "reduced means of support," and notes that "overcrowding and dangerous sanitary and health conditions remained serious problems."
The Country Reports' tradition of atomizing human rights issues that are interconnected continues in the 1995 report. Thus, the report separates its discussions of freedom of speech and press, freedom of peaceful assembly and association and "respect for political rights: the rights of citizens to change their government." While categories of this nature may be useful, the rigid structure has in fact, kept the report from providing the rounded, contextualized picture of the human rights situation that would allow policy makers to make genuinely informed decisions. Taken as a whole, these violations constitute a pattern of mutually reinforcing official activities rather than a large collection of isolated acts. Greater interplay between the narrow thematic discussions would better illuminate the overall situation.
The report's discussion of individual issues is also too narrowly focused in some spots. For instance, the section on freedom of speech and press never extends beyond the media — though this discussion, as far as it goes, is notably more subtle and probing than other portions of the report. This narrow focus ignores the many situations in which people seek to exercise freedom of speech in the context of political marches and meetings. The report distorts the truth by stating that "[t]he authorities do not normally interfere with public meetings and demonstrations," when in reality, in 1995, there were several instances in which the government did not merely interfere, but violently repressed public gatherings. In August 1995, approximately 800 farmers were stopped by the army on their way to participate in demonstrations, and were told they could proceed no further because guerrillas were killing peasant farmers in the direction they were headed. The peasants sat down in the road and demanded to meet with the department's governor, whereupon the soldiers proceeded to beat and tear-gas the peasants, which included minors. One of the protesters fainted on a bridge as a result of the tear gas, and a peasant farmer who came to her aid was attacked by members of the police and thrown off the bridge. Several other protesters have not been seen since. Law student Humberto Peña Taylor, who had been shot and seriously injured during a 1993 student
44
Colombia
demonstration, was shot and killed in June 1995 in a law faculty cafeteria by two men presumed by students to be working with members of state security forces.
The third subsection on political rights, dealing with the right of citizens to change their government, emphasizes the set of formal constitutional guarantees such as those providing for elections and secret ballots. An emphasis on the formal provisions, however, comes at the expense of a detailed account of the actual extent to which such formal guarantees are available to citizens. The report's claim that "all parties operate freely without government interference" is demonstrably misleading, if not false.
In fact, the government is, at best, complacent about activities that repress basic democratic rights. A Colombian government study has concluded that members of the security forces have been among the main perpetrators of violence against Patriotic Union activists, discussed above. Further, as Amnesty International has noted, although political parties and independent organizations technically are free to operate in Colombia, "members of all political parties have been victims of human rights violations including illegal detention, torture, 'disappearance' and extrajudicial execution because of their political views and activism."
Under its section on respect for political rights, the report notes that "critics" assert that vote-buying is a regular feature of elections in some regions, but makes no attempt to assess the accuracy of such a claim, instead stating that citizens exercise the right to vote in regular, secret ballot elections that have "historically been considered fair and open." Again, Amnesty International takes a different view, reporting that "[djuring election campaigns paramilitary forces have been reported to threaten local people with death if they fail to vote for the traditional parties most closely associated to powerful economic sectors."
The report's section on women, children and indigenous groups does a better job of evaluating actual practice in its discussion of formal legal provisions. The report acknowledges that rape and other acts of violence against women are pervasive, and that the law provides relatively mild sentences and does not penalize marital rape or other forms of marital abuse. It also notes that discrimination against women "persists."
45
Critique 1995
As in the section on women, the report should be commended for distinguishing between the lofty set of formal rights accorded children in Colombia and the reality of day-to-day life for a significant number who suffer grave human rights abuses, as well as for recognizing state involvement in such crimes. As the Washington Post noted in January 1995, Colombian children are — on paper — the country's most protected citizens, while in practice, they are more likely to be murdered than children in any other country in the world. Some startling figures portray the gravity of human rights conditions for Colombian children. A child dies violently, on the average, every four hours in Colombia, and the annual total of 2,219 children killed each year now outstrips Brazil's notorious level of violent deaths for children by nearly 50%. An estimated 5,000 to 10,000 street children are in Bogotá where they are often abused, beaten and raped by police. Nationwide, an estimated 30,000 children were abandoned or placed in situations of risk as of October 1995. There are 45,000 annually documented cases of child abuse in Colombia. Some 600,000 children of grade-school age do not attend classes because there is no space available.
The report notes that vigilante gangs, often linked to the police, murdered children in several major cities as part of "social-cleansing" measures; that merchants and citizens' groups often allegedly hire off-duty police agents and contract killers to rid neighborhoods of children suspected to be beggars and thieves (although the report fails to attempt to verify such "allegations"); and that the Office of the Defender of the People reported "clear complicity by police officers in some of these killings."
The same section also notes the deaths of children in conflict zones caught in the crossfire between security forces, paramilitary groups and guerrillas; the deadly "leg breaker" land mines laid by guerrillas that have killed or mutilated many children; and the recruitment of minors for guerrilla groups despite national and international condemnation. The report does note that an estimated 800,000 children between the ages of 12 and 17 work — often under substandard conditions — in agriculture or in the informal sector as street vendors, in the leather tanning industry and in small, family-operated mines. Despite this acknowledgment, the
46
Colombia
report does not criticize the lack of government attempts to curb underage employment, but rather chooses to praise a government media outreach campaign designed to inform child laborers of their rights and where to turn for help (although the report does not discuss the mechanics of this program or how the government expected young workers to gain access to such information).
The Colombian government is well-known for its capacity to publicize its numerous initiatives to address widespread human rights abuses. The official human rights bureaucracy in Colombia is extensive, and is designed to create the impression that while abuses may occur, they are not a matter of official intent. The unfortunate truth is that the history of abuse and official complicity is too long to sustain this relatively benign portrait. The 1995 State Department report fails to dispel the illusion, and in some areas perpetuates it. Confronted with a high volume of reported abuse and the government's trademark flurry of ostensibly responsive activity, the State Department's critical faculties appear to have been muted, making its report as a whole less than the sum of its many parts.
47


. -i
l.r,.. •
T
X }
