Egypt
*he human rights situation in Egypt continued to deteriorate in 1995. Security forces operating under the Emergency Laws, which have been in force since 1981, acted with complete impunity and total disregard for any basic human rights. Arbitrary arrests, incommunicado detention, hostage taking, torture, extrajudicial killings, restrictions on freedoms of association and expression and executions after palpably unfair trials have become the norm. The Egyptian government made a mockery out of the People's Assembly elections held in November. A large number of candidates from opposition parties were arrested and widespread fraud and tampering was reported. Furthermore, the escalating pattern of violence continued with a vengeance. As of November 1995, 963 people have been killed in politically related violence in the past five years. TTiree hundred thirty-three (35%) of them died in the past ten months alone.
As in previous years, the 1995 State Department report is generally accurate and comprehensive. It dbcuments widespread human rights abuses perpetrated by the Egyptian government and rebels. The report is particularly assertive and straightforward in its appraisal of the Egyptian political system. It repeats the often quoted statement that, "The ruling NDP dominates the political scene to such an extent that the people do not have a meaningful ability to change their government." Additionally, it is candid in its discussion of torture, stating that "there were numerous credible reports of mistreatment and torture." Furthermore, the report correctly documents the increasing use of military courts to try political opponents. It states, "The use of military and state security tribunals under the Emergency Law has deprived hundreds of civilian defendants of their constitutional right to be tried by an 'ordinary judge.'" The report admits that "military courts do not guarantee civilian defendants due process before an independent tribunal." However — and again as in previous years — the main problem with the report remains its tone and language. The latter is often mechanical and detached and, at times, equivocal and inconsistent. It does not reflect a sense of urgency about the increasingly abysmal human rights situation in Egypt. In
61
Critique 1995
addition, the report occasionally includes inexplicable statements that would only serve to appease the Egyptian government.
According to the State Department instructions for drafting tlie Country Reports, each report should indicate in the introduction what type of system the government claims to exist and the system that actually exists — for example, a republic, a monarchy or an authoritarian regime. The report says that according to its Constitution, Egypt is a social democracy in which Islam is the state religion. It goes on to state, in a matter-of-fact fashion, that Hosni Mubarak was re-elected unopposed to a third six-year term by the People's Assembly in 1993. The report then asserts that the ruling party commands large majorities in the popularly elected People's Assembly, and that the government reported that 50% of registered voters turned out to vote in the November People's Assembly elections. These statements simply reflect what the government claims the system to be without independently appraising the validity of this claim. In fact, the Egyptian political system is an authoritarian one in which there is a huge discrepancy between the enumerated constitutional and legal guarantees and the political practices of the state.
The report affirms that, "The Government generally respects many human rights, but others are restricted by the continuing imposition of the emergency law." This is a shocking statement. Indeed, in light of the numerous human rights violations documented later on in the report, it is close to incomprehensible. One is left guessing as to how or why the report reaches the conclusion that the Egyptian government respects "many human rights." This statement is neither defended nor explained elsewhere in the report.
Earlier, the report states that "some members of the security forces committed serious human rights abuses." According to the instructions to those drafting the Country Reports, this language should be used only "in instances in which only a few members of the security forces were culpable." However, just a few paragraphs later the report states that: "In fighting the terrorists, the security forces mistreated and tortured prisoners, held detainees in prolonged pretrial detention, and allegedly committed extrajudicial killings .... Aside from the antiterrorist campaign, the local police have abused common criminal suspects."
62
Egypt
These statements raise at least two problems. First, the report gives the impression that the security forces commit abuses only in the context of fighting terrorism. This is simply inaccurate and is a gross understatement of the impunity by which the security forces operate. Second, it is not clear whether the report is arguing that only a few members of the security forces were involved in human rights abuses. If in fact this is the report's argument, besides being misleading, the report itself contradicts this assertion on several occasions.
Reflecting the same ambiguity in the section on torture, the report states that "there is convincing evidence that some police and security officers, as well as prison guards, routinely abuse and torture detainees." This statement implies that torture is the result of indiscretions by individual officials rather than a government-sanctioned — and even government-mandated — policy. This is inconsistent with the report's assertion that there are numerous credible reports of mistreatment and torture. In fact, reports of torture by ^he security forces and police are so widespread that it is fairly clear that torture has become a governmental policy. In 1995, military courts consistently ignored allegations of torture in admitting coerced confessions and handed down draconian sentences. Security forces engaged in house demolitions, destruction of crops, random arrests, hostage-taking and the torture of children to extract confessions from their fathers. Investigations into human rights abuses by security forces are not made public and are woefully inadequate. The report itself admits that the government stated that "it will not disclose further details of individual cases of police abuse for fear of harming the morale of law enforcement officers . ..It is quite clear that abuses are not the result of individual indiscretions by "some" members of the security forces. Rather the whole apparatus of the Egyptian government sanctions and promotes policies that do not exhibit the least regard for the citizens of the country.
Confronted by certain egregious governmental violations, the report often fails to use the active voice or to draw conclusions. The State Department instructions to drafters of the Country Reports specify that it is not sufficient to state that human rights monitors claim certain
63
Critique 1995
violations took place. Rather, the report, whenever possible, has an obligation to render an opinion and draw conclusions in its own voice.
When discussing extrajudicial killings the report states: "There were several credible reports . . . that security forces were involved in what amounted to extrajudicial killings, because they allegedly were issued shoot-to-kill orders in certain antiterrorist operations." When it discusses deaths in custody, the report states that according to the government, 71 prisoners died in custody in 1995 and that the government denies charges of intentional mistreatment. The report additionally states that after a large number of deaths in the New Valley Prison (13) the government ordered that the medical facilities be brought up to standard, and that government investigations in both the Istikbal Torah and Abu Zaabal prisons (where 58 deaths had occurred) concluded that the prisoners there died of natural causes. On the other hand, the report asserts, human rights groups, family members and defense lawyers "alleged" that at least some of the deaths were the result of torture and mistreatment. Furthermore, the report adds, the authorities "reportedly" denied family members permission to view the bodies of relatives.
It is very positive that the State Department finds reports of shoot-to-ldll orders to be credible. This is particularly significant in light of the fact that Egyptian Foreign Minister Hassan el-Alfi, in a rather shocking statement, seemed to imply that in certain circumstances the government has a right to conduct summary executions. On May 10, 1995 el-Alfi said: "During the past years, we have been very patient in our fight against terrorism. . . . We could have annihilated the terrorists. . . . We found weapons and got full confessions from the people who are currently in prison, which would have entitled us to kill them on the spot."
Nevertheless, the report's failure to take an equally assertive stand on deaths in custody is a major omission. Amnesty International has documented a large number of cases of death in custody in 1995. Nearly all the cases, whether in New Valley, Istikbal Torah or Abu Zaabal prisons, involved extensive and persistent torture. Families of the dead have not been given copies of any medical and autopsy reports or even death certificates. Some were not even told the cause of death. Although
64
Egypt
the government claims that it investigates all deaths in custody, the methods of such investigations are questionable and the findings are not made public.
The report is equally inconclusive about the number of political detainees in Egyptian prisons. The government claims that it has imprisoned between 2,500 and 4,000 "suspected terrorists." Unofficial estimates by Egyptian or international NGOs range from 15,000 to 20,000. As the report acknowledges, this estimate does not include the undetermined number of detainees who are held incommunicado without being registered in the prison system. Nevertheless, the report merely reproduces the official and unofficial figures v/ithout reaching any conclusion of its own as to the actual number of political detainees.
The pattern of ambiguity is recreated when the report addresses the harassment and detention of lawyers. Last year's edition of the Critique called attention to an alarming trend of harassment and persecution of lawyers. This trend continued unabated in 1995. The report states: "Human Rights groups and defense lawyers have claimed that the government has intimidated lawyers representing terrorist suspects by detaining and questioning them on the activities of their clients." It goes on to say, "The Government contends that some defense lawyers are suspected of collaborating in terrorist groups and that therefore the detention is legal." The report gives no sense of how it evaluates these competing claims. This is particularly alarming because in recent years there has been a marked increase in the number of arrests and physical abuse of lawyers defending unpopular causes. As the International Commission of Jurists stated in a recent report, "The right of individuals to a legal defense and the duty of lawyers to accord this defense are threatened by systematic government intimidation, arrest and abuse of lawyers [in Egypt], as well as the administrative detention and torture of their clients."
In a similar fashion the report fails to take a clear and precise stand when assessing governmental attitudes regarding human rights organizations. Although acknowledging that the government has refused to license local human rights groups, the report states that these groups are allowed to operate openly and that at times they enjoy the
65
Critique 1995
cooperation of government officials. The report does acknowledge that on at least six occasions the government banned meetings of human rights groups or denied them permits to hold conferences. Additionally, the report states that the Ministry of Justice issued an advisory ruling requiring all human rights organizations registered as private corporations to re-register as NGOs as defined by Law 32 or face punitive actions. Of course, the problem here is that once these organizations attempted to register under Law 32, they would be denied a license by the government, as has been the case with the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights (EOHR). The report then states that human rights organizations have expressed concern over a hostile campaign by the government-controlled press and over verbal attacks by senior government officials. However, the report concludes, the government did not close down any group during the year.
Although the report is factually accurate, all of this is presented in a detached language and the only affirmative conclusion reached is that human rights organizations were not closed down and that they are allowed to operate openly. Nevertheless, the reality of governmental policies is far more problematic. Besides interference with their meetings, as stated above, human rights NGOs withstood a variety of other pressures in 1995. New legislative regulations were introduced aimed at increasing government control over the activities of NGOs. The government introduced plans to create a government-appointed NGO council which would supervise the activities and funding of NGOs. Furthermore, in January the Ministry of Justice and the Foreign Ministry stressed that it is illegal for NGOs to receive funding from any foreign institution or individual. Even more, staff members of human rights organizations were harassed. Security forces pressured 12 EOHR members to resign by threatening them and warning that they belonged to an "illegal" organization. High-ranking government officials, as well as the officially controlled media, impugned the motives and questioned the integrity of local and international human rights groups and activists. For example. Ambassador Adel Safii, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs of International Relations, accused EOHR of being a "subversive group." Interior Minister el-Alfi accused Human Rights Watch/Middle East of
66
Egypt
being clearly biased against Egypt, accused other human rights organizations of relying on terrorists for their sources of information and accused the EOHR of being funded by foreign powers bent on harming Egypt — such as the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights.
The attitude of the Egyptian Government toward its abysmal human rights record has been dishonest and even insolent. Senior government officials characterized last year's Country Report on Egypt as "fabrications" and "lies." Interior Minister el-Alfi asserted that the Country Reports are biased and based on stories appearing in opposition papers sympathetic to terrorism and on reports of organizations with suspect motives. Furthermore, el-Alfi boasted about Egypt's submission of its periodic report to the U.N. Committee for Combating Torture. Ironically, the Committee deplored the fact that Egypt did not prepare the report in accordance with the Committee's general guidelines and that the information provided was general and not specific.
Last year's edition of the Critique, noted that the 1994 report should have avoided the impression that the State Department tacitly agrees with the Egyptian government's attitude toward human rights abuses. The Egyptian government seems to grow more obstinate each year, and the Interior Minister's claims more outrageous. The ambiguity and indecisiveness of the 1995 report on several material points can only lend support to the Egyptian government's lack of seriousness about its human rights commitments.
When discussing the opposition's concerns about the guarantees provided for fair elections, el-Alfi exhibited a typically dismissive attitude. In response to a comment that the opposition complains that the guarantees are insufficient, his response was: "Naturally, any oppositionist is bound to make justifications and attacks." In fact, the People's Assembly elections were anything but fair. The elections were marred by a massive amount of manipulation and fraud. The election violations are too extensive to recount here but what follow^ is a partial list. First, the government arrested over 1,000 representatives of Muslim Brotherhood candidates during the first and second rounds. Candidates from various opposition parties were arrested as well. Second, security forces rigged voting in entire constituencies after expelling candidate representatives or
67
Critique 1995
voters from polling stations. Third, the elections were conducted without representatives of opposition candidates being present, either because they were arrested or forced to leave the polling stations. Fourth, fraud was widespread: many photocopies of voting cards were found inside the ballot boxes; the numbers and data on candidates' lists were altered; electoral rolls were forged, vsdth up to 20,000 bogus names being added in some constituencies. Also, election lists were manipulated through the repeated addition of names of relatives of National Democratic Party members. Fifth, sub-polling station chairs, public polling station chairs and police stations refused to receive or record any election violations. Additionally, the Supreme Administrative Court ordered the annulment of elections in 109 constituencies and ordered the suspension of the Minister of the Interior's decree to conduct a second round of voting in these constituencies. The government ignored the ruling and proceeded with the second round of elections anyway. Furthermore, acts of thuggery and violence by government supporters and security forces left 878 wounded and 51 dead. This was the highest number of deaths and injuries in any single election in Egypt's parliamentary history.
The report does not describe this alarming state of affairs. It simply reports that voting was marred by irregularities. However it states many of these irregularities appeared to result from either inadequate crowd control or a breakdown in the oversight system. It asserts that: "Violent incidents, mostly among supporters of competing candidates, resulted in about 20 deaths." Furthermore, the report states: "Critics maintain that the government's campaign of arrests of Muslim Brothers was designed to exclude the Brotherhood from the legislative elections." The report's detached language and, in fact its overall conclusions about the Egyptian elections, defy comprehension. The number of dead stated by the report is the official number. The report does not review any other figures or even mention their existence. Ultimately, the report gives the impression that the irregularities that marred the elections were the result of mismanagement rather than a coordinated and deliberate policy. Human rights observers have consistently documented numerous cases of deliberate ballot box stuffing and other violations. The government detained a total of 1,712 people, most of them candidate representatives.
68
Egypt
The ruling NDP won 93.93% of all the seats, independents won 3.15% and the opposition parties won 2.92%. Most of the independents applied to join the NDP after winning. These figures and facts are alarming and demand a more affirmative stand by the report.
The Egyptian government implemented several new restrictions on the freedom of association in 1995. The report clearly asserts that "[s]ubstantial restrictions on these freedoms continue," and it competently reviews several of the new limitations. However, the report fails to mention that the Egyptian government amended the regulations governing the chambers of commerce to give the finance minister direct supervisory powers. In addition, the government now appoints the deans of college faculties. Previously, faculty members elected the deans. The University Council is now dominated by government appointees. Previously, it was dominated by elected members. Furthermore, the government abolished elections for the position of village headman. These positions are now filled by government appointees.
In an effort to limit the freedom of press, the government passed Law 93 of 1995 which imposes criminal penalties for acts of speech. The report's coverage of Law 93 and freedom of speech and press issues is generally good. The report states that under the new law the definition of criminal libel is so vague that it "imposes severe limitations on press freedom." In fact, the new law mandates fines and imprisonment for broadly defined offenses such as "publishing false or biased rumours, news and statements or disconcerting propaganda" if such material "offends social peace, arouses panic . . . harms the public interest or shows contempt for state institutions or officials." Under the new law the prosecutor no longer has to prove malicious intent in libel and defamation cases. Furthermore, the new law revoked statutes prohibiting the detention of journalists pending the investigation of press-related offenses.
The report, however, incorporates a passage that makes its position rather ambiguous. It states that under the previous press laws, "penalties [were] so minimal and the judicial process so long and costly that individuals or officials who [were] wrongly defamed [had] no realistic legal recourse. This has given some opposition, and even government-
69
Critique 1995
controlled newspapers license to publish rumours." One is left to wonder whether the report believes that the new draconian press laws are somehow justified because of the problems that the previous laws posed. Furthermore, libel and defamation laws in a democracy do not prevent the press from publishing rumours and do not avoid costly and time-consuming litigation. Yet this does not justify the passage of draconian press laws that effectively prohibit criticism of public officials or the discussion of controversial public issues.
The report is far more assertive and comprehensive in condemning the denial of citizens of the right to due process by military and state security tribunals. For the first time since the 1960s the government has tried civilian defendants in military courts on non-violent charges. The report candidly states that "the military courts do not guarantee civilian defendants due process before an independent tribunal." In 1995 military courts were used to silence political opponents for holding opinions the government deemed unacceptable. These trials are such a fundamental denial of due process that they have been called "kangaroo trials." In the trial of Muslim Brotherhood members, 350 lawyers, including Britons, Americans and Germans, walked out of court and withdrew from their cases in protest. As the report notes, the trials are rushed and there is no adequate appeal process. In fact, in 1995, in the re-organization of the Jihad case, involving Islamists accused of a variety of terrorist offenses including attacks on tourists and government officials, 42 defendants were tried in 48 days. Two were sentenced to death, 28 to prison and 12 were acquitted. From December 1992 to May 1995, military courts, after woefully unfair trials, sentenced a further 64 defendants to death. Amnesty International has stated that it considers these death sentences to be summary and arbitrary executions. To make matters worse, acquittals before these courts mean very little; of the 158 civilian defendants acquitted in military trials only two have been released.
In summary, as last year's Critique noted, the human rights situation in Egypt is deteriorating with each passing year. The year 1995 witnessed new restrictions on civil liberties and new extremes in human rights abuses. Future State Department reports should adopt a much clearer
70
Egypt
and more assertive tone that conveys a real sense of urgency. Furthermore, future reports should avoid giving the impression that Egypt is receiving preferred coverage because of its dose relationship with the United States. As in previous years, the report is generally accurate and comprehensive in its basic presentation of factual material. However, as in previous years, it is often ambiguous and equivocal in tone, as if reluctant to hold the Egyptian Government responsible fór its human rights commitments. Ambiguity is not the only problem. At times the report is also disingenuous and openly misleading — as when it asserts that the Egyptian Government respects many human rights.
71


■ y Y
-v.!
íf'rr: v
T
