Ethiopia
*he 1995 State Department report begins by stating that "Ethiopia's political landscape changed significantly in 1995." Yet the basic terrain it goes on to describe remains remarkably similar to what it has been in recent years. Since its overthrow of Mengistu Haile-Mariam in 1991, the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) has dominated Ethiopian politics. The EPRDF's record of respecting human rights is significantly better than was that of the Mengistu government. The EPRDF has curbed many of the abuses that were prevalent under Mengistu, and continues to take further measures to ensure respect for basic rights. Nonetheless, serious abuses continue. And the EPRDF's stated commitment to human rights often outstrips its commitment in practice. Against this background, two criticisms can be made of the 1995 State Department report. First, although the report should be commended for its catalog of abuses, its reliance on the EPRDF's stated goals and positions and its dismissal of various credible reports of abuse overstates the progress the EPRDF has made, and understates the seriousness of the current abuses. This is particularly evident in the report's discussion of the May 1995 elections and the issue of press freedom. Second, it fails adequately to address the likely impact that the EPRDF's policy of devolving power to regional government units will have on respect for human rights at the regional level.
National and regional elections were held in May and June to elect a successor to the Transitional Government (TGE), which had governed Ethiopia since the overthrow of Mengistu in 1991. Although dominated since its inception by the EPRDF, the TGE originally included several opposition parties, the most influential of which was the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF), which held 12 of the 87 seats in the TGE Council of Representatives. Following the OLF's boycott of the 1992 elections, the TGE and the EPRDF became essentially the same. Most opposition parties boycotted the May-June elections, as they had in previous years. As expected, the EPRDF won an overwhelming number of seats in the new government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia (FDRE). The FDRE is thus, as was the TGE, dominated by the
73
Critique 1995
EPRDF. And Meles Zenawi, the president of the TGE, is now the prime minister of the FDRE.
Although viewed by international observers as generally fair, the elections were marred by being boycotted by most opposition parties. While recognizing the EPRDF's harassment of some opposition parties, the report appears to dismiss the boycott as being based on the opposition parties' "refus[al] to test the TGE's stated willingness to allow opposition participation." In this regard, the report cites, without attribution, a "widespread finding that opposition participation was possible." The report continues on to imply that opposition is limited to "some elites" who are dissatisfied with the EPRDF's policy of ethnic federalism.
All of this is at significant odds with the finding of various observers. Terrence Lyons of the Brookings Institution, in his article "Closing the Transition: the May 1995 Elections in Ethiopia" {The Journal of Modern African Studies, 34 (1996), pp. 121-142) for example, found that, in several regions where the EPRDF might have expected significant opposition, EPRDF "intimidation contributed to a political climate in which many potential candidates and their supporters feared repression and arrest," and that a "pattern of [EPRDF] intimidation .. .undoubtedly created a climate of fear that sharply limited the ability or willingness of alternative candidates to compete . . . ." And Mr. Lyons found that opposition was not limited to "elites," but extended also to ethnic-based political parties. The report itself acknowledges that certain groups, including the OLF, are excluded from political participation. Given this, the opposition parties' refusal to test the EPRDF's "stated willingness" to allow opposition parricipation appears more reasonable than implied in the report.
In this regard, the May-June elections do not represent the landmark step on the road to representative democracy that the report portrays them to be. Nor do they represent a harbinger of future improvements in other areas of human rights. The same persons previously governing the country remain in control. And their commitment to representative democracy and human rights remains questionable.
74
Ethiopia
As with its coverage of the May-June elections, the report significantly understates government restrictions on the press. The report acknowledges that the government often restricts press freedom. In assessing the extent of such restrictions, however, the report refers only to the arrests in May and November of 22 journalists, and the continued detention at year's end of 15 journalists. These numbers are significantly below those reported by human rights monitors. In its annual worldwide survey, Attacks on the Press, for example, the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) identified 36 journalists who were arrested in 1995, and found that 31 journalists remained in detention at year's end. CPJ found that, for the third consecutive year, Ethiopia has imprisoned more journalists than any other country in Africa. And Amnesty International stated in its April 1995 report "Accountability Past and Present: Human Rights in Transition" that, since enactment of the Press Law in October 1992, over 100 journalists have been arrested and a score more summoned for interrogation.	,
The report's understatement of the severity of press restrictions is not limited to statistical coverage. In addition, its choice of language tends to understate, if not to appear to excuse, government restrictions. Thus, the report appears to excuse the government's prosecution of the publication of inaccurate stories and its refusal to speak to the private press, stating that "much of the private press continues to lack professionalism," and that many journalists fall victim to provisions of the Press Law prohibiting the publication of false information. The report fails to note, however, that if government officials refuse to speak to the press, the accuracy of the press's reporting of official events is likely to be impaired. More significantly, the report fails to note that, in practice, prosecutions are limited to articles critical of government policy. There are no reported cases of the government prosecuting the publication of inaccurate articles favorable to the government. Finally, the simple inaccuracy of a report does not in any case justify the criminal prosecution of the journalist.
Along these same lines, the report overstates the government's accommodation of opposition access to the press, stating that the government "made efforts to open the official media [which is controlled
75
Critique 1995
by the government] to opposition political views prior to the May elections." The report fails to note, however, that, at the same time, the government imposed what CPJ described as a "crackdown on the independent media." And the report overstates the robustness of the private press in stating that 20 biweekly and weekly papers are in publication, while failing to note that this represents a significant decline from the 65 such publications which were in operation in 1993.
While most pronounced in its discussion of the May-June elections and press freedom, the report's dismissal of credible reports of abuse also underplays the seriousness of human rights violations in other areas as well.
In its discussion of torture, the report may underplay the extent of extrajudicial detention, stating that officials "sometimes" use unmarked houses and military camps for the detention and interrogation of political opponents. Amnesty International in fact pointed to the existence of a parallel detention system, stating that:
There appear to be two systems for holding government opponents: the official police and prison system and a closed system run by the security service or the military. In the official system there is more openness and prisoners' rights are generally protected, although abuses of human rights still occur. In the closed system prisoners' rights under national law and international law and standards are ignored.
In discussing the detention and trial of former officials of the Mengistu regime and opposition figures, the report appears to disparage the credibility of allegations that some of the detainees are, in fact, political prisoners, attributing such allegations only to opposition groups. In fact, Amnesty International also concluded that some detainees appear to be political prisoners.
In addition to these various understatements of the government's responsibility for human rights violations, the second major criticism of the report is its failure to address the likely impact of the Ethiopian government's policy of devolving power to regional government units on
76
Ethiopia
respect for human rights at the regional levels. The government has begun, and is committed to continuing, to devolve judicial and police power down to regional government units. This devolution of power, while intended to bring government closer to the people, is rife with potential for abuse. In this regard, the report notes that the questionable independence of the regional judiciary and its lack of resources operate to deny most citizens the full protections provided for in the Constitution. The report also notes that police procedures, such as warrantless searches, are more lax outside Addis Ababa. And Amnesty International has found that prison conditions outside the Addis Ababa area oftentimes fall below international standards. The State Department report does note that the majority of human rights abuses occur outside Addis Ababa, but should have extrapolated on the significance of this fact by pointing out that fully 85% of Ethiopians live outside the capital.
Finally, the report's discussion of restrictions on the freedom of association of independent human rights monitors should have highlighted the deregistration of the Action Professionals Association for the People (APAP). Although the report correctly notes that 47 Ethiopian and internarional NGOs had their registration certificates revoked in 1995, it goes on to list APAP as a currently active group. APAP is a highly reputable legal aid and public interest advocacy organization and the only one of its kind in Ethiopia. The Ethiopian government had no valid grounds for its deregistration. At the end of 1995, no human rights monitoring or advocacy organization was registered to operate in Ethiopia. Additionally, the lack of official registration procedures from the Ministry of Justice — which, as the report says, now has primary responsibility for NGOs — means that no new human rights monitoring or advocacy organizations can register and begin their much-needed work.
In sum, the report is generally commendable for its cataloguing of current abuses. It is also to be commended for addressing summary executions and other violations committed by opposition groups. It understates, however, the severity of the current abuses, and overstates the government's recent progress in implementing respect for human rights. Such overstatement may be understandable in comparison with
77
Critique 1995
the abuses committed under the prior Mengistu regime. It is not, however, supported by the facts. The year 1995 did not bring any major improvement in respect for human rights by the Ethiopian government. On the contrary, the government appears to accept the status quo. And, depending on the outcome of the government's policy of devolving power to regional units, human rights conditions in Ethiopia are quite as likely to deteriorate as to improve in the future.
78
I;
