United Kingdom/Hong Kong
'or Hong Kong, 1995 will be remembered for the stark divergence between Hong Kong's evolving democratic institutions and the plans being put in place by the future sovereign. This was the year when China laid to rest any illusions about its intentions to incorporate Hong Kong into its own authoritarian system. It became clear that China intends largely to ignore or vitiate the requirements of the 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration. The Joint Declaration's promise that the future Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR) would have a high degree of autonomy, democracy and human rights, along with'-the promises of "one country, two systems" and "Hong Kong people ruling Hong Kong" became increasingly illusory. One pro-democracy leader was moved to reformulate the latter slogan to "Hong Kong people ruining Hong Kong," as China's Preliminary Worlcing Committee (PWC), a select group of local pro-China supporters and mainlanders appointed by China to lay the groundwork for its future rule, set about systematically undermining the foundations of Hong Kong's fragile democratic system and human rights protections. Unfortunately, as in past years, the State Department's annual report on Hong Kong reflects very little of the turmoil and anxiety about human rights brought on by China's onslaught.
The most serious threats to human rights in Hong Kong derived from China's actions or threats. As Hong Kong's first fully elected Legislative Council (Legco) came into existence in September 1995, the PWC was already laying the groundwork for its demise. In its final plenary session in December 1995 the PWC declared, in accordance with earlier subgroup determinations, that the elected legislature should be dismissed on July 1, 1997 and replaced with an appointed provisional legislature, to be chosen by a Selection Committee made up of China's hand-picked Hong Kong supporters. At the same time, the PWC declared that certain key implementing provisions of the Hong Kong Bill of Rights Ordinance (BORO) would be eliminated and that six ordinances that had been reformed to conform to the BORO would be restored to their old draconian colonial character.
235
Critique 1995
The provisions to be deleted from the BORO related to its status as an implementing statute to fulfill Hong Kong obligations under the ICCPR; the BORO's override of previous ordinanœs; and the requirement that legislation enacted after the commencement date of the BORO, "to the extent it admits of such construction, be construed so as to be consistent with the ICCPR" (Art. 4). The ordinance reforms to be set aside related generally to free speech and association protections incorporated in several draconian ordinances, that the PWC now wants restored to their original form. (The amended ordinances include: the Societies (Amendment) Ordinance, 1992; Television Amendment Ordinance, 1993; Broadcast Authority Ordinance, 1993; Public Order Amendment Ordinance, 1995; and the Emergency Regulations Ordinance, 1995).
As if this tvrin attack on the pillars of Hong Kong's rule of law were not enough, the Chinese and British governments reached an agreement that provides that the Court of Final Appeal, required by the Joint Declaration, would not be created until the initiation of Chinese rule on July 1, 1997. While these developments are mentioned in the report, their significance is seriously understated.
The basic criticism of the State Department report in last year's edition of the Critique can be repeated verbatim in 1995: "While technically accurate with respect to those rights it addresses (especially respecting refugees, labor and women), [the report] seems reluctant to assess the importance of current developments and neglectful of China's role in events in Hong Kong." The persistence of this problem despite our repeated criticisms in recent years is of concern. Especially in view of the concomitant seriousness of the report on China, it appears that the State Department has made a conscious decision to pursue a "hands off approach to Hong Kong and this has had a negative effect on the quality of its human rights reporting. With the transfer of sovereignty a year away, this cannot be reassuring to the people of Hong Kong.
The year 1995 saw the full implementation of Governor Chris Patten's proposals for greater democracy in Hong Kong, originally advanced three years earlier. Following direct elections to the District Boards in September 1994, similar elections were carried out for the
236
United Kingdom/Hong Kong
Urban and Regional Councils and the Legislative Council in March and September 1995. These included universal franchise for the district and regional bodies and direct election under a complex formula (20 directly elected/universal suffrage seats, 30 functional constituency seats, of which 10 were new broadly based constituencies, and 10 seats filled by an election committee made up from elected members from the other representative bodies) for Legco. It is noteworthy that, while China had formally opposed this rather conservative formula for being too liberal, China's official representatives in Hong Kong had actively supported pro-China candidates for all three levels of election. While contradictory, this support was evidence of interference in a local election in ways seemingly not contemplated by the "one country, two systems" formula.
Members of the Democratic Party and other independent pro-democracy candidates took the lion's share of the directly elected seats that were up for grabs in the September Legco elections. The Democrats took 12 of the 20 directly elected seats and seven indirectly elected seats, while independents and smaller party candidates closely aligned with the Democrats took 12 additional seats, giving the pro-democracy forces a possible majority in the 60-member Legco. After failing in its electoral efforts (the leading pro-China party took just two directly elected and four indirectly elected seats), these steps forward in democracy for Hong Kong were followed immediately by a large step backward, as China's PWC, in its final plenary session, formally voted to dismiss the elected legislature in 1997 and replace it with an appointed provisional legislature made up of supporters of Beijing.
In this regard, China's continued exclusion of pro-Hong Kong democracy supporters from all of its transitional bodies does not bode well for democratic rule after 1997. Not only have pro-democracy figures been excluded from various advisory bodies and the PWC, it also became clear that Democrats had been excluded from membership in the Preparatory Committee (PC). The PC is the formal body to replace the PWC (which was disbanded at the end of the year) designated to handle final transition matters, including the creation of the 400-member Selection Committee which is to choose the first Chief Executive, and, it now appears, to choose a Provisional Legislature. The actual
237
Critique 1995
announcement of the PC membership, made on December 29, is not mentioned in the State Department report. The list of 150 PC members includes 94 from Hong Kong and 56 from China. The local PC membership is stacked with business and professional leaders with strong records of support for China's positions. The PC included only one Democrat from a minor party and no one at all from the Democratic Party, which emerged from the September elections as the territory's dominant party. China continues to refuse all contact with leaders of the Democratic Party. (As China's leading spokesperson on Hong Kong, Lu Ping, recently threatened, even the one Democrat who was included in the PC may be excluded from the Selection Committee and the Provisional Legislature as a result of his opposition, in a formal PC vote in March 1996, to the planned creation of the Provisional Legislature.)
The report correctly notes the strong criticism of Hong Kong's existing electoral system by the U.N. Human Rights Committee in its November 1995 comment on the periodic report of the United Kingdom under the ICCPR. The committee, while noting Britain's reservations to the ICCPR with respect to universal suffrage in Hong Kong, argued that "once an elected Legislative Council is established its election must conform" to the ICCPR's call for direct popular election of all seats. As the State Department report correctly notes, the Human Rights Committee criticized the existing system of functional constituencies for giving "undue weight to the views of the business community" and for discriminating "on the basis of property and functions." The report also notes that the Hong Kong Court of Appeal ruled on November 24, 1995 against a challenge to the electoral system for these deficiencies. The report fails to emphasize, however, that China is set to perpetuate this discriminatory system and reacted very harshly to Governor Patten's attempts to expand the franchise. The Patten proposal would have dramatically enlarged the franchise for the 10 new functional constituencies, and this was among the primary grounds for China's decision to dismiss the existing Legislative Council.
It is against this backdrop of open and repeated Chinese hostility that human rights developments in Hong Kong in 1995 must be viewed. In this respect, the image of tranquility conveyed by the State Department
238
United Kingdom/Hong Kong
report sorely misses the mark. As it mentions, China's hostility to Hong Kong's human rights protections was particularly directed against the BORO. This hostility seems unwarranted in that the BORO merely articulates the language of the ICCPR, to which the parties are bound. {While China is not a party to the ICCPR, it agreed in the Joint Declaration to the ICCPR's continued application to Hong Kong). At the same time, the PWC determined that six other ordinances, which were earlier reformed to conform to the Bill of Rights (especially in matters related to freedom of expression), should be restored to their former colonial character.
To make matters much worse, the Chief Justice of Hong Kong, Sir T. L. Yang (a frequently mentioned candidate for appointment as the future Chief Executive), entered the Bill of Rights dispute on the side of the Chinese government by endorsing plans to reduce the stature of the ordinance. The State Department report fails to mention this. Justice Yang was alleged by a top Chinese official to have made a remark that the Bill of Rights undermined the territory's legal system. When a furor erupted over this report. Justice Yang appeared to admit the remark and ultimately submitted a formal statement containing similar views to the executive branch of the government, thus further undermining confidence in both the rule of law and continued rights protection.
The PWC also set about its own review of all Hong Kong laws to have them conform to its interpretation of the Basic Law. As evident from the PWC's attack on the BORO, this non-judicial exercise of review power turned judicial review on its head — rather than aiming to protect human rights it aimed to insure that there was not excessive rights protection. At the same time, the rule of law came under attack on the institutional side by a Sino-British agreement that the new Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal will not actually be set up until July 1, 1997. This agreement included a provision limiting the courts jurisdiction over "acts of state" (a vaguely defined term for which the intended meaning seems much broader than the foreign affairs concerns usually implicated by the common law doctrine of acts of state), and limiting foreign judicial participation to only a single judge, a limitation that had previously met with widespread objections from Legco, the Law Society and the Bar
239
Critique 1995
Association. There was no such limitation on foreign judges in either the Joint Declaration or the Basic Law and Hong Kong has had a long tradition of inviting qualified foreign common law judges to sit on its highest court. The democratic camp launched a serious challenge to this agreement but it was pushed through the partially appointed Legislative Council before the September election.
The report correctly points out growing community concern with the absence of an independent review of complaints against police. Complaints against police are rarely substantiated. Amidst growing public concern over police brutality, human rights groups such as the Hong Kong Human Rights Monitor and the private Hong Kong Human Rights Commission have called for further investigations into two cases of unexplained death while in police custody. Lee Shing-tat died 24 hours after claiming to be a victim of a police beating. After another prisoner, Lam Tin-ming died in police custody, an initial post-mortem showed broken ribs and a torn liver.
The State Department report also correctly notes criminal process-related reforms eliminating arrest and warrant powers previously granted to the Independent Commission Against Corruption (ICAC), as well as the persistent presumption that excessive unexplained assets held by civil servants are ill-gotten. However, the report makes no mention of the December recommendation by the Crime Wing of the Police Department to the Security Branch that the right to remain silent be watered down to allow juries to make adverse inference from the silence of an accused. As may be imagined, such issues, which are vitally important to the texture of the rule of law, are of great concern with only a year remaining before the transfer of sovereignty.
Closely related to concerns about law enforcement are the numerous problems in the immigration and refugee areas in Hong Kong, and these are addressed in the report. It notes that some 23,000 people remain in camps in Hong Kong, of whom 1,500 have been screened in as refugees. The report correctly notes that Hong Kong has never turned away Vietnamese boat people, although as problems with repatriation and resettlement have mounted, the community has had to employ harsher measures, including closed camps and voluntary (2,566 in 1995) and
240
United Kingdom/Hong Kong
forced repatriation. Fifteen Vietnamese holding Taiwan passports, whom Vietnam refused to accept back, received a January 1995 High Court judgment in their favor in a lawsuit challenging their seven-year detention in closed camps. (After reversal at the Court of Appeal, this case ultimately resulted in a Privy Council ruling in their favor in April of 1996 and the immediate release by transfer to open camps of 207 detainees who were similarly situated). The report also notes that large numbers of illegal Chinese immigrants enter Hong Kong and are repatriated at the rate of 150 per day, although in rare cases temporary asylum is afforded. The most notorious case is that of Chinese independent labor activist Han Dongfang, who was expelled to Hong Kong and wants to return to China, but has been refused re-entry. The case of Han, as well as about 80 other cases of Chinese asylum seekers are of concern as 1997 approaches.
In a similar vein, the report completely ignores the continued concern of Hong Kong people, in particular minorities, about their future nationality status. Except for 50,000 heads of household and their families covered under the 1991 British Nationality Act, Britain continues to deny full British nationality to Hong Kong people. This has been of particular concern to Hong Kong minorities who fear becoming stateless after 1997. In offering glowing praise to Hong Kong concerning the right to travel, the report ignores the growing concern of Hong Kong people about their future freedom of travel and the international recognition of both their British National Overseas (BNO) and future Special Administrative Region passports. China has also failed to afford adequate assurances of the continued rights of residency of Hong Kong holders of foreign passports, or of future Chinese respect for the diplomatic protection allowed by such passports. This problem extends to the domestic front as well, as China has denied permits for entry for several Hong Kong political activists, sparking concern about a blacklist for exclusion based on political factors. Hong Kong people have understandable anxieties about their right both to leave and return after 1997, and these issues deserve careful scrutiny in the 1996 State Department report.
The report offers substantial coverage of freedom of expression and of association. It appropriately notes the vibrant tradition of a free press
241
Critique 1995
in Hong Kong and die shadow that China now casts on that tradition. Among the most pressing tasks facing the current Hong Kong government is the effort, promoted by the Hong Kong Journalists Association, to update a number of overbearing colonial laws that limit press freedom. The colonial legal system formally allowed the government enormous powers over the press, especially in the interests of national security and in times of emergency, as well as to protect official secrecy. While the former powers were rarely exercised in Hong Kong, the principles of official secrecy have been applied. Concern that the Chinese authorities may apply these laws with a heavy hand after 1997 has encouraged a movement to reform and update these laws to conform to current actual or expected practices or to the norms set forth in the BORO.
Freedom of association is also a matter of concern. This goes beyond questions about the strict language currendy contained in the Societies Ordinance, which the report mentions. There is growing concern that the provisions in the Basic Law banning foreign political organizations will be used to exclude such international organizations as Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch/Asia, Justice and Greenpeace, all of whom are currently permitted to operate in the territory. Furthermore, concern has arisen over those local organizations that Chinese officials have already criticized as "subversive." Membership in the allegedly subversive Alliance in Support of the Patriotic Democratic Movement in China has already been cited by Chinese officials as a basis for exclusion from the Legislative Council. Local human rights groups such as Hong Kong Human Rights Monitor or the Hong Kong Human Rights Commission could also come under attack. In considering issues related to freedom of association, the State Department report is excessively sanguine.
Whether the present Hong Kong government will take the task of reform to heart, in the face of strong Chinese opposition, must be in doubt. The government resisted a legislative proposal in 1995 for freedom of information legislation, offering an administrative code of access instead. In the face of Chinese opposition, plans to privatize the government-owned Radio Television Hong Kong (with the aim of insuring editorial independence) have apparendy been abandoned. In October it
242
United Kingdom/Hong Kong
was reported that China would be consulted over controversial radio and television reforms. As mentioned above, China's willingness to reverse the reforms already carried out under the Bill of Rights Ordinance offers little room for optimism in the development of progressive media laws. China has already become directly involved in censorship by attempting to control which Chinese films will be permitted to be shown in the annual Hong Kong film festival, even going so far as to withdraw its participation if the organizers do not agree.
More threatening than government censorship, at present, is the environment of self-censorship. This arises from Chinese intimidation of reporters covering the mainland, historical memory of blacklisting of newspapers (reported in previous editions of the Critique), favoritism and harassment of China's critics. As the report notes, the continued imprisonment under a 12-year sentence of Hong Kong Ming Pao reporter Xi Yang for reporting financial information China deemed secret continues to haunt the Hong Kong press and has stimulated demonstrations. The harassment of Hong Kong publisher Jimmy Lai has been equally vexing. After closing down his Beijing retail store in 1994 in response to an article critical of Premier Li Peng in his Next magazine, Chinese officials in 1995 took a dim view of his newly launched paper, Apple Daily, by refusing his reporters accreditation in China. China's continued exclusion from its Hong Kong consultative dialogue of local residents who supported the 1989 Beijing student movement under the banner of the Alliance in Support of the Patriotic Democratic Movement in China has also had a chilling effect on local freedoms of expression and association. It does not help that Hong Kong police are frequently observed to be filming demonstrators outside the offices of the Xinhua news agency, China's unofficial representarion in Hong Kong.
Problems relaring to the equal protection of residents has continued to vex Hong Kong. As noted above, China's main offense in this regard has been the exclusion of individuals from the country and from participation in its consultative processes, based on their political beliefs and activities. Under these circumstances of political favoritism, local civil servants have had reason to be concerned with the mainland government's recent request for their confidential files, a request which
243
Critique 1995
the current government has so far resisted. The present government has also confronted a range of issues in this regard. Most prominent have been challenges to its civil service localization policies, designed to insure that most top positions are occupied by qualified local Chinese, which the courts have largely rejected. Sex discrimination has also been a problem in Hong Kong. As the report highlights, the government did push through a limited anti-discrimination bill in 1995 banning discrimination based on sex and disability. However, this occurred after the government first refused to allow a more comprehensive bill to come before the Legislative Council in 1994, exercising its right of prior approval of members' bills requiring expenditure.
Discrimination takes many forms in Hong Kong. As the report notes, women face discrimination in employment, welfare and inheritance. Age discrimination is not prohibited by law and occurs openly. Treatment of the disabled, especially the mentally disabled, has been a problem, with communities opposing the location of facilities for the disabled in their neighborhoods. The report correctly points out that Filipino domestic workers, now totaling 140,000, have been the targets of reported mistreatment. The employment laws sometimes work to their disadvantage, especially with respect to their right to remain in Hong Kong and seek employment. Such workers can be very vulnerable, as they face deportation if they lose their jobs. As the report notes, given China's huge labor supply, foreign domestic workers have some reason for concern about their continued right of abode after 1997.
It should be acknowledged that the report is especially thorough in other respects when reporting on worker rights. The most significant new development in 1995 was the election of several labor leaders to the Legislative Council. This can be expected to focus renewed attention on the range of problems noted in the report. The labor import scheme came under scrutiny almost immediately after the election. Local labor leaders, while opposing importation, to their credit, have also focused attention on abuse of foreign workers, especially several reported wage problems under sub-contracts in the mammoth new airport project. Labor leaders and other liberal political leaders have also sought to expand other social welfare benefits and the government's social welfare budget, especially for
244
United Kingdom/Hong Kong
the elderly, seemed set at the end of the year for further modest expansion. Paradoxically, Communist leaders in China have harshly criticized Hong Kong's "runaway" social welfare spending.
In the face of worrisome human rights trends in Hong Kong, the U.N. Human Rights Committee and numerous local and international NGOs, including the Lawyers Committee, have expressed concern over China's expressed intention to discontinue the periodic human rights reports required under the ICCPR and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. In 1995 China indicated its intention to discontinue such reporting, despite its obligations to adhere to both covenants with respect to Hong Kong under both the Joint Declaration and the Basic Law. Disparate forces in the Legislative Council were even able to agree to send a delegation to the Human Rights Committee hearings on Hong Kong in October 1995 to lobby for support for continued reporting. In its November report the Committee concluded that China was bound to do so. In the same report, as a reflection of its continued interest in human rights developments in Hong Kong, and a demonstration of the importance of this international process, the Committee also voiced support for maintaining the status of the Bill of Rights Ordinance and for continued law reform under the Bill of Rights. It also expressed concern about the unfairness of the electoral system, the inadequacy of anti-discrimination legislation, the rights of Vietnamese boat people, the lack of an independent police complaints procedure, the lack of acceptable regulations concerning states of emergency and the limitations on jurisdiction over "acts of state" imposed by the Sino-British agreement to establish the new Court of Final Appeal. The Committee's concern over continued reporting was emphasized when it took the extraordinary measure of calling for an additional report from the United Kingdom in May 1996.
245
United Kingdom/Northern Ireland
T
'he State Department report on Northern Ireland is more comprehensive than in previous years, providing a better picture of the range of human rights abuses which occurred in 1995. The report catalogues, albeit at a remove, dozens of allegations of state human rights abuses. The fact that the report refers to the possibility of the existence of such abuses is welcome. What is less fortunate is the manner chosen to acknowledge these and other serious concerns. The violations committed by the state are usually referred to as "allegations" or "complaints," which can be directly contrasted with the tone adopted when reporting violations of humanitarian law or other outrages carried out by paramilitaries. In the latter case, such violations are generally reported as real and proven, even where the allegations of state abuse are supported by as much, if not more, evidence. In one example the report states that paramilitary punishments such as exile are imposed for "sometimes even such acts as dating an IRA prisoner's girlfriend." This is worthy of contrast with the following: "There continued to be allegations that security forces . . . physically and psychologically abused detainees in holding centers." In fact there is clear and proven evidence of violations committed by both the state and by paramilitary organizations.
This difference in tone underlines the general bias endemic in the report, with different weight given to complaints of state human rights abuses on the one hand and to government claims that measures are being taken to improve matters on the other. The report frequently makes bald statements about government improvement or reform that conceal a reality entirely less favorable to the government of the United Kingdom. For example, the report states (correctly) that measures have been introduced to remedy the inadequate legal protection afforded to part-time workers. What it fails to report is that such legislative protection was forthcoming only after the European Court of Justice had found the UK in breach of its obligations under European Community law on the matter.
Such bias is perhaps most naked in the assertion that "The Government does not practice exile . . . but the terrorist organizations do." In fact both engage in practices which amount to exile, the
247
Critique 1995
government by way of exclusion orders under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA), which are an administrative measure incapable of challenge either by way of judicial review or by appeal.
In an improvement over previous years, the report also contains a number of references to the pronouncements of international human rights bodies on matters of concern in Northern Ireland. It is particularly useful to see the references to the concerns of the U.N. Committee on Torture and the U.N. Human Rights Committee about human rights violations in Northern Ireland, as well as mention of the September 27 decision of the European Court of Human Rights in Farrell et al v UK, although no mention is made of the response to the judgment by the UK government, which asserted that it would ignore the ruling.
The contents of the report on Northern Ireland lend themselves to a number of themes, as well as a number of ancillary points. The report naturally makes reference to the existence throughout 1995 of the twin paramilitary ceasefires, although it does note, correctly, that there were apparent unacknowledged breaches of these ceasefires by both the IRA and Loyalist paramilitaries. In this respect the reporting is more accurate and less biased than in other areas. However the report contains one or two speculative remarks, such as the questionable assertion that the economy has improved in Northern Ireland since the ceasefires. Certainly, tourism improved dramatically, and business confidence improved, but unemployment remained more or less static.
The report also acknowledges the response by the UK government to the ceasefires, noting that emergency laws were nonetheless renewed, despite the call by the U.N. Human Rights Committee for the UK to end emergency law. Many have argued that the failure of the UK government to respond in a progressive, meaningful way to human rights concerns contributed in no small way to the ending of the ceasefires. Throughout 1995 a wide range of respected, independent NGOs in Britain and Ireland, including the Committee on the Administration of Justice (CAJ), Liberty, the Scottish Council for Civil Liberties, the Irish Council for Civil Liberties and British-Irish Rights Watch, argued that the failure to respond positively to the ceasefires was an obstacle to peace and reconciliation. They drew attention to the continuing emergency law
248
United Kingdom/Northern Ireland
regime, which had necessitated a UK derogation from both the ICCPR and the European Convention on Human Rights, a regime which itself drew the opprobrium of the U.N. Human Rights Committee. These groups also focused upon the failure of the UK government to move toward an earlier release of paramilitary prisoners, a situation compounded by the deterioration in the conditions in which such prisoners were held in Great Britain.
The report is right to note that many relatives of those killed by paramilitaries have not been told the truth of what happened and that the bodies of their relatives have not been returned to them by the paramilitaries. It does not, however, discuss the similar problems that continue for the many relatives of people killed or injured by the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) or the Army. This is a difficult issue, but one that is being increasingly addressed in post-conflict societies and ought to have been addressed in this report.
The report notes, correcdy, that the incidence of complaints of abuse in the holding centers has decreased. It summarizes accurately the available detention powers under the PTA, but its use of the term "judicial review" is confusing and somewhat misleading. Anyone arrested and detained under the PTA can be detained for an initial period of up to 48 hours, without charge. Access to a solicitor during this period can be denied, although the decision to deny a detainee access to his or her legal advisor may be challenged by way of judicial review. A detainee may also be denied the right to have anyone told of their whereabouts for these initial 48 hours. In order to detain someone without charge for more than 48 hours, the RUC must obtain the permission of the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland — not a judicial officer, but a politician. Such permission can only be used to detain the individual for a maximum of another five days, a total of seven in all. At no point in the proceedings is a court ordinarily involved in deciding whether a detention may continue. At the end of the initial 48 hours a person must be released, charged with a criminal offense or obtain the permission of the Secretary of State to extend the detention period. If someone is actually charged, then he or she may be brought before a court to decide the matter of bail. The report should have noted that this extensive detention
249
Critique 1995
power has been held to be in breach of the European Convention on Human Rights and has occasioned a derogation by the UK from the Convention.
While the PTA applies throughout the UK and one can be detained for up to seven days anywhere in the UK, the report correctly acknowledges that one's treatment if detained under the Act differs depending upon whether one is detained in Northern Ireland or in Great Britain. In the former, detention is governed by the Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act 1995 (EPA) and the situation as outlined above applies. In the latter, the provisions of the Police Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE) and the Codes of Practice issued thereunder apply, and one is entitled, among other things, to have one's lawyer present during questioning. The report leaves the impression that all criminal arrests and detentions in Northern Ireland are governed by emergency law, but in fact the law differentiates between "scheduled" and "non-scheduled" offenses and arrests, and detentions under the latter are governed by the Police & Criminal Evidence (NI) Order 1989, Northern Ireland's equivalent of PACE.
The manner in which the report deals with the issue of exclusion orders under the PTA is partial and inaccurate. Exclusion orders permit a member of the government — usually the Home Secretary, although a similar power is available to the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland — to make an administrative order excluding someone from either Great Britain or Northern Ireland. No evidence is required to sustain such an order nor can it be challenged in court. This the report acknowledges. However, it describes those who are the subject of exclusion orders as "suspected terrorists and supporters," when in fact evidence of such activity or support is neither supplied nor required for the making of an exclusion order.
The report also inaccurately characterizes the only form of review of such orders as an "appeal [which] may be made informally to an independent advisor." The process could not by any stretch of the imagination be described as an "independent appeal." Those who are the subject of an exclusion order can make representations to an adviser appointed by the Secretary of State, by way of a letter and possibly an
250
United Kingdom/Northern Ireland
interview. Finally, the report's failure to even acknowledge the trenchant criticism of this method of internal exile by a wide range of groups and political parties is a glaring omission.
The report should also have referred to the fact that the power of internment without trial remains on the statute books in Northern Ireland. This power has not been utilized since the mid-1970s, when its use drew widespread criticism, but it can be re-introduced by way of ministerial order, without recourse to Parliament or the courts. That such a power remained available throughout the ceasefires begs many questions about the government's approach to emergency law. The report should have acknowledged these concerns and the attempts made by NGOs to persuade the UK government to address them, not least because the U.N. Human Rights Committee, in its remarks on the inadequacies of the measures to protect human rights in the UK, reflected some of them.
The issue of policing is in many respects at the heart of the conflict in Northern Ireland, and the problems associated with it continue. One of the core difficulties is the matter of accountability, and many of the problems during the past year have revolved around this issue. Despite the government's apparent acl<jiowledgment of the need for some reform of the operation of policing in Northern Ireland, little real change seems to have taken place. In this respect the report could have been a little more robust in acknowledging the developing debate, although it does helpfully report the views of the U.N. Human Rights Committee on the matter of the holding center at Castlereagh. The report's assertion that the police are "responsive to and under the effective control of civilian officials" (emphasis added) is questionable. Whether there is de jure control is debatable, but whether such control is effective in practice is highly dubious. Further, the manifest inadequacies of the complaints procedure mean that true accountability is a chimera. The report notes correctly that "watchdogs" appointed by the government have "no independent investigative powers," but does not refer to the actions taken in the civil courts by aggrieved individuals. While large sums of public monies are paid out each year in settlement of civil actions against the police and army, there are few successful disciplinary actions against errant officers and even fewer successful criminal actions. Dissatisfaction
251
Critique 1995
with the existing complaints system is widespread, but despite this no real change in the process is planned. This dissatisfaction is even expressed by the individuals appointed by the government to assess the system, something the report notes in a useful passage which quotes the statistics on substantiation of complaints.
Many of the complaints are about treatment in the holding centers, something that could in part be remedied by audio- and videotaping of the interviews there, which the UK government has, until now, sternly resisted, despite the plethora of opinion in favor of videotaping. Late last year the government finally succumbed to these arguments and announced that they would move toward the videotaping of interviews. The report notes the appointment of an Independent Commissioner for the Holding Centres, Sir Louis Blom-Cooper, but does not note the limited nature of his powers. For example, while he is empowered to make suggestions the government is not required to act on these. Thus, despite the fact that the commissioner (as well as the U.N. Human Rights Committee) has recommended the closure of the principal holding center at Castlereagh, it remains open. This is a familiar pattern in the field of supervision of emergency law: people are frequently appointed to investigate or supervise emergency law and their recommendations are either toothless or, when substantive, frequently ignored. This sort of process has resulted in a great deal of cynicism, to the extent that such "reviews" are often seen as a pointless exercise.
The report states that the commissioner has the power to make "unannounced" visits to the holding centers, but the evidence is that these visits are sometimes known about in advance. The commissioner also proposed changes in the way in which detainees would be legally represented which were widely criticized by NGOs including the Lawyers Committee and British-Irish Rights Watch, but which are not mentioned in the report.
The failure of the complaints process has led, as the report notes, to calls by human rights organizations for independent inquiries into a number of matters, not least the allegations of collusion between the security forces and Loyalist paramilitaries. The NGOs have been joined in this criticism of the process by the U.N. Human Rights Committee,
252
United Kingdom/Northern Ireland
which described the existing arrangements as "lacking sufficient credibility." The State Department report refers to perhaps the most notorious of these cases, that of the murder of Belfast lawyer Pat Finucane, and to the allegations that Brian Nelson, a Loyalist paramilitary and M15 agent, had assisted in the murder. The report also usefully recounts the failure of the UK authorities to pursue prosecutions of members of the security forces.
The controversy surrounding the decision to release Private Lee Clegg, a soldier in the British Army who was convicted of murder, is also usefully documented in the report, although there are two omissions in its discussion of the case which require comment. First, the report notes that the decision to release then-Private Clegg (who has subsequently been promoted) was taken after recourse to the Northern Ireland Life Sentence Review Board, but fails to acknowledge that Northern Ireland's Chief Probation Officer, an ex officio member of the board, was so incensed by the process by which the decision was reached that she resigned and went public with her concerns. Second, the report claims that the decision was criticized by the "Nationalist Community," but does not note that it was also severely criticized by members of the Unionist community, as well as by many reputable human rights organizations. This leaves a partial impression which deserves correction.
Two other matters of concern are raised in the report. The first of these is the matter of allegations of harassment of members of the public by members of the RUC and the Armed Forces. These allegations range from those of being continually stopped and searched, to rudeness, offensive behavior, and the arbitrary use of arrest powers, to allegations of serious ill-treatment. The wording of the report in discussing these issues is unfortunate. It describes the areas from which most complaints of harassment stem as those "where support for terrorists is considered strong." A more accurate description would have been "rural and urban working-class areas." The report might also usefully have acknowledged the growing evidence that harassment is occurring not just in "nationalist" areas but in working-class Loyalist areas, as borne out by a CAJ study of the issue. The report might also have referred to the growing body of evidence that such harassment does indeed occur.
253
Critique 1995
Second, the report valuably records the use of plastic bullets, which were deployed on a number of occasions in 1995. However, what is startling about the report is that there is no mention whatsoever of one of the most controversial issues of last year — the routing of Orange Lodge marches through nationalist areas and the police reaction to protests against them. This issue, perhaps more than any other, created contention and division in 1995. There is no mention in the report of any of the incidents in July and August which gave rise to serious allegations of abuse against the RUC, many of them supported by media coverage of the events.
In July an Orange Parade was scheduled to march down Belfast's Ormeau Road, to the consternation of the occupants of the lower part of that road, who are predominantly Catholic. After the Chief Constable refused to re-route the parade, which its organizers said was traditional, cultural and religious in character, local residents organized demonstrations against it. These were forcibly broken up by police. The police action was heavily criticized by the residents and television pictures tended to bear out some of their complaints. A similar debacle occurred in Derry on August 12 when residents of the mainly Catholic Bogside objected to a similar Apprentice Boys parade. This protest was also broken up by the RUC, in a heavy-handed and often violent fashion, which was documented by a local human rights organization. The failure of the report to mention either of these serious incidents is a major omission.
The report documents the continuing "punishment beatings" by members of paramilitary organizations — violent and horrific attacks on individuals whom they judge to have committed some form of crime. These attacks vary from exile of the individual under threat of death to sadistic and brutal beatings. There is no question that these attacks are wrong. What is interesting, however, is the tone in which the report records them, as compared with the way in which it details human rights abuses by the state. As discussed above, the former are presented as facts, the latter as allegations.
This tone operates throughout the report, as in, for example, the bald statement that "the judiciary is independent." This does not take into
254
United Kingdom/Northern Ireland
account the serious questions over the operation of the courts in Great Britain as well as Northern Ireland, and the many examples of questionable judicial balance, some of which are helpfully referred to in the report. Despite its assertion that "the law provides for fair trial," there are many areas in which it does not and many occasions where trials have later transpired to be manifestly unfair.
The passages on measures taken to secure equality are perhaps an improvement over previous reports, but still leave gaping holes of information. Here the report tends to regurgitate the official government line and frequently fails to examine the truth. Thus, it records that there is no legal bar on women holding public office, but fails to examine the huge under-representation of women in parliament or government. It claims that the government "respects all extant anti-discrimination laws" when the truth is that the government has been responsible for many breaches of such laws. Indeed, it reports that the government introduced legislation to extend employment rights to part-time workers, but fails to record that this was in response to a European Court of Justice judgment against the United Kingdom. The report states that the law "provides for equal opportunity between the sexes" — a questionable enough assertion in relation to the operation of the equal pay laws, but disguising the reality that the sex-discrimination measures apply only to employment and to the provision of goods, facilities and services. It does note, correctly, that new measures to deal with domestic violence are being introduced, although the legislation to prohibit race discrimination had not yet appeared at the end of the 1995 reporting period. (A draft Order in Council appeared in July 1996.) The latter omission is noteworthy.
In the field of religious discrimination, the report observes that "anti-Catholic discrimination persists in the private sector" as if there was none in the public sector, which is the largest employment sector in Northern Ireland. It acknowledges the efforts made by government, which are real, but does not record the criticisms of these as inadequate. The report records the gap in unemployment rates between Catholic and Protestant men, but does not mention the widening gap between Catholic and Protestant women. Finally, the report acknowledges the rise in applications by Catholics to join the RUG, but fails to record that few of
255
Critique 1995
those applications were successful. Nor does the report mention the review of the Fair Employment legislation which was undertaken by the government in 1995 and which is ongoing.
In summary, the 1995 report is most useful in its recitation of claims of human rights abuses in Northern Ireland as well as in the breadth of issues covered. The references to the findings of many distinguished international bodies is also a welcome improvement over previous years. Nonetheless, the tone of the report once again lacks balance and its drafters are again too quick to accept the government version of events as fact. It is especially unfortunate that in the face of much international criticism of the human rights status quo in Northern Ireland, the drafters of the report could only report these findings and not identify the U.S. State Department with them.
256
Since 1978, the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights has worked to protect and promote fundamental human rights. Its work is impartial, holding each government to the standards affirmed in the International Bill of Human Rights, including
•	the right to be free from torture, summary execution, abduction and "disappearance";
•	the right to be free from arbitrary arrest, imprisonment without charge or trial, and indefinite incommunicado detention; and
•	the right to due process and a fair trial before an independent judiciary
The Committee conducts fact-finding missions and publishes reports which serve as a starting point for sustained follow-up work within three areas: with locally-based human rights lawyers and activists; with policymakers involved in formulating U.S. foreign policy; and with intergovernmental organizations such as the United Nations, the Organization of American States, the Organization of African Unity and the World Bank.
The Committee's Refugee Project seeks to provide legal protection for refugees including the right to dignified treatment and a permanent home. It provides legal representation, without charge, to indigent refugees in the United States in flight fi'om political persecution. With the assistance of hundreds of volunteer attorneys, the Project's staff also undertakes broader efforts — including participation in lawsuits of potential national significance — to protect the right to seek political asylum as guaranteed by U.S. and international law.
If you would like more information about the Laviyers Committee, write to us at: Publications Department Lawyers Committee for Human Rights 330 Seventh Avenue. 10th Floor New York, NY 10001 USA
Tel: (212) 629-6170 E-mail: comm@lchr.org Fax: (212) 967-0916
