Guatemala
n its 1995 report, the State Department at last begins to take • full measure of the gap between human rights rhetoric and reality in Guatemala. With refreshing candor and, in many instances, admirable detail, the report describes the incidence of violence and the inadequacy of institutional responses, and identifies the responsible parties. Information from independent sources, primarily the United Nations Human Rights Verification Mission (MINUGUA) and several respected NGOs, adds to the report's breadth and depth. Unlike many of the Country Reports reviewed in this publication, the report on Guatemala often presents the clear voice of the State Department, evaluating progress, assessing claims and raising important criticisms. The deeply rooted power structures and their long history of wilfully disregarding virtually every right of the country's poorer citizens has imbued Guatemala's human rights crisis with a pervasiveness that is hard to capture within the limits posed by the Country Reports' restrictive reporting framework. Nonetheless, this year's report goes a long way toward making the problem clearer.
The most notable improvement in the 1995 report concerns impunity. The revised State Department instructions for drafting the Country Reports place greater emphasis on the question of impunity and government accountability for human rights violations. In the particular case of Guatemala, this is an especially well-targeted addition. Throughout the report, the State Department has added language acknowledging the issue of impunity and assigning blame where it is due.
The report is still not without its flaws. The section on international humanitarian law is devoted almost entirely to a discussion of guerrilla violations. As far as it goes, this discussion is informative, yet the virtual silence regarding the Guatemalan Army conveys an impression that the State Department can hardly attempt to maintain: that in the two sides' prosecution of the armed conflict, the army's misdeeds are merely incidental. To offer just one striking example, the October 1995 massacre at Xaman, in which troops killed 11 and wounded at least 30 members of a refugee resettlement, is mentioned in the report's first section on extrajudicial killings, but is omitted from the later discussion of violations
79
Critique 1995
of humanitarian law. Even if the State Department does not share the Lawyers Committee's view that killings of non-combatants by army units belong in this section as a matter of principle, the army's claims that its soldiers were reacting to hostile fire in the Xaman incident should have been enough to justify its inclusion here — as well as an examination of whether those claims had any merit.
In addition, the treatment of cases reviewed at length by the U.S. government in 1995 in response to allegations of torture, murder and subsequent cover-up by Guatemalan CIA assets and soldiers under their authority is incomplete. In general, however the criticisms leveled by this Critique are relatively minor, and are offered to encourage continued improvement.
Additional detail and texture would have been helpful to readers seeking to understand the motives and mechanisms of violence in Guatemala. For instance, murder victim Abner Esau Avenado is described in the report only as a professor at the San Carlos University (USAC), whereas in fact, Avenado was writing on Guatemala's oppositionist student movement of the i960s. At the time of his killing, he was researching several abductions believed to be politically motivated. Bartolo Solis Sunin, abducted and beaten during an interrogation by unknown assailants, is identified without stating that he was a member of the Mayan Defense Organization, an important due to the motive for the attack. Without such information, the presentation of numerous inddents tends to flatten out in the report, diminishing the value of the references.
The discussion of freedorn of assodation would have been strengthened by a more explicit acknowledgment that many of the problems discussed elsewhere in the report are violations of this fundamental right. In a paragraph dominated by a discussion of free assembly, the report points out the "cumbersome and difficult" process required for organizations to obtain legal status. The hostile attitude of the military and the civilian government toward domestic and international human rights organizations, documented later in the report, directly implicates this important right, and illustrates the areas in which the collective exercise of rights is considered most threatening to
80
Guatemala
Guatemalan authorities. MINUGUA has reported that in the last third of 1995 it received nine complaints of violations of freedom of association, mostly alleging harassment of human rights organizations and trade unions. Several NGO members were shot in 1995. One case involved an activist of the well-established Mutual Support Group {Grupo de Apoyo Mùtuo: GAM), a group of relatives of the "disappeared" attempting to discover the fate of their family members. After being shot and wounded, the victim was later harassed in the hospital by the National Police assigned to provide her with protection from additional attacks. In March 1995, the union leader at the RG\ maquiladora was killed after the factory's owners threatened a group of workers who had filed a suit against the company alleging the unjust dismissal of 70 employees.
As in previous years, the report fails to adequately examine the issue of racial discrimination. The section on discrimination against Guatemala's indigenous peoples is identical to that contained in the 1994 report, with a bland statement of the constitutional guarantees afforded to the country's diverse ethnic groups and the same single sentence addressing the general issue of human rights abuses ("Indigenous people suffered most of the serious human rights abuses described throughout this report.") It is true that many of these abuses are mentioned in a number of the issue-specific sections of the report. However, the general character of such discrimination should have been stressed more strongly, especially in view of the rejection by the U.N. Committee on Racial Discrimination of the Guatemalan government's statement that no form of racial discrimination is practiced. The committee concluded in its report dated March 17, 1995 that de facto discrimination persists against indigenous communities and "noted with concern that no legal protection is offered in practice against such discrimination." The committee laid the principal blame on the militarization of indigenous areas.
During 1995, a number of past attacks on U.S. citizens in Guatemala received significant attention because of allegations that individuals paid by the CIA for providing information were linked to the violence or its subsequent cover-up. The report mentions several of the more prominent cases, including that of Michael De Vi ne, murdered in 1990. The results
81
Critique 1995
of a review of CIA links to this case and a criminal investigation by the Justice Department, made public in 1996 by a presidential review board, as well as the efforts by lawyers working for the De Vine family, all go significantly beyond what the State Department reports here.
Although the report indicates that one of the soldiers convicted in the DeVine Idlling, Francisco Solbal Santay, was unable to identify the exact burial location of others Idlled in the course of a military cover-up for an exhumation team, a witness at the site says the team made little attempt to exhume or identify the bones located at the site to which Solbay Santay led them. Moreover, the special prosecutor assigned to the case after "the Public Ministry launched a new investigation to try to determine the intellectual authors of the murder" took virtually no action.
The report correctly observes that "it is widely believed that military officials facilitated [the] escape" of Guatemalan Army Captain Hugo Contreras, convicted of ordering the operation that ended in DeVine's murder. In fact, a soldier was found guilty of allowing Contreras to escape, on the day he was convicted, from the military base where he had been held. It is also widely believed that Col. Mario Roberto Garcia Catalán, head of the military base near DeVine's Guatemala home, dispatched the surveillance team of soldiers that killed DeVine. A court dismissed charges against him, however, as the report notes. It does not add however, that Garcia Catalán had been awarded a medal for "professionalism" during the course of the proceedings, apparently reflecting the army's view of the investigation and its implications.
Guatemala's revised criminal procedure code is a step forward, with, as the report highlights, strong provisions for defense rights and a more open manner of proceeding. The Lawyers Committee shares the State Department's observation that the difficulties of implementation have meant that "the commitment to transform a dysfunctional judicial system into an effective one is being seriously tested." Even this is an understatement. The head of the Public Prosecutor's Office reported that during 1995, 750 formal charges had been filed, but only 40 judicial investigations were opened. According to MINUGUA, there are approximately four death threats against prosecutors and 23 against judges every month. The issue of judicial independence deserves greater
82
Guatemala
attention in future State Department reporting; it is, perhaps by definition, the single largest influence on the provision of a fair trial. By incorporating references to the latter in the section on denial of fair public trial, the report implicitly acknowledges this important connection.
The case of anthropologist Myrna Mack, murdered in 1990 by a military death squad, highlights the limits of judicial resolve where the military is concerned. As the report points out, the investigation into the criminal responsibility of three officers accused as intellectual authors of the killing was "paralyzed" for much of 1995 until a new prosecutor was named to the case. Once the Public Ministry began making requests for documents regarding the chain of command between one of Mack's killers, convicted in 1993, and the three superior officers, the military stonewalled, refusing to turn over even organizational charts on grounds of national security. The military judge assigned to the case under the revised criminal procedure took no action, despite a legal requirement that he review such documents in order to assess the validity of the military's contention, and to release appropriate materials. In addition, the judge has made no effort to call the military to account for discrepancies — possibly fabrications — in documents regarding the case which the military has turned over to the prosecutor. The authorities' performances in cases such as Mack's, which have benefited from intense international attention, do not bode particularly well for the thousands of less celebrated matters with which the judiciary must contend. The progress, or lade of it, toward a fair and reliable justice system should be as central to the State Department's reporting as it will be to the prospects for meaningful improvement in Guatemala's human rights situation.
The 1995 report gives reason to anticipate that the State Department's reporting on Guatemala will now begin to meet a higher standard than it has in prior years. Of particular interest in 1996 will be information gleaned from the U.S. government's review of the connection between U.S. intelligence and the Guatemalan security agencies. Guatemala's military intelligence is a pervasive presence, never far removed from the locus of human rights violations. (Claims by former President de León Carpió that he dismantled a notorious military
83
Critique 1995
intelligence unit known as the Archivo, are undermined by reports that its activities continue, a point which the report misses.) The June 1996 report of the Intelligence Oversight Board (lOB) is one of the first opportunities to evaluate information that sheds light on questionable relationships with inadequate oversight. In fact, one of the lOB's most important findings was that although the CIA's Guatemala station kept its Washington headquarters well-informed, the CIA omitted or glossed over negative developments regarding human rights when reporting to Congress or other executive branch agencies. Now that some of the reasons why the United States may have traditionally muted its human rights criticisms of Guatemala are out in the open, such extraneous factors can be neutralized in the State Department's reporting. This year's effort is a strong start.
84
