Croatia
year 1995 was characterized by a significant increase in human rights violations in Croatia. This increase is largely attributable to the two Croatian policev''military offensives to regain Serb-held territories. On May 1, Croatian forces regained control of Western Slavonia in operation "Flash," which violated the ceasefire agreement of March 29, 1994. On August 4, the Croatian Army launched operation "Storm," a major military offensive to recapture the Krajina region from the rebel Serbs who had occupied it since 1991. These offensives were carried out despite international concern over the likely repercussions for the Serb majorities in these areas. Reports from numerous dependable sources confirm claims that the Croatian Army, Special Police units and Civil Police were directly responsible for serious violations of human rights and humanitarian law both during and after the two offensives. These violations continued through the end of 1995. As a result, almost 200,000 Serb civilians, representing most of the Serb population from the territories they had previously occupied, fled from Western Slavonia and ICrajina to Serbia and neighboring Bosnian Serb-controlled parts of Bosnia. This mass exodus constituted one of the largest displacements of civilians since the war began in 1991. Additionally, thousands of Serb homes and religious edifices have been looted and destroyed in what appears to be an attempt to erase all signs of Serbs ever having lived there.
The increase in war-related human rights violations was matched by a simultaneous increase in human rights violations not directly related to the military campaigns. Illegal and forced evictions continued to occur despite years of efforts by human rights groups to put a stop to them. In Split, local human rights groups received reports of new cases of human rights violations every week. Serb and Muslim minorities in the government-controlled parts of Croatia continued to suffer discriminatory treatment in employment, housing, justice and the enjoyment of cultural rights. The Croatian government suspended the constitutional safeguards for minorities which guaranteed the special status of districts which were predominantly populated by national minorities, created separate educational institutions and secured proportional representation in the
49
Critique 1995
parliament, government and judiciary. The state also continued to exercise control over the media through a variety of methods.
The 1995 State Department report does a good job of addressing most of the different categories of human rights violations which took place during the year and provides relevant examples to support its claims. However, despite its breadth, closer scrutiny reveals a number of structural faults, omissions and patterns of apparent bias which seriously undermine the report's overall objectivity and integrity.
The report contains a vast amount of information. However, proper analysis of its content is seriously hampered because of the way in which it is organized and presented. Related issues and events are discussed piecemeal and information is repeated in several different places. This may be attributable to the format outlined in the instructions distributed by the State Department to those drafting the Country Reports. In any case, the report's organization is confusing and lacks focus. For example, the Croatian government's discrimination against Muslims in the issuance of citizenship papers is discussed under the heading of Freedom of Religion, and again later under the heading of National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities. Also, the report refers to the human rights violations which took place during operations "Flash" and "Storm" throughout the document (and under numerous different subheadings), but the facts surrounding the two military offensives are presented on page 824, while the killings which occurred during and after the offensives are discussed earlier, on page 820 and the mass looting, destruction and burning of property carried out by the Croatian military is discussed on page 823. Killings are mentioned again on page 824 and burning and looting repeated for a second time on page 825. By scattering related information in this way and presenting necessary background information only after discussing the specific cases to which it applies, the report dilutes the significance and magnitude of the implications of the May and August offensives for the Serb population in the formerly occupied territories of Croatia. The report should therefore have focused on the two offensives and then described human rights violations within that context. To address the topic of human rights in Croatia in any other way is to fail to recognize the responsibility of these offensives for the
50
Croatia
sharp increase in human rights violations in Croatia in 1995. Furthermore, by presenting the information relating to human rights violations in that way the reader would more easily distinguish the forest from the trees. It would become clear that Operations "Flash" and "Storm" constituted an ethnic cleansing campaign — something the report appears deliberately to evade.
The case for the existence of a Croatian ethnic cleansing policy is a strong one, made stronger by statements like this from President Franjo Tudjman on September 4, 1995: "And those from abroad who condemn us for burning Serbian houses on the liberated territories of Croatia, let them remember the biblical principles from the Old Testament — eye for an eye, tooth for a tooth!" Further evidence confirming the existence of a Croatian ethnic cleansing campaign is obtained from the numerous international human rights monitors who witnessed its deadly aftermath. The European Community Monitoring Mission Special Report concluded that the "events in the five weeks following 'Operation Storm' suggest that the first aim of Croatia was to recover her territorial integrity and to re-establish communication routes between continental Croatia and Dalmatia. A second achievement of the operation has been the disappearance of a sizable and unwanted minority." Additionally, an anonymous European Union monitor was quoted in The New York Times as saying .. now they (the Croats) are carrying out a campaign of ethnic cleansing as effective, and often as brutal, as that carried out by the Serbs. Only the uniforms are different; the behavior is the same."
The argument is further strengthened by the Croatian government's systematic and blatant disregard for human rights and international law witnessed in the ICrajinan city of l<nin, on which over 2,000 shells rained down from Croatian positions during the first 24 hours of the August offensive, despite the fact that there were no reports of Serb soldiers positioned there. The absence of Serbian military positions within the city suggests that Croatian forces were deliberately targeting the predominantly Serb civilian population. "ICnin went from 35,000 people to 500 living and 500 dead," said Colonel Andrew Leslie, chief of staff of the U.N. force based in ICnin during the beginning of Operation Storm,
51
Critique 1995
in an interview with Time magazine. He concluded that "[t]he behavior of the Croatian military was appalling. It had to be government policy."
Despite the overwhelming evidence of a Croatian ethnic cleansing campaign, the report never refers to it as such. It describes the Croatian Army's killing of Serb civilians during and after the military operations, their massive looting and burning of Serb homes, their harassment and ill-treatment of Serbs and the failure to protect those who remained in the formerly Serb-controlled areas, and yet fails to conclude that these actions collectively comprised an ethnic cleansing campaign. The terms "ethnic cleansing" and "genocide" are never used to describe the apparent intentions and results of the campaign by the Croatian armed forces. The report does, however, accurately identify the activities of the army of the so-called Serbian Republic of ICrajina and the Serbian Army in Eastern Slavonia as ethnic cleansing campaigns. This apparent double standard and failure to assign equal blame for the same crimes places the report's objectivity in question and suggests a possible bias in favor of the Croatian government.
The report's possible bias is also implied in statements that are tainted vwth ambiguous or forgiving language. The paragraphs describing the human rights situation in Serb-controlled regions of Croatia are sharply worded, and the authors of the report do not mince words in attributing responsibility for violations. For example, it writes: "The police and military forces continued to use violence, intimidation and displacement against Croats and minorities to settle incoming Serb refugees and achieve their goal of ethnic cleansing in the areas they controlled." Unfortunately, the same candor is not always apparent in describing the actions (or lack thereof) of the Croatian authorities. Statements like: "The Government failed to establish adequate civil authority to control vengeful renegade arsonists, looters, and murderers who still operated with impunity in the reclaimed areas months after the offensive had ended" are misleading in so far as they imply that the Croatian government expended serious efforts in order to protect the property and lives of ethnic Serbs in the formerly Serb-occupied areas. To the contrary, the participation of Croatian active-duty personnel and especially professional "home guard" in the murder of innocent Serb
52
Croatia
civilians has been amply documented, as has their involvement in other heinous crimes, as described in Section 1 of the report.
The report's failure to recognize the evidence that Croatia's May and August offensives constituted ethnic cleansing is mirrored by its failure to identify the "soft" ethnic cleansing policy which Croatian authorities have employed in the remaining months of 1995. These subtler methods are meant to uphold the results of the ethnic cleansing campaign executed during the offensives and are directly at odds with the Croatian government's numerous verbal commitments to the safe return of those Serbs who fled during the war.
According to the report, by year's end, the Croatian government had charged only 11 individuals in connection with the 2,878 cases of arson that were reported to the United Nations. The report also claims that Croatian authorities have "clarified" 770 out of the 1,054 identified cases of looting (a 73% rate of "clarification") and brought charges against 1,260 people. Although this appears impressive, the ambiguity of what is meant by "clarified" brings into question whether or not justice has truly been served. By mid-1996, there had been no convictions with respect to looting, further weakening the government's claim that it is taking action. Moreover, by mid-1996 there had also been no convictions for killings that took place. Such a dismal record clearly gives grounds for questioning the sincerity of the Croatian government with respect to the apprehension and prosecution of criminals. When displaced Serbs who wish to return to their homes in Croatia learn that Croatian authorities have successfully investigated and charged individuals in so few cases, they will rightly believe that the Croatian government is not seriously concerned with assuring their safety, despite its public assertions that they are welcome to return.
Another form of deterrence is the apathy and passive consent demonstrated by members of Croatia's police force in the field. This trend was noted by the U.N. press officer in Knin who told The New York Times on September 30: "Our U.N. patrols are continuing to find bodies, usually of elderly Serbs, killed in their homes." Despite repeated requests by the U.N. to the Croatian authorities to intervene, they appear to make little effort, and usually do nothing. This claim is further supported by
53
Critique 1995
the Croatian Helsinki Committee (CHC), whose fact-finding missions have witnessed Croatian police officers ignoring gangs of looters as they drove past in cars filled with plunder. Such reports should come as no surprise in light of the fact that the CHC has also received reports of uniformed Croatian police and military personnel participating in the looting themselves. This passive consent by Croatian authorities with respect to vigilante activity was typical during the two offensives and especially in the months following.
The shortcomings of the judicial system, the passive consent of the police toward criminal elements, the Croatian government's apparent defiance of the War Crimes Tribunal at the Hague, along with the passage of the property law regarding Serb property, the suspension of constitutional safeguards for minorities and the bureaucratic obstacles to obtaining citizenship papers are all methods intended to erode Serb confidence and security, thus deterring them from ever returning to their homes in Croatia. They exacerbate an already difficult situation faced by those ethnic Serbs wishing to return and provide further evidence of the Croatian government's objective of creating an ethnically pure state.
As the report notes, a number of human rights groups operate in Croatia. However, there is no mention made of the Croatian government's attitude toward them. Despite the Croatian government's numerous pledges to cooperate with human rights organizations, it has been known to interfere with their work. For example, the Croatian Helsinki Committee for Human Rights was denied access to Croatian jails in order to investigate conditions — rumored to be dismal — following the death of an inmate under questionable circumstances. Government officials justified this denial of access on the grounds that the investigation would cause too much unrest among the prisoners and prison officials. The report also fails to mention how Croatian forces denied access to international monitors and U.N. troops wanting to investigate reported mass graves. The European Community Monitoring Mission Special Report stated that it is difficult to gain access to areas in order to investigate reports of killings. The mission attempted to investigate a rumor that Croatian army troops were Burning corpses at a church in ICnin. Their report states that they "were denied access by a
54
Croatia
large security presence but witnessed an excavator digging inside the cemetery along with medical personnel, two ambulances and a medium size refrigerator truck." The mission also reported that it visited mass graves in Gracac where it counted 71 graves. It stated that burials were continuing and that many Serbs are still missing.
In addition to interfering with the work of human rights organizations by denying them access to important evidence at sites where violations are reported to have occurred, the Croatian government also carried out a program of disinformation about the number of civilian casualties, missing persons, summary executions and the existence of the mass graves, thus further thwarting the efforts of human rights organizations.
The Croatian government continued to exert great pressure on the independent media. In 1995 there were numerous cases of aggressive government censorship, but two examples will suffice to describe accurately the government's attitude toward independent media. The first case involved the seizure and burning of hundreds of copies of The Feral Tribune (an independent and analytical newspaper with a satirical approach, critical of the government), by so-called "unidentified individuals" in various dties across Croatia. These supposedly unrelated incidents occurred simultaneously and the fact that reporters and cameramen from the government-controlled media were on hand to record the incidents, coupled with the fact that police officers at the scene failed to stop these criminal acts, suggests that the action was premeditated, that government officials were notified ahead of time and that they were not random independent occurrences.
The second incident involved the banning of Radio Labin, an independent radio station known for its critical views of the government. The Croatian government defended this act with arguments that were dubious at best. The government claimed that another group which supported the Bosnian branch of the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) should be allocated that particular frequency because of the higher quality of its work — although it had never been on the air and had no equipment. The officially controlled media acted as a conduit for attacks on behalf of the government against individual journalists and the independent media as a whole. Roman Latkovic, a journalist for Novi
55
Critique 1995
List, one of Croatia's two independent newspapers, was viciously attacked and categorized as an enemy of Croatia in a lengthy narrated report on the evening news on Croatian national television. This harangue was prompted by an article by Mr, Latkovic in which he encouraged Croatia's citizenry to take any and all democratic steps necessary to remove President Franjo Tudjman from power. The lengthy commentary was a reply by the television station in defense of President Tudjman and featured a picture of Mr. Latkovic for the entire duration of the narrative. Mr. Latkovic received 169 anonymous crank calls and death threats in the 24 hours following the broadcast and as a result was forced to flee the country out of concern for his physical safety. Individuals from NGOs were also the target of government attacks in the officially controlled media. For example, Ivan Zvonimir Cicak, the president of the Croatian Helsinki Committee for Human Rights, is regularly vilified in the state-controlled press and television as an enemy of the state. Like Mr. Latkovic, he has never been given the opportunity to speak in his own defense. This sort of one-sided polemic has unfortunately become the norm on Croatias only national news program, and the Croatian media in general has become a regular medium for ethnically based hate speech.
While some journalists and noteworthy individuals suffered attacks on their reputations via the government-controlled media, others were physically threatened. In what later became a well publicized event. Vice President Borislav Skegro put a gun to the head of Edita Vahovic, a journalist who had sharply criticized him a few days earlier in an article in Novi List. Ms. Vahovic pressed charges against Mr. Skegro, but the proceedings were dropped by the government due to his immunity during his tenure as a government official.
Croatia has committed itself to respect human rights in times of armed conflict as outlined in the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 it has ratified as well as in a number of OSCE documents. The Code of Conduct on Politico-Military Aspects of Security adopted as part of the Budapest Document at the OSCE Budapest Review Conference in late 1994 sets forth the standards by which the participating states are to abide in events of armed conflict. Croatia became a fully recognized member of the OSCE in 1994. Although the OSCE commitments are not
56
Croatia
legally binding, they nevertheless have political authority and constitute sources of obligations for the participating states.
Paragraph 33 of the Budapest Document states that:
[t]he participating States deeply deplore the series of flagrant violations of international humanitarian law that occurred in the OSCE region in the recent years and reaffirm their commitment to respect and ensure respect for general international instruments, including the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their additional protocols, to which they are a party.
Article 36 of the Code of Conduct states that: "Each participating State will ensure that any decision to assign its armed forces to an internal security mission is arrived at in conformity with constitutional procedures. Such decisions will prescribe the armed forces' missions, ensuring that they will be performed under the effective control of constitutionally established authorities and subject to the rule of law. If recourse to force cannot be avoided in performing internal security missions, each participating State will ensure that its use must be commensurate with the needs for enforcement. The armed forces will take due care to avoid injury to civilians or their proper^." (emphasis added) As the State Department amply documents, the Croatian government's behavior with respect to human rights in 1995 was not at all consistent with these commitments.
According to the November 7 report of the U.N. Special Rapporteur, civilian targets, including residential areas of Knin, were deliberately targeted by the Croatian army. Eyewitnesses reported that fleeing Serbs were shot dead by Croatian army soldiers during both military operations. International human rights groups and U.N. and European monitors have all concluded that killings of civilians during the actual fighting did take place without any military justification. According to the EU Monitoring Mission Special Report with respect to ICrajina, "newly killed Serbs were found at the rate of six per day." The most common murder method was shots to the back of the head or slit throats. Moreover, the government
57
Critique 1995
has done little or nothing to bring the perpetrators of these crimes to justice.
The Special Rapporteur's reports of July 5 and November 7 stated that serious violations of humanitarian law and human rights law occurred during and after both military operations The EU Monitoring Mission Special Report concluded that grave breaches of international law were committed by the Croatian authorities during and after Operation "Storm." Based on evidence gathered during a fact-finding mission to the Kjajina from August 17-19, the International Helsinki Federation for Human Rights and the Croatian Helsinki Committee concluded that "violations of OSCE human dimension commitments and the Code of Conduct on Politico-Military Aspects of Security appear to have been committed during and after Operation Storm. Violations of human rights and humanitarian law have also taken place and many allegations require further investigation."
The State Department report makes no mention of Croatia's human rights commitments under international law or the OSCE commitments it has pledged to uphold. The Croatian government's reluctance to fulfill its obligations is also evidenced by its failure to deliver all indicted war criminals within its borders to the Hague. According to reports, Ivica Rajic, a war criminal indicted by the war crimes tribunal in the Hague, has been living with his family in a government-ovmed flat at the Motel DujIovo in Split. Meanwhile, another indicted war criminal, Dario Kordic, is currently traveling without any restrictions throughout Croatia. This blatant disregard for the commitments it agreed to in the Dayton Peace Agreement is perhaps the most flagrant demonstration of the Croatian government's defiance of the international community and its refusal to respect fundamental human rights norms.
Croatian President Franjo Tudjman has expressed his views on the return of the Serbs to Croatia with great clarity. In an interview by Olga Ramljak of Slobodna Dalmacija, Tudjman said:
If you remember, in one of the agreements between myself,
Dobrica Cosic [then-president of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia] and Milosevic in Geneva in 1992, we agreed about
58
Croatia
tiie first steps towards returning to normal living conditions and pointed out that we would enable 'voluntary resettlement.' However, things took another course and what has happened has happened despite these people's personal tragedy, but the result will be positive because the role of the Serbs will be as small as it was during the time of the Turks.
By association, Tudjman's comments also speak volumes about the position of the current Croatian government. The position, in short, is one of ethnic intolerance and the promotion of an ethnically pure state. The persecution of ethnic minorities by civilians and the military and police, the resistance to reintegration, silencing of the media and other repressive measures are evidence of such a position. The omissions and choices of terminology in the State Department's report on Croatia make it appear at best ambivalent and at worse consciously biased. Furthermore, the report also casts a.»dark shadow over U.S. foreign policy toward Croatia and the former Yugoslavia as a whole, since its failure to recognize and strongly criticize the culpability of the Croatian government with respect to human rights violations could be considered by default an act of consent.
The escalation in the frequency and severity of human rights violations over the course of 1995 does not bode well for the development of a democratic state in Croatia governed by the rule of law. The Croatian government continues to violate the human rights of its citizens in the face of international pressure and condemnation. In addition to the report's weaknesses, which are mentioned above, it does not address the consequences of these actions for the future of pluralist democracy in Croatia, and thus diminishes the impact and significance of its findings.
59

V» • . ■
Pv ■

t:
