Haiti
T^he State Department's analysis attempts to strike a difficult J- balance: while noting the dramatic improvement in Haiti's human rights landscape in 1995, the report nonetheless points to several areas of continued concern, including events at the end of the year which suggest that Haiti's past legacy of rampant human rights abuses and systematic impunity continue to undermine attempts by President Aristide, and his successor René Préval, to foster both reconciliation and justice in a bitterly divided society. On the whole, the State Department report is accurate and presents a balanced overview, praising the Aristide government's progress while raising concerns over institutional weaknesses that continue to handicap the new Haitian National Police (HNP) and the moribund judicial system. In a few areas, however, the report skews this balance by glossing over highly politicized issues and dismissing the significance of abuses that are linked to deficiencies in the nation's judicial infrastructure. These inconsistencies in an otherwise detailed account of human rights conditions in Haiti at the end of 1995 seem an inevitable outcome of the politicized nature of current U.S. policy toward Haiti and the approaching presidential campaign in the United States.
Until very recently, the Haitian state was little more than an instrument of extortion. Given this legacy, it is not surprising that in most cases, the state's miserable judicial infrastructure shares much of the blame for the continued existence of human rights abuses. A general lack of standardized legal records, the existence of vague and inconsistent charging procedures and the notable shortage of judges, legal texts and legal representation for most Haitians all help to explain why incidents of prolonged arbitrary detention remain common. "Haitian justice lacks everything: resources, competent personnel, independence, stature and trust," according to the National Coalition for Haitian Rights (NCHR). At the same time, however, this appalling lack of infrastructure provides a convenient excuse — a defense that corrupt or simply uninterested public officials are often eager to exploit as a justification for the continued existence of abuses. The truth is actually more complex: a lack of resources and training explains some, but not all of the abuses.
85
Critique 1995
Improvements in management and infrastructure within the Justice Ministry and the HNP, for example, would clearly alleviate many of the strains which currently provide an opportunity for corrupt individuals to manipulate the system. Nonetheless, improvements in infrastructure alone will not prevent future abuses, and the State Department's failure to acknowledge this point fully is perhaps the most significant deficiency in its 1995 report.
Corrupt elements within the HNP, as well as corrupt and incompetent judicial officials and rogue elements in the new prison agency (National Penitentiary Administration, APENA), must be removed from office and sanctioned. Accountability must become the rule rather than the exception.
As the State Department notes, 1995 marked the first time that Haiti was governed for a full year by a democratically elected president. The presence of democratic institutions, coupled with President Aristide's efforts to dismantle the military and an abusive systeiji of rural warlords, known as section chiefs {chefs de section), resulted in a dramatic improvement in human rights conditions early in the year. By September, however, as the fourth anniversary of the 1991 coup which overthrew the democratically elected government of President Aristide approached, Haitian human rights groups began condemning the systematic failure of the justice system to prosecute cases dating back to the coup period. By the end of the year, the government had not successfully prosecuted a single member of the Hairian armed forces. Only a handful of cases from the coup period have gone forward at all, the most famous of which was the case against Gérard Gustave, an attaché known as Zimbabwe, who was sentenced to life at hard labor for participating in the 1993 killing of Antoine Izméry, a prominent Aristide supporter. In other coup-related cases, defendants have been sentenced in absentia for participating in the murders of prominent Aristide supporters, a practice which the Lawyers Committee joins other human rights organizations in condemning. Although the State Department mentions the use of in absentia hearings, the report fails to express concern at the government's reliance on such proceedings. Moreover, in at least one of the in absentia cases, a conviction was obtained with scant evidence
86
Haiti
and without any meaningful judicial inquiry into the allegations. In another, many observers believed that the accused could have been located, apprehended and brought to face trial had local officials been willing to make a serious effort.
This frustration with the state's failure to address human rights abuses from the coup period has been exacerbated by concerns within the Haitian human rights community regarding the Truth and Justice Commission {Commission Nationale de Vérité et de Justice), the body President Aristide created to investigate coup-related abuses and to recommend appropriate mechanisms for compensating victims. Local organizations have criticized the lack of transparency in the commission's work and the atmosphere of secrecy that has surrounded its final report. Unfortunately, the State Department fails to raise these concerns, which, justified or not, are likely to frustrate the government's ability to implement the Truth Commission's final recommendations. Since a number of problems, some self-inflicted', prevented the commission from launching any major field investigations before July, the commission's investigative work was conducted in a remarkably short period of time, and despite the impressive number of cases that the commission ultimately reviewed, the compressed time frame raises questions regarding the comprehensive nature of the report.
Unfortunately, as this publication was going to press in July 1996, the government still had not publicly released the Truth Commission's full report. If the government does, as it has intimated, establish a compensation system based on recommendations contained in the report, compensation must not be limited to those who are named in the report, as many Haitians did not have an opportunity to file a complaint. The commission's records, moreover, should be preserved in a secure location, a concern the State Department fails to raise and one which the Haitian government has failed to consider.
This perception of impunity, coupled with structural weaknesses in both the police and judicial systems, contributed to many of the troubling incidents that occurred throughout the year. The most immediate — and the most deadly — ramification of the common perception that the judicial system is completely incapable of handling even minor cases, let
87
Critique 1995
alone the politically charged cases from the coup period, was the alarming number of street lynchings, and other forms of popular justice, that took place throughout the country. The State Department cites 100 instances of mob justice that resulted in death. The frequency of such incidents declined throughout the year {U.N. reports indicate that 45 people were stoned or beaten to death by crowds in March, compared to 18 in July) but the issue remained a major concern.
While the Haitian government condemned instances of popular justice in general terms. President Aristide did not personally intervene in a strong manner to denounce these acts. Moreover, he shares at least some of the responsibility for the instability, and the increase in mob violence, that occurred in November. During a funeral for a slain parliamentarian, Aristide delivered an impassioned eulogy in which he called on citizens to take the law into their ovm hands and to assist the police in a disarmament campaign. The report takes note of this disturbing incident but fails to emphasize its significance. In contrast. Human Rights Watch and NCHR, in an open letter to President Aristide, noted with great alarm that his speech on November 7 encouraged civilian mobs to discard procedural protections, including the Haitian Constitution's guarantee of a fair trial, and that the president's words led to vigilante killings in at least eight cases. In a report to the U.N. General Assembly, Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali also noted that the disturbances following Aristide's speech served to highlight the "underlying fragility of the situation" in Haiti.
In a section of the report with the most significant political ramifications for the United States, the State Department concludes that there were more than 20 execution-style murders between February and November 1995 in which robbery did not appear to be a motive. In many, although not all of the cases, the victims were linked to the former military government. One of the exceptions involved the execution of Jean Hubert Feuille, a pro-Aristide member of parliament and cousin of President Aristide. Surprisingly, in that particular case, the report suggests that theft may have been a motive in the slaying, despite credible reports, including statements by another deputy who was also wounded in the attack, that discount robbery as a likely motive.
Haiti
Unfortunately, investigations into all of these killings have been conducted in a politically charged climate, with Republican lawmakers and some Clinton administration officials claiming that the Aristide government has sought to impede the investigations. The report notes, for example, that the Aristide government, after requesting FBI assistance in investigating the murder of Mireille Durocher-Bertin, an advocate of the military regime, sought to impede the operation by failing to cooperate with the FBI. Despite these assertions, no credible evidence links government agents to any of the killings. U.S. officials close to the investigation have in fact said privately that the Haitian investigative team's performance compares favorably with that of the FBI. The U.Ny Organization of American States International Mission in Haiti (MICIVIH) has simply concluded that "[i]t has not been possible to determine links between the different cases other than by profession or business association. Nor have the motives been established. No evidence has emerged so far to link the killings to state agents. Judicial investigations into the killings have made little progress."
The report is similarly reserved in its evaluation of the HNP. It notes that there were at least three incidents involving deadly use of force by members of the HNP. However, between July 1995 and the end of January 1996, MICIVIH reported that members of the HNP were responsible for at least nine killings, 20 non-fatal shootings, seven incidents of cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment, and 27 incidents of abuse of authority. These U.N. figures are also somewhat misleading, however, as the number of fatal shootings by members of the HNP decreased in relative terms throughout the year due to a corresponding increase in the size of the force as successive classes graduated from a U.S.-supported training program. In addition to the excessive use of force, a U.N. report has also noted that repeated breaches of basic disciplinary codes have raised concerns over general discipline within the new force. Common disciplinary breaches that have been attributed to members of the new force include: failure to wear uniforms; failure to identify police vehicles as such; the possession and use of firearms while off duty in violation of regulations; and reliance on inappropriate methods of crowd control.
89
Critique 1995
In general, the State Department should have presented a more accurate picture of these abuses, many of which have been attributed to lack of experience and the relative youth of the police force. In many respects, the HNP represents the key to stability in Haiti. If the HNP acquires an abusive reputation, particularly in Haiti's volatile slums, such as Cité Soleil, or if corrupt members of the force squander the positive reputation of the new force, instability will quickly replace the relative calm of the past year. By clouding the concerns that have been raised over the performance and the reputation of the force, the report evades an important and useful discussion of pitfalls that could emerge in the coming months.
Unfortunately, the mechanisms that the Aristide government created to allow Haitian citizens to file complaints against members of the HNP also seem weak, and the report's statement that the HNP has already concluded 12 internal disciplinary actions, with 20 more investigations pending, serves to obfuscate the institutional weaknesses that plague the Office of the Inspector General, the department responsible for internal investigations. A U.N. report indicates that disciplinary measures for transgressions by individual police agents have not been forthcoming, warning that "the prosecution system has been slow to respond in establishing individual responsibility for instances of death or serious injury at the hands of the police," and that public confidence in the HNP "has suffered as a result."
The report properly raises concerns over longstanding provisions in Haitian law that serve to limit criminal court sessions for major criminal offenses to two sessions per year and two weeks per session. With such a limited trial calendar, periods of prolonged detention are common in most criminal cases. The report fails to note the true scope of the problem: for instance, in Gonaïves there has not been a single criminal court session since 1991. While deficiencies associated with the administration of justice in Gonaïves may be more exaggerated than in other regions of the country, in general terms, the problems there are sadly emblematic. The first criminal court session in Gonaïves in four years, which, after several postponements, was scheduled to take place in December, had to be postponed due to strikes by local justices of the
90
Haiti
peace and court clerks {greffiers), many of whom had not been paid in months. Unfortunately, as a U.S. survey of Haiti's judicial infrastructure confirmed, this was not an isolated incident; justices of the peace in many regions of the country were not being paid, despite the announcement of a nationwide increase in judicial salaries in an effort to combat corruption. By ignoring this issue, the report seems to dismiss the rather significant impact of the ministry's repeated failure to meet its payroll. Unfortunately, management problems in Port-au-Prince are bringing justice to a halt in areas such as Gonaïves and encouraging corruption — an endemic problem in the Haitian judiciary — throughout most of the rest of the country.
The report accurately notes that the number of arbitrary arrests decreased significantly in 1995. However, such arrests are still far too common. In October, for example, MICIVIH reported that a woman was arrested in place of her 13 year-old son. Fortunately, MICIVIH intervened in this and other similar cases, including one in which MICIVIH observers discovered that no charges were pending against a child in detention. It is not surprising, however, that such arbitrary arrests are still common in a country where the police are generally unable or unwilling to conduct meaningful investigations. Due to the near total lack of police investigations, many arrests are still based entirely on public denunciations {clameur publique), a fact the report notes without appropriate alarm. In a detailed report entitled "Human Rights After President Aristide's Return," Human Rights Watch and NCHR note that in July 1995, a murder trial in Mirebalais led to two convictions, both of which were based entirely on public denunciations and statements by the victim's relatives. Neither the police nor the investigating judge in the case presented any information obtained through an independent police investigation. The report highlights another troubling case in which Captain Patrick Bastien and Dieumeitre Lucas were arrested in February for plotting against the state. The warrant authorizing the arrest of the two men contained no specific allegations and no reference to dates or specific acts, and failed to identify the specific section of the penal code which the men were alleged to have violated. The two were released, on a provisional basis in September, seven months after their arrest.
91
Critique 1995
Declaring October "a month of justice," the public prosecutor in Jacmel organized a number of trials for coup-related offenses that were based on similar public denunciations. In at least four of the trials, complaints filed by civilian parties were similar, accusing former members of the Front for the Advancement and Progress of Haiti (FRAPH), a paramilitary organization that terrorized Haitian citizens with impunity during the coup period, of menacing actions. The four complaints failed to specify exact dates and they lacked even basic descriptions of particularized incidents of intimidation or persecution. Moreover, due to the politicized nature of justice in Jacmel, the public prosecutor, who has since been replaced by the Justice Ministry, regularly traveled with his own private bodyguards, many of whom were routinely outfitted in dark sunglasses, civilian clothes and pistols, in a style reminiscent of Haiti's former attaches.
As the State Department indicates, credible reports of arbitrary detentions decreased in 1995, but pre-trial detention is still being used improperly and legal time-limits for such detention are regularly exceeded. Under Article 26 of the Haitian Constitution, no individual may be incarcerated for more than 48 hours without being brought before a judge for an arraignment. The report accurately notes that "an overburdened, often corrupt, and inadequate judicial system regularly detained suspects well beyond the 48 hours permitted for arraignment." While this statement is clearly accurate, the report fails to note that compliance with this rule continued to improve dramatically throughout the year. By December, it appeared that the 48 hour time-limit was being honored in a majority of cases in Port-au-Prince. A much more significant concern is that following arraignment, those who have been indicted often languish in detention with no indication of when they will be tried. In a report to the U.N. General Assembly, Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali emphasized this significant failing in the system, noting that the vast majority of individuals in detention have not been tried and that many do not understand why they are being held.
The report recognizes that the Ministry of Justice has made a "sincere effort to correct this failure," but that 87% of the inmates in the National Penitentiary were still in pre-trial detention in September. Citing the
92
Haiti
same survey, the Secretary-General has noted that near the end of the year, 1,504 out of a total of 1,703 detainees were awaiting trial and that sentences had only been handed down in 199 cases. The report goes on to note that the Ministry of Justice has established a project through which law students assist detainees in preparing their cases. Since Haiti lacks a system of public defenders, this is a welcome innovation. The report should have noted, however, that the program, and others like it which are financed by a variety of donors, while praiseworthy, has been operating on too small of a scale to have a significant impact. The director of one of the prison projects estimated that its efforts secured the release of approximately 35 prisoners per week from the National Penitentiary in Port-au-Prince, but that at the same time approximately 135 new prisoners were brought in each week.
These statistics also reveal the significant increase that has occurred in the prison population. U.N. estimates suggest that there was a 40% increase in the nation's prison population between June and November. Worth mention is that one contributing factor in the escalating prison population is the continued detention of Haitians for offenses that are not criminalized under Haitian law, such as indebtedness and, in at least one case, homosexual relations.
The report does a good job of scrutinizing the devastating conditions that exist in prisons throughout the country, noting, for example, that in a two week period at the end of the year, nine prisoners died from malnutrition. What the report fails to note is that prison conditions have actually improved dramatically — which should emphasize how truly critical conditions were at the beginning of the year, rather than suggesting that conditions are now acceptable. Unfortunately, conditions still do not approach the standards outlined in the U.N. Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. Nonetheless, as Human Rights Watch and others have noted, wilfully cruel and inhuman treatment of prisoners became the exception rather than the rule in 1995.
In general, the report provides an accurate assessment of the devastating economic conditions in the country. As it recognizes, the minimum wage will generally support a single worker at a subsistence level but "cannot adequately support additional family members." In
93
Critique 1995
fact, several studies suggest that the average worker attempts to support four or five additional family members on this salary.
Though abject poverty plagues the vast majority of Haitians, conditions for impoverished women and children are materially worse. The report, while noting discrimination that has long afflicted rural Haitian women, including the de facto rationing of jobs and education to the detriment of women, fails to note the consequences of poverty — exacerbated by years of bitter economic and political turmoil — on the health of the nation's women and children. Estimates suggest that 35-40% of all pregnant women have at least one sexually transmitted disease. In cities, between seven and ten percent of pregnant women have tested positive for HIV, and the percentage is estimated to be even higher in slums such as Cité Soleil. Chronic malnutrition and anaemia in women result in low birth rates for children, and up to one-quarter of all children suffer from malnutrition in childhood. Nine women are estimated to die in childbirth for every 2,000 live births, one of the highest rates in the world. A U.N. survey on AIDS in Haiti, moreover, recently found that 29% of female respondents stated that their first sexual encounter had not been consensual.
In addition to omitting these grim statistics, the report fails to note that many women have suffered disproportionately in the aftermath of the coup. During the three years of military rule, men were forced into hiding or killed in greater numbers, and, as a result, many women are now responsible for raising families on their own. In addition, during the military's three years in power, women were subjected by military or paramilitary forces to gross human rights violations, including widespread and systematic incidents of rape. The mental and physical consequences of this systematic campaign — such as a higher incidence of sexually transmitted disease, infection, pregnancy, abortion, HIV infection and social stigmatization — have only recently become apparent. The justice system's failure to prosecute rape cases from this period simply adds to the clearly unjustified perception that rape is in some way a less significant category of human rights violation. Nonetheless, throughout 1995, complaints relating to incidents of rape during the coup period were referred by judicial officials to the Truth Commission or the
94
Haiti
Ministry of Women's Rights and Status; unfortunately, neither of these agencies is empowered to initiate formal judicial proceedings.
The report also fails to note that women, particularly women who have never had children, are still occasionally accused of witchcraft and subjected to torture and murder at the hands of angry mobs. An incident in Port-au-Prince in December is sadly typical of similar incidents that have occurred throughout the country. On December 7, two women, one aged 69 and the other 23, were beaten and then burned to death, following accusations that the older of the two women had killed a neighborhood child through witchcraft. The child reportedly died from a high fever and vomiting earlier in the day.
The report's failure to raise these issues under the section devoted to the human rights of women raises questions about the State Department's commitment to conducting a thorough, gender-specific examination of rights for each country chapter in its annual survey. The report's pro forma, two-paragraph analysis of the rights of at least one half of Haitian society stands in contrast to the careful attention afforded to nearly every other subject in the report. The State Department must take this section more seriously in the future, as it is a distinctly important element of any review of general human rights conditions in the country.
The section on children, in contrast, is more thorough, although it fails to mention a disturbing riot at the children's detention faciUty at Fort National on November 28 in which at least 20 minors were subjected to cruel and inhumane treatment, including beatings, by four APENA guards. The report does mention a similar incident that took place at Fort National in June under the heading of "Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment." The report's discussion of the practice of selling rural children into forced servitude in the cities is well presented and recognizes that the practice has increased in recent years as economic conditions have continued to deteriorate.
Unfortunately, the report does not mention the unaccompanied minors who were forcibly returned to Haiti from the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo Bay in 1995. Disturbing reports indicate that some of these minors, many of whom lost their relatives at sea while fleeing the repressive military government, have been placed with distant relatives in
95
Critique 1995
unsatisfactory or abusive homes, and that a number of the children may actually be living on the street. Since informal surveys conducted by MICIVIH suggest that at least 30% of all of the children in detention at Fort National are street children, some of these repatriated minors seem destined to end up in detention. Given the financial and logistical resources at the disposal of the U.S. Embassy, embassy personnel should undertake a survey of the unaccompanied minors who were repatriated from Guantanamo Bay before completing next year's human rights report, since U.S. officials are largely responsible for the placement and welfare of these children.
Haiti presents a difficult challenge for the State Department and other human rights observers. The human rights situation is immeasurably better than it was in prior years. Many of the abuses reflect a legacy that under the best of circumstances will require years to eradicate. The Aristide and Priva! governments, despite their missteps, have made great strides toward ensuring respect for human rights, in part due to assistance from the United Nations, the United States, Canada and other donor nations. However, the problems that exist must be confronted squarely, despite the domestic political pitfalls. For the first time in decades, Haiti has a government that is receptive to the notion of institutional improvements in human rights. More complete reporting can only serve to enhance the prospects for meaningful progress at a critical moment in Haiti's history.
96
