Indonesia
'he State Department should be credited with producing a mostly thorough and accurate picture of human rights violations in Indonesia in 1995. The report's introduction clearly identifies important patterns, noting that elements of the armed forces continue to be responsible for the most serious human rights abuses. The introduction also highlights the pattern of increasing violations against dissidents in East Timor, Irian Jaya and Aceh. In several instances, the report draws the important distinction between changes in official policy and actual practice. For example, in its description of the welcome step by the government to lift the "ET" (ex-Tapol) stamp found on the identity cards of former political prisoners, the report notes that there has been no promise that their civil and political rights would be restored.
However, despite its overall quality, the repetition of omissions and weaknesses from previous years' reports is disheartening. These include a reluctance to express criticism in the State Department's own voice, understatement of military involvement, some instances of excessive credence given to government claims or estimates, and understatements or omissions that provide a more favorable impression of the government than the facts warrant. Some important incidents were omitted altogether, perhaps in the attempt to avoid a "laundry list" of violations. The weakest sections of the report concern indigenous peoples, acceptable conditions of work and freedom of religion.
The report continues to mention human rights violations in the context of reports from other sources, rather than using its own voice, especially in the areas of extrajudicial executions, disappearances and torture. This tendency is particularly pronounced in the introduction, even where the report uses its own voice in citing security forces in the relevant section. Where the State Department has numerous sources and reports that it characterizes as knowledgeable, credible and detailed — as it does in discussing the killings of civilians without justification in Aceh and Irian Jaya — it seems reasonable to make an assessment of whether security forces committed these acts. For example, the killings in Irian Jaya were reported by a foreign NGO and then confirmed by investigations by the Catholic Church in that province and by the
103
Critique 1995
National Commission on Human Rights {Komisi Nasional Hak Azasi Manusia, or Komnas HAM). Yet these killings are still referred to as having "reportedly" taken place, or as having occurred "according to credible, detailed reports" — language that is repeated throughout. However, elsewhere in the report it notes outright that tensions in that area "led to a crackdown by government security forces, resulting in the deaths of civilians."
The 1994 edition of the Critique noted a reluctance to mention military involvement in particular cases, despite general statements that the armed forces are responsible for most human rights violations. That trend continues in 1995, in some cases repeating the same omissions as the previous year's report. In a discussion of the military role in labor disputes, the report makes passing mention of the 1994 conviction of a soldier in the Marsinah murder case, in which a young female labor activist was abducted and murdered in 1993 following a strike at her factory. The report refers only to the fact that a soldier was convicted in the case. It fails to mention either that it was only the court-martial of one low-ranking officer for procedural violations or that, based on a report by the Legal Aid Foundation, there is a strong possibility that Marsinah was killed at the district military command and that responsibility lay with high-ranldng military authorities. In its discussion of the military's response to human rights violations, the report's section on extrajudicial killings conflates the issue of excessive force by police with that of politically-motivated extrajudicial killings. Military prosecutions deserve a separate discussion.
Military involvement is again understated in the description of the H1<BP case, a complicated case in which two factions — one of them backed by the government — have been fighting for control of the largest Protestant church in Indonesia, the Huria Kristen Batak Protestant. The report mentions only that the authorities have treated violence by the two sides differently, but omits that the military has played an active role in intimidation and violence as well.
The report does mention the activities of the hooded, vigilante "ninja" gangs that stoned and burned homes and attacked residents in Dili, East Timor in February 1995. However, it omits reports that these gangs
104
Indonesia
primarily targeted East Timorese pro-independence activists; allegations that members of the military observed but made no effort to stop some of the gangs' attacks; and that security forces reportedly hired these gangs to intimidate activists. Amnesty International has also raised concerns that the "ninja attacks," and retaliations against them, were used not only to intimidate but also as a pretext for subsequent arrests of those opposed to Indonesia's presence in East Timor. In addition, while noting the waves of arbitrary arrest and detention in January, and again in October and November 1995, it omits the round-up of 30 East Timorese in March, supposedly for pro-independence activities, and the refusal of authorities to release information about their detention for several days. The mention of only certain waves of arbitrary arrests and the omission of the security forces' likely involvement in the "ninja" attacks prevents the report from adequately characterizing the nearly constant climate of fear for dissidents in East Timor in 1995.
In addition, the report contains, instances of understatement, overstatement, incomplete reporting and omission. While many of these inaccuracies are subtle, it is a cause of concern that they are consistently favorable to the government at the expense of dissidents, indicating either an incomplete grasp of the facts or a general unwillingness to criticize the government. The level of caution in accepting claims by nongovernment sources is not applied in all cases to government claims and estimates.
For example, the discussion of the treatment of labor activists is understated, with no references to two arrests of members of the independent labor union SBSI and continued inadequate attention to labor activists not associated with SBSI. Neti, an SBSI activist, was arrested in November with four others after attending a political trial in Jakarta, while Roliati Harefa, SBSI Vice Chair of Binjai {North Sumatra) Branch, was arrested at Binjai police station on December 30. She had gone to the police station to complain that her supervisor had assaulted her twice after she protested that she had been unfairly dismissed. While the report mentions the SBSI members tried and sentenced in connection with the labor demonstrations in Medan in 1994, it fails, as it did last year, to mention labor activists operating outside SBSI. Three activists
105
Critique 1995
were sentenced in Medan in 1994 and served out tlieir sentences in 1995. These are significant as indications of the government's general attitude toward any labor activity, and not just that of SBSI, and because local activists unaffiliated with a national organization are less visible nationally and internationally and may be more vulnerable to harassment and unfair trials.
In the section on freedom of religion, the report echoes language from previous years, despite evidence of growing religious intolerance by the government, which, for example, is increasingly using blasphemy charges against perceived opponents. The government-sponsored Association of Muslim Intellectuals (ICMI), headed by Suharto protégé B.J. Habibie, deserves mention as an example of the government's increasing promotion of Islam as an instrument in maintaining power. It is likely that the creation of ICMI facilitated the Islamic backlash noted in the report.
The section on indigenous peoples, an extremely important issue in Indonesia, is inadequate. While there is a reference to the problems faced by indigenous inhabitants in the area of the Freeport McMoRan mine, the larger context of land tenure is not addressed. Lacking individual titles, the ancestral lands of indigenous peoples, such as the Dayak of Kalimantan, and the many ethno-linguistic groups in Irian Jaya, are considered state land, and are frequently expropriated for both private and public projects. These include mining, logging, plantation agriculture and the transmigration of settlers from other islands. These in turn lead to conflicts between settlers and indigenous inhabitants of the affected areas, and to human rights abuses such as intimidation, harassment and arbitrary arrest by security forces. These problems are only likely to increase in coming years. Also, a crucial explanation in the 1994 report has been deleted; it noted that according to some reports in Irian Jaya, workers were forced into debt and then indentured to companies. Without that explanation, the report' s comment that workers are "being separated from their traditional economy" no longer seems so serious.
The discussion of freedom of the press is good but omits several instances of violence directed at journalists, and understates the importance of government moves to control journalists. For example, in January a journalist from the weekly Genta in Pekanbaru, Riau, was
106
Indonesia
beaten unconscious by unknown assailants after writing a story about timber thefts involving businessmen and Department of Forestry officials. In August, Ricky Pitoy Tafuama, a reporter for the leading daily Kompas, was beaten by police in Bandung while reporting on a land dispute. The report notes that the government-controlled Association of Indonesian Journalists (PWI) expelled 13 members of the Alliance of Independent Journalists {Aliansi Jumalis Independen: AJI) which had been formed by journalists after press bans in 1994, and also notes that the government threatened publishers with sanctions if they employed journalists not associated with PWI. While perhaps implied, the report should have stated outright that expelled journalists lost their jobs. The Committee to Protect journalists estimates that some 80 journalists have lost their jobs as a result of sanctions and press closings, undoubtedly an important means of increasing self-censorship.
According to the report, the government allowed the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) access to prisoners in various parts of Indonesia, including Aceh and East Timor. The report's section on NGOs in Indonesia mentions only vaguely that the ICRC experienced difficulties in East Timor. It makes no mention of the government's refusals and delays in allowing prisoner visits by the ICRC, including visits to Martinho Pereira, the alleged ringleader of the Jakarta embassy protests by East Timorese in December 1995. This practice of haphazard denial of ICRC visits has continued into the early months of 1996, with the denial of ICRC access to 15 East Timorese arrested in Jakarta on January 12. In addition, the report fails to mention that, according to Amnesty International, ICRC visits in East Timor are ineffective at stopping torture before or after the visits, and that officials sometimes pressure a detainee not to describe their treatment to the ICRC or even to accept ICRC visits at all.
At the same time as the report understates the degree of repression, it overstates some measures of progress. While. noting some of its limitations, the report seems to overstate the increasing independence of the National Commission on Human Rights, and its willingness to criticize the government. Komnas HAM continues to act with greater independence than was predicted for the government-sponsored
107
Critique 1995
commission and has become an important tool for protecting human rights. However, it is still constrained by its weak legal standing, unclear mandate and occasional interference from the military. While it did, as noted in the report, question the military and charge it with abuses in the killings of six civilians in Liquisa, East Timor, Komnas HAM did not issue its report on the killings to the public, except in the form of a three-page press release. Although Komnas HAM found that the soldiers responsible for the Liquisa killings had also tortured their victims, the court-martial that tried the soldiers did not charge them mth torture, indicating the limited effect of a body with no enforcement powers.
The report accurately recognizes some signs of nascent judicial independence, particularly in the successful suit brought by the employees of the banned periodical Tempo against the Minister of Information for revolding its publication license. But the limits of that decision and the overall context of a year of political trials indicates that the judicial branch is still far from independent. While a Jakarta administrative court found that both the banning of Tempo and the 1984 press law on which it was based was unlawful, the administrative court has little actual influence.
Regarding evidence of continued judicial improprieties, the report does not note the unfairness of the trial of two AJI members and an office assistant for charges relating to criticisms of the government. Unfair aspects included the inadequacy of the evidence, the inappropriateness of the charges, the intimidating military and intelligence presence in the courtroom, and the violations of criminal procedure. The findings for Tempo (which was reversed in any event by the Supreme Court in June 1996) and against the AJI in the same year show that despite the positive indications of an independent judiciary, there has been little genuine progress in strengthening the judiciary's independence on sensitive press issues. Similarly, the investigation of parliamentarian Sri Bintang Pamungkas following demonstrations against Suharto in Germany was marked by serious violations of criminal procedure.
The tendency toward overstatement or excessive credence in government claims is well exemplified by the discussion of labor. The report provides a thorough and fairly accurate description that
108
Indonesia
nonetheless goes too far in accepting government claims and neglects the issue of working conditions. The discussion on labor also deserves special attention due to its relevance to the decision by the office of the U.S. Trade Representative regarding the continuation of Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) trade status for Indonesia, a decision that has been suspended but not resolved.
The 1994 State Department report noted that following a change in regulations that year to allow the formation of plant-level unions that could carry out collective bargaining agreements, 192 such associations had formed by the end of the year, although only one had concluded a collective bargaining agreement with management. The 1995 report accepts uncritically the figure that 900 plant-level unions had been formed by December, a figure that some labor organizations find unlikely. The fact that only 24 collective bargaining agreements were reached belies the claim of such a large number of plant-level unions. In addition, many of those that have been formed are thought to be unions on paper only, "yellow unions" set up by the Ministry of Manpower and management with little or no worker participation. The report should include a strong caveat that the credibility of these unions is dubious.
Likewise, the observation that the government-sponsored union SPSI has carried out a process of decentralization into 13 independent unions should have put the word "independent" in quotation marks, and the government role in these official unions should be made more explicit. For example, the sectoral unions were to have the power to collect membership dues directly; instead all dues go to the Ministry of Manpower for distribution, so the 13 so-called independent unions are in reality totally dependent on the government. While the report accurately details the role of government functionaries in the SPSI leadership, the statement that the government has "a great deal of influence" is an understatement. In fact, the government controls SPSI.
The capacity for and understanding of collective bargaining in Indonesia may be overstated as well, putting the statistics cited into question. Instructions for those drafting the Countiy Reports note that for "genuine collective bargaining to exist the most directly affected workers should be able to participate in the negotiations or to ratify/reject
109
Critique 1995
agreements." However, these conditions are most likely not present in many of the collective bargaining agreements cited by government figures. The report also notes a decrease in labor unrest and assumes that it was due to an increased level and enforcement of the minimum wage. In fact, strikes continued to be frequent, and government efforts may have increased rather than decreased unrest in the short term due to growing worker awareness and confidence in demanding a fair wage.
The report notes incorrectly that military intervention in labor matters has been prohibited; rather only one of the two regulations authorizing such intervention has been revoked. The other regulation, authorizing intervention in labor disputes in the name of internal security, remains on the books. The non-governmental Legal Aid Foundation documented some 150 instances of such intervention in 1995.
The report also gives inadequate attention to working conditions. Compulsory overtime and mistreatment of the largely female work force employed in the manufacture of light exports, such as garments and footwear, are common. In addition, employers often respond to increases in the minimum wage by reducing benefits such as insurance and allowances for food and transport. The worst conditions continue to be in light export manufacturing, extractive industries and plantation agriculture — all of which merit special attention in the 1996 State Department report.
As in previous years, the report contains references to the restrictions placed on citizens formerly associated with communist organizations, but fails to describe the continued use of the supposed communist threat to justify the government's "security approach." Despite the welcome release of three long-term prisoners and the removal of the ET stamp from identification cards, government officials have shown that they have no wish to abandon the communist threat as a useful tool in the suppression of dissent. In February, Minister of Defense and Security Edi Sudradjat maintained that the recent discovery of politicians in the Indonesian Democratic Party (PDI) with communist ties, (an unfounded allegation that had forced the head of the West Java chapter to step down in 1994), showed that government fears of a communist comeback were well-
110
Indonesia
founded. In January, students in Central Java pushing for fewer speech restrictions on campus were accused of being the sons and daughters of communists by the deputy head of a parliamentary commission, Soerjo Handjono. In June, two officials in Bengkulu, Sumatra, reportedly intimidated thousands of people into paying for health cards that should have been free by threatening them with investigation for communist ties. In a justification for censorship, in April, a senior official in the ruling Golkar party, warned a seminar that frustrated communists could use literature for revenge. Suharto's government has banned some 2,000 books.
The report omits some other important issues and examples. As in last year's report, there is no reference to allegations of coercion in family planning, despite reports (including one by the Lawyers Committee) of declining but persistent human rights problems in the family planning program. Whereas earlier State Department instructions specifically directed that this issue be addressed, the most recent revisions appear to have dropped this requirement.
The discussion of academic freedom should be strengthened in future reports. In addition to the freedom of academic discussion, the report should include issues of pressure on faculty to join the ruling Golkar party, government interference in the selection of university rectors, the use of student militias (Menwa) and censorship of student newspapers as a means of stifling dissent. An important example has been omitted as welL Prominent government critic Dr. George Aditjondro, who in 1995 was charged with insulting a government body in a lecture the previous year, has opted to stay in Australia rather than return to face what he considers will be an unfair political trial.
As in past years, the report makes inadequate reference to U.N. instruments and findings. There is a passing reference to the visit by the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights to Jakarta and East Timor, but no reference to the content of discussions or to the recommendations made by previous thematic rapporteurs regarding torture and extrajudicial execution. The High Commissioner, José Ayala-Lasso, requested that the government implement the rapporteurs' recommendations and consider the repeal of the anti-subversion law; the reduction of troops in East
111
Critique 1995
Timor; and clemency for all those civilians convicted for publicly expressing political dissent or revealing facts relating to the Dili Massacre and other more recent demonstrations. Also deserving of mention is the campaign by the National Commission on Human Rights and a coalition of Indonesian NGOs to secure ratification by the Indonesian government of the Convention on Torture, which it signed years ago.
The report mentions the matter of Sri Bintang Pamungkas, an outspoken parhamentarian suspended by his party and then brought up on charges relating to protests that greeted Suharto's visit to Germany in April 1995.- It notes that Mr. Bintang was banned from traveling and was facing charges at the end of 1995 (he has since been sentenced to two years and 10 months in prison), but does not mention that two other prominent government critics — journalist Goenawan Mohamad and student activist Yeni Rosa Damayanti — were also publicly accused of instigating the protests in Germany. Following these demonstrations, the Indonesian government requested permission to collect evidence in Germany, a request that was rejected by Germany as "unreasonable." This attempt to reduce freedom of expression outside Indonesia is reminiscent of 1994 attempts to shut down seminars on East Timor in the Philippines, Thailand and Malaysia.
112
t:
