India
As in previous years, the State Department's 1995 report provides a fairly balanced and accurate assessment of developments in the area of human rights in India. However, like its predecessors it also suffers from a few shortcomings. These include erroneous and/or misleading statements, significant omissions and a lack of attention to detail in places.
In the introductory section, for instance, the report, while noting that the primary responsibility for maintaining law and order rests with India's 25 state governments, goes on to state that "the Union Ministry for Home Affairs controls the nationwide police service." This is likely to confuse the uninitiated reader into believing that the police force as a whole is unitary in character and is controlled by the Central Government in New Delhi. In fact, the police are organized on state lines, with each state government being responsible for its own force, although recruitment and deployment of senior police officers is carried out through a centralized service.	'
The report is similarly imprecise when it states, in the section discussing the right of citizens to change their government, that "the President may proclaim a state of emergency in any state in the event of war, external aggression or armed rebellion" (emphasis added). In fact, the power of the president to declare a state of emergency extends to any part of the national territory, including parts of a state, as well as to the country as a whole.
The report refers, intriguingly, to a Supreme Court judgment of May 1995 in which the government's authority to suspend fundamental rights during an emergency was apparently upheld. Despite extensive inquiries with legal experts, the Lawyers Committee has not been able to identify any such judgment. It may be recalled that the 1994 edition of the Critique noted a similarly mysterious reference in last year's report. As the Lawyers Committee pointed out then, the authors of the report would do well, as a matter of good practice, to give appropriate references whenever they cite case law.
In the section on political and other extrajudicial killing, the report rightly refers to terrorist attacks carried out by militant groups in
97
Critique 1995
ICashmir. A significant omission, however, concerns the kidnapping and lulling of innocent foreign tourists. The report could have referred to some of these cases, especially to the killing on August 13 of the Norwegian, Hans Christian Ostro, by the Al-Faran organization. These cases could also have been mentioned in the section on violations of humanitarian law, involving as they do contravention of Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions.
Similarly, in recording the extrajudicial killings by security force personnel in ICashmir, the report could have cited a widely publicized incident which took place in Gada Kocha, Srinagar, on February 10, in which six civiUans were killed in cold blood by members of the Border Security Force (BSF), allegedly in retaliation for an attack made on a BSF bunker by armed militants earlier that day. This incident, in which some 38 bystanders were reportedly beaten up by soldiers when they tried to approach the bodies of those killed, drew widespread condemnation from human rights monitors within and outside the country.
The report rightly refers to the continuing phenomenon of disappearances and unacknowledged arrests, especially in Punjab, and cites two relevant cases. It could have usefully added that, in a number of such cases, police officers have harassed the families of those abducted by demanding money in return for their release. Amnesty International publicized one such case, that of Gurdeep Singh, whose family had to pay the police a bribe of Rs. 20,000 (approximately U.S.$700) after he was picked up and kept in unacknowledged detention. Mr. Singh was subjected to a second abduction on August 13, and his whereabouts remained unlcnown at the end of the year.
The value of the section on torture by police and paramilitary forces could have been enhanced by the inclusion of a few examples from the hundreds of cases reported in the Indian media during the year. Much concern was expressed, for instance, over the brutal treatment in February of a ICashmiri lawyer, Zahid Ali Lone, who was arrested without explanation by the Special Task Force of the Jammu and Kashmir Police, allegedly on suspicion of links with militants. Mr. Lone was made to stand blindfolded for 34 hours, threatened with extrajudicial execution, hung from the ceiling by his feet and given electric shocks to his genitals.
98
India
On a positive note, the report could have noted the conviction in June of some 40 Indian soldiers for torture and other human rights abuses committed in ICashmir over a four-year period. Many of them were sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for 10 years and dismissed from the army.
The report correctly notes that the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act (TADA) — which it erroneously refers to as Terrorism and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act — was allowed to lapse in May and that it had not been reinstated or replaced by the end of the year. It could have usefully added that the government did, however, circulate a draft law, entitled the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, to replace TADA. This came in for sharp criticism from human rights monitors on the grounds that many of its provisions were just as inconsistent with international standards as those of TADA.
In the section on the denial of fair public trial, the report rightly refers to the inaccessibility of the legal prcfcesses to the poor. It could have underscored this point by mentioning that the arrangements for free legal aid at the state's expense leave much to be desired and fail to meet the frequently expressed concerns in this area.
The report is rather cursory in its treatment of freedom of speech and of the press. It fails to note some prominent examples of attempted censorship by the government, such as the banning in July of a book by an American academic, Paula Newberg, which discussed the insurgency in ICashmir (a ban which was lifted some three weeks later after it was discovered that the book highlighted Pakistan's complicity in fomenting the insurgency); the threat to prevent the Indian launch of the computer software, Windows 95, on the grounds that it contained a map showing the borders of the country incorrectly (a threat which was revoked after the makers of the software apologized and agreed to withdraw the map from its Indian copies); and a similar threat to the importation of a book. The Moor's Last Sigh, by Salman Rushdie, which allegedly contained passages that were seen as a parody of a prominent Bombay politician.
The report could also have given a more comprehensive account of the politically motivated attacks on journalists in different parts of the country. It could have referred, for example, to the widely-publicized
99
Critique 1995
physical assault on Prakash Swamy, editor of the Madras-based Junior Vikatan in April, allegedly at the instance of the state's chief minister, after his paper had published an article critical of her; or to the beatings inflicted on 15 members of the Jammu Journalists Association who were participating in a peaceful demonstration on March 31 to draw attention to threats to journalists in the state. Another attack on press freedom which fails to find mention in the report concerns the treatment of a new magazine. Outlook, at the hands of activists belonging to the Bombay-based Shiv Sena party: as well as burning inaugural copies of the magazine, the party's supporters defaced billboards carrying its advertisements and threatened news agents to deter them from distributing it.
On the positive side, the report could have noted a government proposal aired in July to abolish the Board of Film Censors. Based on a survey carried out by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in which media professionals and state officials were asked for their views on the continuing relevance of film censorship, the government reportedly concluded that such censorship was being rendered irrelevant by the increasing difficulties in controlling information entering the country via satellite television.
In the report's section on freedom of religion, the statement that "there is no national law to bar proselytising by Indian Christians" is potentially misleading, because such laws do exist in some states and have been used to prosecute missionaries. In January, for instance, a court in Ambikapur in the state of Madhya Pradesh sentenced a Christian priest and a nun to six months' imprisonment each and ordered them to pay fines after finding them guilty of violating a state law which forbade religious conversions through coercion or inducements. The authors of the report would have done well to note relevant cases such as this.
The report runs the risk of presenting too rosy a view of the treatment of refugees. In the first place, it fails to refer to the continued refusal by the Indian government to recognize as refugees tens of thousands of Chins who arrived in northeastern India after fleeing from persecution in Burma. The plight of these people is compounded by the fact that they are not even allowed to seek protection and assistance from UNHCR —
100
India
unlike refugees elsewhere in the country — due to the denial of access to UNHCR personnel to the seven northeastern states. The report also fails to note the inhuman conditions of some of the refugee camps in south India where tens of thousands of Sri Lankans are housed. These conditions have been documented extensively by human rights monitors who have expressed grave concern over such matters as the cramped nature of the accommodation, lack of hygiene and sanitation, and inadequate medical facilities. Allegations have also been made of camp officials threatening to withhold rations and monetary stipends from refugees unless they agreed to leave the country.
The report quite properly praises the democratic nature of the Indian polity, with citizens being given the right to freely choose their representatives at periodic elections. It could have usefully added that the smooth conduct of elections has often been marred by instances of vote-rigging and intimidation of voters, leading sometimes to large-scale violence. A particularly egregious exanlple of this phenomenon, which the authors of the report should have noted, occurred in Bihar in March. Just days prior to the state elections, police officers on election duty (chosen from outside the state) were reported to have participated in a systematic campaign of rape, assault and extrajudicial execution of local residents, which led to grave concerns being expressed over the safety of the civilian population generally.
The report pertinently highlights the inconsistent attitude of the Indian government toward the grant of permission for on-site visits by international human rights monitors. It could have usefully referred to the harassment meted out to a young Canadian academic, John Cockel, who was researching the functioning of the National Human Rights Commission while on holiday in the country in August. As part of his research, Mr. Cockel had visited Srinagar, but on his return to Delhi, his passport was confiscated and he was asked to leave the country forthwith. Another significant omission in the report is its failure to note the Indian government's continued refusal to grant the requests of the U.N. Special Rapporteurs on Extrajudicial Executions and Torture permission to undertake visits to the country.
101
Critique 1995
In the section on discrimination based on race, religion, etc., the report correcdy refers to the personal status laws of Muslims which allow a man to have up to four wives. It should have noted an important Supreme Court judgment, delivered in May, in which the court expressed disapproval of the increasingly common practice of Hindu men converting to Islam merely to circumvent the prohibition contained in the ordinary law against polygamy. Significantly, the court criticized the government for not implementing the constitutional mandate to "secure for the citizens a uniform civil code throughout the territory of India." The court also asked the government to file an affidavit by August 1995 outlining the steps it was taking to enact such a civil code. Future reports should be attentive to progress in enacting a uniform civil code applicable to Hindus and Muslims alike, which, as the Supreme Court noted, is necessary "both for the protection of the oppressed and promotion of national unity and solidarity."
102
t'
JL I
