Iraq
^he human rights situation in Iraq showed no signs of improvement in 1995. The economic decline caused by sanctions and the government of Iraq's mismanagement of scarce resources brought continued suffering and deprivation to the majority of the population. At the same time, a wide range of civil and political rights continued to be denied. The re-election of Saddam Hussein in the presidential referendum in October 1995 was regarded by most observers as a mere formality. Internal protest as well as direct challenges to the government were suppressed. The predictions of an imminent collapse of the leadership which accompanied the defection to Jordan in August of Saddam Hussein's sons-in-law Hussein Kamil al-Majid and Saddam ICamil al-Majid and their families proved unfounded.
Crime and lawlessness reportedly remain at high levels despite draconian decrees passed in 1994, which included amputation and branding as punishments for some^kinds of theft and army desertion. Described as cruel and unusual by the U.N. Special Rapporteur on Iraq, these punishments reportedly continued to be applied. Two general amnesties announced in July 1995 for those convicted of criminal and political offenses were viewed with skepticism by most human rights organizations.
Meanwhile, in the Kurdish-controlled areas of northern Iraq, fighting flared again during early 1995 between rival Kurdish parties, and concerns for the human rights situation in the region persisted.
The State Department's 1995 report covers most of the major human rights issues which arose during the year. There is less of an effort than in previous years to evade mention of abuses committed by parties other than the government of Iraq. However, the tone and emphasis of the report is at times questionable, and there is a tendency to gloss over issues which could be considered politically difficult. This problem relates particularly to reporting on the situation in northern Iraq, which appears to play down the significance of the internal conflict over the past two years, and the human rights abuses which have accompanied it.
The report does acknowledge more clearly than in 1994 that human rights abuses are being perpetrated by Iraqi Kurdish parties in the north.
113
Critique 1995
It notes that civilians were killed in the course of the fighting in the first half of 1995, since which time a ceasefire has been in place. However, the report fails to provide a clear context for this information. Having described the establishment of the regional parliament and local administration in 1992, it merely states that: "This parliament last met in May 1995. Discussions among Kurdish and other northern Iraqi political groups continue on reconvening the parliament but tensions between the ICDP and PUK continue to prevent parliamentary activity." The report does not say that since early 1995 the region has effectively been divided between areas in the northwest, including most of Dohuk governorate, controlled by the Kurdish Democratic Party (I<DP), and those to the east and south of Arbil, including that city, which are controlled by the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK). It is the two major parties, rather than the administration or the parliament, that control most of the funds for "public" use.
No mention is made either of the U.S. government's interventions to achieve a resolution of this conflict. The United States initiated peace talks in August 1995, which brought together the PUK and ICDP, representatives of the Turkish Government and the Iraqi National Congress (INC), and two meetings took place in Ireland. The first round of tall<s on August 10-11 reportedly led to the ICDP and PUK agreeing in principle to the demilitarization of Arbil and to measures to ease the inter-party dispute over control of the region's finances. However, the second round of talks in Dublin on September 12-15 ended without an agreement on how to implement this plan. In early October, Iran hosted a rival round of tall-cs between the PUK and KDP in Teheran, which, according to a joint communique, "achieved tangible progress" on issues similar to those discussed in Ireland. Further U.S. missions visited northern Iraq in mid-November and in early 1996.
The State Department report does not raise the more general issue of the conduct of the Kurdish protagonists to the conflict in the light of human rights principles. In a report issued in February 1995, Amnesty International expressed the view that the clashes between Kurdish parties in December 1993, and in particular those of May 1994, "signified ... an
114
Iraq
abandonment of fundamental human rights principles to which the Kurdish leadership had publicly committed itself."
The Amnesty report highlighted two factors leading to abuses: the impunity enjoyed by the armed and special forces of the ICDP and PUK; and the active undermining of the judiciary and lack of respect for its independence by these political parties. "From their respective positions of strength," Amnesty went on, "both parties have undermined many of the positive measures adopted in the name of the [Kurdish] administration." Thus, although the administration of justice is supposed to be carried out through the courts, the police service and recognized prisons, the Amnesty report states that the parties — especially the PUK, KDP and islamic Movement of Iraqi Kurdistan (IMIK) — have usurped all these functions. The parties, especially the PUK and KDP, have prevented the arrest of suspects affiliated with them and for whom arrest warrants have been issued by investigating judges. Political interference has compromised the right to a fair trial. It does not seem that this situation has materially changed since the Amnesty report was written. The State Department does not include reference to the Amnesty report in its otherwise useful listing of the main organizations which issued human rights reports during 1995.
An additional criticism of the State Department's description of events in northern Iraq relates to the way in which the human rights abuses it records are in each instance juxtaposed and "balanced" with abuses committed by the Kurdistan Workers Party (PICIC) in northern Iraq. The PICIC is variously described as "a Turkish terrorist organisation" and a "Turkish Kurd terrorist group." The report notes that the fighting in early 1995 between the Iraqi Kurdish parties led to civilian deaths. The next sentence states that in the latter part of the year, the PICK "increased their activity in northern Iraq and reportedly killed local residents in an effort to control a territorial base." Similar juxtapositions of Iraqi Kurdish and PKIC abuses are made in the summary in regard to kidnapping. The background here is crudal to an understanding of these events. The PICK has been using the areas of northern Iraq bordering on Turkey as a base for its operations inside southeastern Turkey. The ICDP, which controls most of this border region, has from time to time, at the urging of the
115
Critique 1995
Turkish government, launched attacks on the PICK, and there were frequent clashes between the two during the latter half of 1995. The report does not mentioned this.
In discussing the Turkish government's military incursions into northern Iraq, the report gives the Turkish authorities the benefit of the doubt. In March 1995 a large-scale Turkish military operation involving 35,000 troops backed by tanks, helicopters and F-16 fighter aircraft attacked PICK bases in northern Iraq. Turkish troops did not complete their withdrawal until May. According to Human Rights Watch, "Kurdish civilians from both Turkey and Iraq were casualties in the fighting." The State Department report, while including human rights organizations' "charges" that civilians were casualties, concludes by saying, "However, the Turkish government authorities stressed that the operation sought to avoid civilian casualties."
References to Turkish Kurdish refugees in northern Iraq suffer from some inconsistencies. For example, the report states that 14,000 Turldsh Kurds fled civil strife in southeastern Turkey, adding that "The UNHCR is treating these displaced persons as refugees until it reaches an official determination of their status." It is unclear why they should be described as "displaced persons," since they have crossed an international border.
The report fails to mention a number of incidents in Iraqi Kurdistan which caused civilian casualties but whose perpetrators have not been identified. During 1995, Kurdish and Iraqi opposition sources reported several bomb explosions which caused death and injury. One, in a crowded market in Zaldio, was said to have killed over 70 people. In Salah al-Din, a bomb explosion on October, 31 1995 at the security offices of the Iraqi National Congress was reported to have killed 28 people and wounded 70. Another explosion in Salah al-Din on November 14 was said to have injured the wife and child of a senior military officer working for the INC and another explosion, at a gas station on December 7, reportedly killed 13 people and injured 15. Human Rights Watch alleged that there had been "persistent reports" of Iraqi government agents using thallium sulfide poison against political opponents in Iraqi Kurdistan. In September 1995, the INC alleged that one man had died and six others were in a serious condition in a Tehran
116
Iraq
hospital after reportedly being poisoned with thallium. In his March 1996 report, the U.N. Special Rapporteur also speaks of receiving "credible allegations" of thallium poisoning "supported by certification of medical diagnosis." This refers to the case of Major Safa al-Battat, an Iraqi Special Forces officer who defected to northern Iraq. He allegedly developed symptoms after drinking a beverage said to be laced with thallium while in Shaqlawa, northern Iraq. He was taken to Cardiff, Wales, where he was treated for thallium poisoning.
The format of the State Department report gives rise to frequent repetition of material under different headings, sometimes resulting in inconsistencies. Surprisingly, one example is the report's inconsistent and even inaccurate descriptions of the "safe haven" and "no fly zones." In the initial summary, the international protection afforded to northern Iraq is described as "an internationally enforced safe haven." A more accurate formulation refers to Operation provide Comfort as "continued enforcement of a 'no fly zone' to inhibit government aerial activity to repress citizens in northern Iraq." However, another reference on the same page says both the northern and southern no-fly zones were established in 1992. In fact, the northern no-fly zone was established in April 1991, and the southern in August 1992.
The report gives a rather misleading impression of both the role of U.N. guards in the protection of aid workers and the threats faced by U.N. personnel. Few international NGOs still work in government-controlled areas; most work in the Kurdish-controlled north. There have been attacl<^ and threats ascribed to Iraqi government agents against aid workers in the north, but in 1994 and 1995, the major security concern hampering aid work in the north related to the internal fighting, particularly affecting Arbil and Sulaimaniya governorates. This is not mentioned in the report. In Dohuk governorate, security problems related more to Turkish military incursions and shelling across the border and PICK activities. The report says that: "Throughout 1995 the government harassed and assaulted employees of the U.N. and nongovernmental organizations in Iraq." However, it cites only the single case of a U.N. guard who was denied entry to Iraq because he was carrying a foreign newspaper with unfavorable references to Saddam
117
Critique 1995
Hussein. The report's other example of harassment of U.N. personnel refers to the Iddnapping of eight U.N. aid workers by the PKIC at the Atrush camp.
Social and economic conditions in Iraq continued to deteriorate during 1995, as highlighted in reports from the Food and Agriculture Organization and the Center for Economic and Social Rights. In May 1996, the Iraqi government finally agreed to accept the terms of U.N. Security Council Resolution 986 (adopted on April 14, 1995). This allows for the sale of $2 billion worth of Iraqi oil over a six-month period, with the possibility of renewing the arrangement thereafter. Thirty percent of this amount is earmarked for the U.N. Compensation Fund for victims of the 1991 Gulf War and further amounts are deducted for U.N. expenses. Under the resolution, $150 million is set aside every 90 days for humanitarian aid to the Kurdish-controlled areas. This aid is to be distributed through the U.N., while humanitarian aid within government-controlled areas is to be distributed through Iraqi government channels.
The resolution itself does not specify any form of monitoring of how the Iraqi government distributes this aid, referring only to "observation" by U.N. personnel of "whether Iraq has ensured the equitable distribution of medicine, health supplies, foodstuffs and supplies for essential civilian needs" (para 11). However, a detailed Memorandum of Understanding signed between the government of Iraq and the U.N. has outlined in more detail monitoring by U.N. personnel. It remains to be seen whether these provisions can address the criticisms raised by both the State Department and the Special Rapporteur about inequities in the distribution of rations and other goods between different groups in Iraq.
Despite the agreement on Resolution 986, there is still a sense in which the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people remain a political football, with no party to'the conflict willing to give them primacy. The resolution allows the leading protagonists of continued sanctions to say that they are addressing concerns over the impact of sanctions on the Iraqi population. The new flow of humanitarian goods may, if equitably distributed, alleviate extremes of hunger and lack of basic medical supplies. However, as the Center for Economic and Social Rights remarlcs, it will not solve the crisis of economic collapse, brought about by
118
Iraq
five years of sanctions and the economic policies of the Iraqi government. For the government, acceptance of Resolution 986 was probably a matter of necessity, not a result of concern over humanitarian needs, and it will be used to bolster the government if possible.
The report quotes Iraqi government officials as linking arbitrary arrest and detention to the impact of international sanctions. These are said to be "a temporary preventive measure." Human Rights Watch/Middle East, in its report on decrees relating to amputations, gives a more explicit example of this line of argument by Iraqi officials: "Ambassador Hamdoon said that 'the measures were not human rights abuses. . . . They are temporary measures that have to do with the current circumstances. . . . When the economic sanctions are lifted (by the United Nations), there will be no need for such measures.'" However, as Human Rights Watch concludes, "Difficult econômic conditions that have caused a rise in crime and military desertion cannot justify Iraq's violation of its citizens' basic human rights."
The State Department report covers the major internal developments of the year, including the defection of Hussein Kamil al-Majid, Saddam ICamil al-Majid and their families to Jordan in August 1995, and their return to their deaths in February 1996. It also deals with the October 1995 presidential "referendum," in which Saddam Hussein received 99.9% of the vote. Like most other commentators, the report dismisses this vote as "not democratic."
The report rightly notes the difficulty in getting accurate information on events in Iraq. This may explain its rather brief references to opposition activity. It mentions "uprisings" by former General Wafiq Samara'i and General Turk Dulaimi but should also have explained the background to these events. Samara'i had already defected to the opposition in northern Iraq in early 1995. This unsuccessful army insurrection in March was apparendy organized from outside government-controlled areas. The attack on Abu Ghraib prison in June, reportedly led by General Turk Dulaimi, stemmed from earlier events in Ramadi governorate which are not mentioned in the report. According to the U.N. Special Rapporteur, an uprising took place in the city of al-Ramadi in May 1995 after the body of Brigadier General Muhammad
119
Critique 1995
Madhloum Dulaimi was returned to his family in Ramadi, allegedly bearing the marks of torture. The riots which followed this event led to an "allegedly disproportionate and indiscriminate use of force" by the authorities, including arbitrary killings and numerous arrests, said to include women, children and elderly people. The attack on Abu Ghraib prison by General Turk Dulaimi was apparently aimed at freeing these detainees.
On developments in the southern marshes, the Special Rapporteur confirms the State Department report, adding that in Oaober 1995, Iraqi military attacks on villages in Misan and Basra provinces were said to have resulted in the Idlling and wounding of many civilians. It should be reiterated in reference to Iraqi refugees in southwestern Iran that all the official refugee camps are run by the Iranian authorities, not by NGOs as the report suggests.
The report notes the continued use of punitive amputation during 1995. Additional evidence was gathered by the Special Rapporteur during his mission to Kuwait "that penal amputations continued to be enforced in the spring and early summer of 1995." A number of witnesses spoke of amputation of ears and branding on the foreheads of deserters. While anaesthetics were generally said to be given for the amputations, post-operative treatment was denied, sometimes leading to septicaemia. Reports suggested that doctors continued to be coerced into performing these amputations. The Special Rapporteur also received a report that in 1994 a large number of imams from mosques and prayer halls in Baghdad had been arrested, incarcerated or executed. One of the reasons cited was their opposition to the application of amputation decrees.
In his March 1996 report, the Special Rapporteur also confirmed the State Department's findings when he noted the application of the death penalty during 1995 "in a wholly disproportionate way" against persons convicted of minor offenses such as pickpocketing or illegally exchanging money. In his February 1995 report, the Special Rapporteur also raised the issue of decrees which gave judicial or quasi-judicial authority to nonjudicial bodies. In the Special Rapporteur's view this "creates a private and personal 'judicial' prosecutorial mechanism in the person of the
120
Iraq
President's Principal Private Secretary who, of course is wholly dependent upon and partial to the President."
In July 1995, the RCC announced two general amnesties. The report appropriately shares the skepticism of human rights organizations about their validity. The Special Rapporteur remarked that these amnesties inspired "little confidence." The first, RCC decree No. 61 dated July 22, 1995, "remits the remainder of the sentences of Iraqi prisoners and detainees, commutes death sentences to life imprisonment and pardons persons liable to the penalty of amputation of the hand or the auricle of the ear." The second, decree No. 64, dated July 30, 1995 was said to grant "a general amnesty to Iraqis living in or outside Iraq in respect of the penalties imposed on them following their conviction for political reasons." However, a number of conditions are attached to each amnesty decree. For example, in Decree No. 61, a condition of remission of sentence is "if [the detainee's] relatives undertake to ensure their good conduct, provided that the said undertaking is endorsed by a member of the Arab Ba'ath Socialist Party." In both decrees a number of categories of offenders are not eligible for amnesty. One of these categories is espionage, which the Special Rapporteur noted is "a particularly important exclusion . . . because so many laws refer to 'espionage' and because the crime applies to a wide variety of behavior."
In referring to foreign nationals in detention in Iraq, the report alters the previous year's wording from "several" to "numerous foreigners." However it only gives details of two U.S. citizens arrested in March for crossing the border from Kuwait and released in July. In addition, press reports say that four Sudanese nationals were executed in Iraq in mid-1995, one allegedly for manslaughter, the other three for receiving stolen cars.
121

a,
