Israeli Occupied Territories/ Palestinl\n Authority
s in previous years, the State Department's 1995 report includes separate sections on Israel and the Occupied Territories. The body of the report briefly mentions Israeli violations related to Palestinians and the Occupied Territories, while an annex details human rights issues of both Israel and the Palestinian Authority (PA) in the territories. This division — always an obfuscation of Israel's responsibility for its human rights practices — is increasingly problematic, as two authorities are now discussed in a single section.
The division of the report into two separate sections suggests that Israel's occupation of the territories is far removed, and can be neatly divorced, from events inside Israel. This may be wishful thinking on the part of the Israeli and U.S. governments. The reality, however, is that such a division is artificial. Many human rights violations against Palestinians take place inside Israel. Virtually all instances of torture and ill-treatment occur in interrogations conducted inside Israel. Of the six Palestinians whom the report cites as having died in Israeli custody, at least four were held in detention facilities inside Israel, including 'Abd a-Samed Harizat, who was tortured to death by the Israeli General Security Service in West Jerusalem. Administrative detainees were also held inside Israel.
Furthermore, violence by Israeli civilians against Palestinians is only discussed in the annex, although one Palestinian was shot to death and another injured by an Israeli civilian inside Israel. In contrast, Palestinian extremist violence is mentioned in the sections dealing with both Israel and the Occupied Territories.
Regarding most rights, Israel has identical human rights obligations inside the state and in occupied territory. Article 2 of the ICCPR (to which Israel is a signatory) requires states parties to respect and ensure the human rights of "all individuals within its territory and subject to its jurisdiction. . . ."
To avoid inconsistencies, future reports should address all of Israel's obligations and practices in one chapter, with a separate section on the Palestinian Authority. At a minimum, those events which took place
123
Critique 1995
inside Israel, such as detentions and interrogations, should be detailed in the body of the chapter on Israel, rather than in the annex.
The State Department continues the trend, begun in the 1993 report, of equating political and diplomatic developments with human rights. Thus it asserts that: "[pjositive human rights developments flowed naturally as peace agreements were implemented." Despite the report's conflation of the two, the relationship between peace agreements and human rights observance is often far from clear. On one hand, the withdrawal of Israeli military forces from the Gaza Strip and West Bank cities as a result of the Oslo and Cairo Accords has dramatically reduced the number of Palestinian deaths and injuries. Yet human rights problems remain, and in some cases they are the direct result of the implementation of the peace accords.
Support for the political process was a pre-condition to enjoy many of the positive developments in the territories. Signing a statement of support for the peace accords was a pre-condition for the release of every prisoner released in the framework of the agreements. Signing such a statement was also a pre-condition for Gaza students to obtain the necessary permits to attend West Bank universities.
The targeting of Palestinians who are opposed to the political process increased in 1995. In June Israeli sources said that 3,200 Palestinians had been arrested in the previous seven months, most of them said to be members of Hamas or Islamic Jihad. The enormous number of arrests suggests that they were motivated by a person's suspected political sympathies rather than evidence that the individual had engaged in illegal activity. In addition to its praise for the positive human rights developments, the report should have acknowledged that the peace process has also heightened suppression of non-violent political opposition.
Last year's edition of the Critique suggested that many distortions could be avoided by measuring human rights conditions against the consistent standard of applicable international human rights and humanitarian law. This year's report has decreased even further its reliance on international legal standards. For example, the report has deleted both references to the fact that transfer of prisoners from
124
Israeli Occupied Territories/Palestinian Authority
occupied territory into Israel is a violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention. The introduction to the annex no longer states that "Israel is not recognized to have sovereignty over any of the occupied territories."
The release of Palestinian prisoners — an element of the Oslo Accords — is discussed in detail in the report, although such releases are not necessarily mandated by human rights law. While the report continues to mention the applicability of the Hague and Geneva Conventions, the deletion of certain international legal standards together with the reporting on Israel's implementation of the peace accords implicitly suggests that diplomatic negotiations make human rights principles obsolete. The report should have made dear that, regardless of its agreements with the Palestinians, Israel is obligated to respect international human rights and humanitarian law.
The report demonstrates bias by reporting positive political developments even if they occurred after the end of the calendar year. At the same time, the report does not mention negative events which occurred in the same time period. For example, the report includes a detailed and favorable description of the Palestinian elections, held on January 20, 1996. Yet the arrest and 24-hour detention of B'Tselem field worker Bassem 'Bid by the Palestinian police on January 2, 1996 is not mentioned.
Furthermore, in its discussion of legal challenges against the use of force in interrogations, the report states that the Supreme Court issued an injunction against the use of physical force in interrogation. Yet this petition was canceled on January 11,1996, enabling the General Security Service (GSS) to continue to use torture in its interrogation of the detainee. These events are not mentioned in the report, although they occurred well prior to the elections, which are discussed.
With regard to the release of Palestinian political prisoners, the report states that "another 1,200 detainees were scheduled to be released in January 1996." According to Israeli Defense Force (IDF) statistics, the prison population only decreased by approximately 900 prisoners in that month. To avoid such inaccuracies, the report should consistently report only those events which occurred in the year under discussion.
125
Critique 1995
While it mentions certain developments from 1996, the report shirks its obligation to follow up on cases pending from 1995. Despite explicit instructions by the State Department that the Countiy Reports should provide an update into cases of extrajudicial killing from previous years, the report does not mention that there was no significant progress in the investigation into the killing of six Palestinians by Israeli undercover units in Jabalya. (In February 1996, the Chief Military Prosecutor ordered the file against the five soldiers closed for lack of evidence against them.) Nor does it update the two trials pending of members of the Palestinian security forces suspected of killing Palestinians.
The State Department does a good job of reporting on the use of excessive force constituting violations of humanitarian law. The report first provides IDF open-fire regulations, which allow soldiers only to fire at a suspect's legs and forbid firing in the direction of children and women unless a soldier's life is in danger. The report then states, "[i]n practice, soldiers, poHce and undercover units used live ammunition in situations other than when their lives were in danger . . . and sometimes shot suspects in the upper body and head." The contrasting of official policy with a succinct statement about what actually occurs in this instance is a welcome departure from the reliance on euphemisms and third party sources in other places throughout the text.
In many instances, the report continues to provide official government justifications for abuses. For example, in a discussion of violence by Israeli settlers against Palestinians, the report states that "[t]he IDF has imposed protective curfews on the Palestinian population when it expects violence from settlers." The report does not comment on the injustice of placing the victims rather than the perpetrators of violence under curfew. In fact, in response both to Israeli and Palestinian acts of violence, the IDF invariably places mobility restrictions solely on Palestinian communities.
The repeated mention of acts of violence by Palestinian extremists seems to be presented as an excuse for Israeli violations. The introduction to the annex discusses torture in the sentence immediately following reference to "lethal terrorist attacks." The report later states that the government approved the continued use of special interrogation
126
Israeli Occupied Territories/Palestinian Authority
measures "arguing that they were vital because their use had prevented numerous terrorist attacks." The inclusion of these rationales with no comment or criticism gives the impression that the United States agrees that torture and ill-treatment are acceptable under these circumstances. Yet according to the U.N. Convention Against Torture (to which both Israel and the United States are signatories), "[n]o exceptional circumstances whatsoever, whether a state of war or a threat of war, internal political instability or any other public emergency, may be invoked as a justification of torture." (Article 2(2)). Political violence should be mentioned in the introduction to the report and in the section on political and extrajudicial killing. It is irrelevant to the discussion of torture.
Last year's edition of the Critique cited a lack of candor in reporting on human rights violations by relying on "credible reports" of torture and extrajudicial killings. This report duplicates last year's language in both these cases. With regard to torture, the report states that "[ijnternational, Israeli and Palestinian human rights groups and diplomats continue to provide credible reports indicating that Israeli security forces are responsible for widespread abuse, and in some cases torture, of Palestinian detainees." The sheer bulk of evidence warrants a definitive opinion on the part of the State Department. Last year's edition of the Critique compared the language on Israel with the language on Syria, where the report states categorically that "[t]he police and security forces continue to use torture systematically." The report should simply state that Israeli security forces are responsible for widespread torture and ill-treatment of Palestinian detainees.
The report correctly attributes the death of one detainee to torture by the Israeli GSS. However, according to B'Tselem, a total of ten Palestinians died in Israeli custody, and not six as cited in the report. Two Palestinians died in the Ketziot military detention camp between August and October, apparently as a result of torture by other Palestinian detainees. Testimonies gathered by B'Tselem reveal that dozens of prisoners were severely tortured by other inmates during this three-month period. The large number of prisoners involved, and the fact that prison authorities took no action even after the deaths, raises the concern that
127
Critique 1995
Israeli prison authorities were aware of these events yet did not intervene. The inaccuracy in reporting deaths in detention and the failure to report on the deaths in ICetziot represent a serious oversight.
An important omission in this year's report is any discussion of land confiscation and discriminatory land use policies. While the introduction to the annex states that "[djiscriminatory policies on land and resource use . . . remained in place," there is no elaboration of this sentence anywhere in the report. In fact, not only did discriminatory policies continue, at least one pattern of discriminatory land use — confiscation of land for the construction of settler by-pass roads — intensified in 1995.
According to Land and Water Establishment, tens of thousands of dunams of land were confiscated from private Palestinian landowners in order to construct roads connecting Israeli settlements without traversing Palestinian cities. In addition to the loss to the landowners, this policy violates both international humanitarian law and an Israeli legal precedent against confiscation of the local population's property for permanent use. In addition, the report should have mentioned renewed land confiscations in East Jerusalem, particularly as B'Tselem released a report in May documenting systematic discrimination against Palestinians in all matters relating to land expropriation, planning and building in East Jerusalem.
While this year's report is significantly longer than in past years, several important items have been deleted. The introduction to the annex no longer mentions the problems of administrative detention and family reunification. The section of the report on freedom of movement contains a much abbreviated discussion of restrictions imposed on Palestinians, although the problems of curfew and family reunification remain. Among the passages deleted is the fact that curfews and closures of the territories do not apply to settlers, although this remains true. The deletions may be due to space limitations, as the chapter now addresses Palestinian as well as Israeli human rights practices. These same space considerations may have resulted in abbreviated attention to certain PA violations as well, although on the whole the rejxjrt does a fairly good job of covering most issues related to the PA.
128
Israeli Occupied Territories/Palestinian Authority
As with Israel, much of the critique of the PA is attributed to human rights organizations rather than to the State Department itself. For example, the report states that "local and international human rights groups have criticized the PA State Security Court arguing that it is subordinate to the power of the executive, undermines the independence of the judiciary and violates defendants' rights to a fair and open trial." The report omits mention of the fact that the military judges who preside over these courts do not necessarily have legal training. However, the report's own description of the State Security Court demonstrates that it violates minimum requirements of fair trial.
The fact that the State Department relies on third parties to criticize the State Security Court may be related to the court's role in trying those suspected of violent opposition to the peace accords. The report notes that the State Security Court was created "in response to Israeli and international pressure." Israelis pressure on the PA to crack dovm on violent opposition should have been mentioned in the context of a variety of PA abuses, including mass detentions following bomb attacks. In addition, the United States played a central role in pressuring the PA to crack down on violent opponents, and specifically encouraged unfair trials. During and following his March visit to the Palestinian areas, U.S. Vice President A1 Gore specifically praised the State Security Court and the sentences it had handed down.
As with the discussion of torture by Israeli officials, the report also refers to "credible sources" to report on ill-treatment and torture by the PA. While the report accurately describes the treatment of detainees in Palestinian custody — including hooding, beating and tying in painful positions — it abstains from labeling this treatment torture. Furthermore, the report mentions five cases of death in PA custody with no reference to allegations that these deaths were the result of torture and ill-treatment.
It is disingenuous of the report to mention disciplinary actions and investigations into these cases without mentioning that no result of any investigation has ever been made public and that in certain cases (such as the 1994 death of Farid Abu Jarbu') interrogators who were arrested were later released and reinstated to their posts.
129
Critique 1995
Despite the State Department's instructions that those preparing the Country Reports avoid comparisons with other countries, the report states that "[t]he PA Press Law ... has been described by Palestinian journalists as the best in the Arab world." Two paragraphs later the report states that Reporters Without Frontiers has labeled the press law restrictive. The report should measure practices according to the universal standards of international human rights law, rather than the practices of specific countries or regions.
The report devotes a lot of space to restrictions on the press. Certain important incidents are absent, however, including the fire bombing of the leftist, opposition newspaper, al-Umma, allegedly by Palestinian security forces; and the arrest of five journalists from the pro-Islamist Istiqlaî newspaper. Both in the context of press freedom and rights to fair trial, the report should have mentioned the midnight trial by the State Security Court of Sayed Abu Musameh, editor in chief of al-Watan, the pro-Hamas weekly. According to Amnesty International, Abu Musameh was convicted of writing "seditious" newspaper articles and incitement and libel against the PA. He was reportedly arrested after publishing an article comparing the Palestinian police to the IDF and accusing them of torturing suspects.
Israel enjoys a special relationship with the United States and is the recipient of tremendous financial and political support. The United States has played an active and highly visible role as mediator and supporter of the peace accords. Given the extent of U.S. involvement in the territories, the pressures to produce less than objective reporting of the human rights situation may be expected to be greater than when dealing with other parts of the world. Nonetheless, the report provides a great deal of accurate information. However, it is flawed by a persistent habit of appearing to justify both Israel and the Palestinian Authority's violations of human rights, and by a reluctance to criticize directly clear violations of international human rights norms.
130
d:
