ICenya
juring 1995, internationally recognized human rights became increasingly imperiled in Kenya. Detainees were tortured; opposition politicians were arrested and sometimes held incommunicado; peaceful political rallies were dispersed by police with gunfire and tear gas; lawyers investigating human rights abuses were arrested and their documents were seized; violence against women increased; and journalists were harassed and threatened. True to form, the Kenyan government continued its increasingly harsh crackdown on dissent.
The State Department should be applauded for the overall tone of its 1995 report on human rights in Kenya and for its detailed approach to chronicling the many abuses perpetrated during the last year by the government and its security forces. In particular, the State Department deserves commendation for using the active voice and not mincing words, as in years past, when describing the deteriorating state of human rights in Kenya. In the introduction, the report unequivocally states that the government's "human rights record worsened in 1995" and that "[mjembers of the internal security forces committed numerous serious human rights abuses." Further, the report pronounces that the police "committed several extrajudicial killings and tortured and beat detainees" and that the Kenyan government "continued to harass and intimidate those opposed to the ruling party."
Like its immediate predecessor, the 1995 report is full of specific examples of human rights abuses committed during the year. Unfortunately, however, this year's report suffers from the same wealcjiess as the 1994 report in that it takes a laundry-list approach to the recitation of abuses instead of providing an overarching framework within which to analyze and understand these disconnected facts. Succinctly stated, the Kenyan government is doggedly determined to silence its critics. By failing to present the chronicle of abuses within the context of intentional, institutionalized disregard for the rights of Kenyans who oppose the current government and for those who have no voice in the political realm (such as prisoners and refugees), the State Department trivializes the significance of the abuses it reports and minimizes the efficacy of the report
131
Critique 1995
as an analytic tool. This is particularly troubling as citizens throughout the country attempt to prepare for multi-party elections in 1997.
The list of abuses provided by the State Department in its 1995 report cannot be understood without reviewing the larger political context. President Daniel Arap Moi and other members of the ruling KANU Party have never been strong champions of multi-party democracy and the freedoms associated with it. It was not until millions of dollars of critical foreign assistance were withheld that Moi reluctantly agreed in 1991 — 13 years after coming to power — to allow opposition parties to form and participate in multi-party elections. Even so, as the report correctly notes, "the 1992 presidential and parliamentary elections were marked by violence, intimidation, fraud and other irregularities . . . . " Curiously, the report fails to mention that the next multi-party elections are scheduled for 1997. Now that its coffers have been replenished with foreign assistance and the 1997 elections are looming on the horizon, the Kenyan government is more openly and brazenly committed than ever before to silencing its critics. It is within this context that many of the abuses chronicled in the report can be seen as inextricably linked together as part of a coherent strategy of government repression. These abuses include: denial of registration to newly-formed opposition parties; denial of licenses to allow opposition MPs to meet with their constituents; detentions and arrests of opposition activists and human rights advocates who dare to question the Moi government; seizure of documents from human rights advocates investigating improprieties by public officials; intimidation of journalists; abuse of the judiciary; and incitement of ethnic clashes.
Unquestionably, President Moi and the ruling KANU Party are turning to increasingly harsh and oppressive tactics to silence their opponents. Critics of the government never know when they may be arrested, how long they may be held incommunicado, or how they will be treated. In February 1995, the government announced that insulting the president is now an arrestable offense. As the report accurately notes, several opposition activists have already been arrested and accused of such an offense. Given that most criticism of Moi or his government's
132
Kenya
policies can be perceived as an insult, it is becoming increasingly difficult for critics to voice their opinions without fear of significant reprisals.
In January 1995, police arrested three opposition members of parliament as they were about to attend a church service in memory of people recently killed in political violence. Each of the MPs was charged with promoting "warlike activities" and "uttering words with seditious intent." Two of the MPs were released in mid-February, when the charges were withdrawn. Before this happened, however, one of them had become so ill and had been denied medical treatment while in prison that over 300 inmates reportedly staged a hunger strike and refused to return to their cells until he received hospital care. The report makes no mention of the MP's ill-health or of the denial of medical care. The report acknowledges that the third MP was held for four months and admitted to the hospital three times, but fails to note that the government doctors in the Nakuru hospital refused to treat him and that while ill in the hospital he was chained to his bed at night. The chilling effect of such degrading treatment of opposition politicians is incalculable.
In August 1995, plainclothes police officers, prison guards dressed in full riot gear and members of the ruling KANU Party youth wing whipped, beat and stoned leaders of the opposition Safina Party and journalists who were wdth them as they approached the courthouse in Nakuru. While there were numerous eyewitnesses to the attacks and the involvement of the police, the prison guards and the ICANU youth wing, the strongest statement that the report makes about this incident is that "police failed to protect members of the Safina Political Party from a mob attack." Given the amount of evidence, the report should have directly linked the government security apparatus and the ruling party to this horrifying event, and placed the abuse within the greater context of government suppression of dissent.
The report accurately notes that security forces "employ various means of surveillance, including a network of informants to monitor the activities of opposition politicians and human rights advocates." While it provides a few telling examples of such surveillance, it does not indicate the frequency and gravity of this abuse. Given the tremendous chilling effect of being followed and having one's correspondence and telephone
133
Critique 1995
calls potentially monitored, the report should have been placed greater emphasis on this abuse.
The State Department should be commended for unequivocally stating that "[ajlthough the Constitution provides for an independent judiciary, it is subject to executive branch influence in practice." However, it would have been even more commendable for the report to have stated that the judiciary is often treated as another tool in the government's arsenal of weapons to silence and discourage critics. Opposition activists are frequently charged with a host of imprecise crimes, with these charges usually dropped later without any investigation as to whether they were brought simply as a form of harassment. The judicial system is also used to subvert investigations of improprieties by government officials. As the report notes, the Kenyan Constitution permits the Attorney General to take over and discontinue proceedings in private prosecution cases. The Attorney General used this constitutional power in 1995 to terminate a public corruption case filed against Vice President George Saitoti and to stop an incitement case related to ethnic clashes brought against Local Government Minister William Ntimama.
The most publicized political trial in 1995 continued to be that of Koigi Wa Wamwere, a former MP from Nakuru, and three co-defendants, who were charged with attacking a police station in 1993. Influenced by the international outcry condemning the trial as a political witchhunt lacking any credibility, the Chief Magistrate decided against sentencing Wamwere and two of his co-defendants to death; instead, they were each sentenced to two concurrent four-year terms plus three strokes of the cane. In a peculiar and troublesome shift from the 1994 State Department report, in which the Wamwere trial was forcefully described as a "political trial" during which the prosecutor failed to "produc[e] credible evidence tying Wamwere to the alleged attack," the 1995 report makes no reference to the political character of the trial, and takes a much more passive stance on the credibility of the evidence presented by the state prosecutor. The report also fails to note that the four-year sentence imposed on Wamwere, a seasoned opposition activist popular among Rift
134
Kenya
Valley lOkuyus who are considered political rivals of President Moi, effectively removes Wamwere from any involvement in the 1997 eleaions.
In its efforts to suppress dissent in 1995, the government also resorted to its old practice of imposing outright bans. In February, the government banned all past, present and future issues of Inooro, a lOkuyu-language newspaper published by the Catholic Church, which contained certain articles critical of the government. The report makes no mention of this blatant suppression of dissent. The Kenyan government also banned CLARION, a non-governmental think tank, after it pubhshed a detailed report on corruption in Kenya. According to the government, the think tank was banned because it exposed "to ridicule and contempt the image and integrity of the Kenyan government."
As part of its overriding objective of silencing critics, state harassment of the independent press increased in 1995. As in 1994, this year's report grossly minimizes the pressure on the print media to conduct self-censorship, which continues to be flagrant. The 1995 report provides numerous examples of gross state harassment and intimidation of the press, including arrests, detentions, beatings and threats of deportation, but then blithely states only that "[n]ewspaper and magazine editors continued to feel varying degrees of government pressure to self-censor." Given the severity and regularity of harassment suffered by print journalists who wrote articles on topics deemed sensitive by the government, there is no question that the print media is under extreme pressure to self-censor.
The report's treatment of torture and other inhuman treatment is at best incomplete. While it describes several specific instances of torture by the police, the report undercuts the importance and impact of this section by stating in a passive voice only that there "continued to be credible reports that police resorted to torture and brutality." According to Amnesty International, which sent a team of medical delegates to Kenya in March 1995, "[t]orture and ill-treatment are widespread in Kenya." Amnesty concluded that the purpose of such treatment "appears to be to intimidate detainees and dissuade them from engaging in political activities, and to obtain (often false) admissions of guilt which can be used in court." According to Amnesty International, torture methods are
135
Critique 1995
frequently very brutal, including beatings on different parts of the body with knobbed sticks, fists, the handles of hoes and gun butts.
On the other hand, the State Department should be applauded for its discussion of a number of topics, including the treatment of refugees, discrimination against Rift Valley lOkuyus, prison conditions (although it provides two very different numbers for those who died while imprisoned), flagrant abuses of the right of peaceful assembly, and violations of International Labour Organisation (ILO) labor conventions. In particular, the report deserves praise for its discussion of the problem of mob justice. The State Department cites statistics from the Kenya Human Rights Commission quantifying the number of suspected criminals murdered by angry crowds, and then intelligently delves beneath government rhetoric, stating "[t]he Government condemned the practice but has taken no action to address the problem, nor arrested anyone who participated in the violence." The fact that the government has taken no action to address the problem destroys any pretense that it is committed to eradicating this serious problem.
In its discussion of female genital mutilation, the report notes the government's stated opposition to the procedure but fails to go the further step to indicate that the authorities have taken no action to address this "widespread" problem. Similarly, in its discussion of violence against women, the report acknowledges that this "is a serious and widespread problem," but then repeats the government position that it "condemns violence against women" without indicating the lack of leadership and action from the government to address the problem. As it did in its discussion of mob justice, the report should much more frequently go beyond government rhetoric and indicate where the government is doing little or nothing to address a particular human rights violation.
The report should be heartily commended for its analysis of the use of excessive force and other violations of humanitarian law related to internal conflicts. Unlike reports in previous years, the 1995 report admirably proclaims that "[s]ubstantial evidence indicates that high-level government officials were complicit in instigating and promoting the ethnic clashes of 1991-1994, which claimed over 1,000 lives and displaced 250,000 people." Moreover, the report explicitly states that
136
Kenya
"[gjovemment officials, particularly [Local Government] Minister [William] Ntimama, continued to make inciteful and threatening statements against non-Maasai living in the Rift Valley." This is particularly significant given that the Kenyan government frequently arrests its critics for allegedly making inciteful and threatening statements. The report also deserves praise for providing several telling examples of governmental disregard for the rights of displaced persons, and for drawing attention to the fact that the UNDP program to assist thousands of displaced victims of ethnic clashes drew to a standstill in 1995 as a direct result of the withdrawal of support from the Kenyan government.
The report should have mentioned that President Moi and his supporters repeatedly accuse critics and human rights lawyers of being in league with guerrilla groups« committed to the overthrow of the government. In early April, the normally conservative Roman Catholic Church leaders in Kenya issued a stinging condemnation of the government. They spoke of a state of fear in the country in which there was no law, justice or protection except for the powerful. In what has become a typical response of the government to criticism, the government accused the church leaders of colluding with guerrilla groups.
Despite its claims to the contrary, the Kenyan government has neither embraced multi-party democracy nor recently improved its human rights record. Until President Moi and his government make genuine strides toward upholding the full panoply of dvil and political freedoms, democracy will continue to falter in Kenya. The government's attitude to the opposition in the run-up to the 1997 elections will undoubtedly prove to be an invaluable gauge of the future for human rights in Kenya.
137

■ÍS4
xí^:'-.-
t!
