Cambodia
'he State Department's 1995 report on human rights in Cambodia accurately catalogues the basic human rights violations affecting Cambodians during 1995. It acknowledges that the general human rights situation worsened in several respects, and does a good job of detailing the individual incidents that occurred. It also does a fairly good job of recognizing the work done by NGOs in ameliorating and documenting human rights abuses. However, the report does not present a cohesive picture either of the increasing use of intimidation and violence by the Cambodian government and military toward their critics, or of the judiciary's inability to serve as a check on the other branches of government due to its corruption, weakness and lack of resources. As the report notes in its introduction, Cambodia is heavily dependent on foreign aid as a source of national income. In establishing this context for the discussion of human rights that follows, it would have been helpful for the report also to note that Cambodia was actively seeking Most Favored Nation trading status with the,United States in 1995, and that in a climate of sweeping reductions in U.S. foreign assistance programs, Cambodia has been largely spared.
The Royal Cambodian Government (RCG) is comprised of a tenuous coalition brought to power by the United Nations-sponsored elections in May 1993. The ruling parties are the Royalist party, the United National Front for an Independent, Neutral, Peaceful and Cooperative Cambodia (FUNCINPEC), the Cambodian People's Party (CPP) and the Buddhist Liberal Democratic Party (BLDP). Instability has been evident in the reluctance of factions within both FUNCINPEC and the BLDP to cooperate with the CPP, which they regard as corrupt.
The general political instability in Cambodia, and the resulting governmental efforts to stifle opposition and criticism are of great concern. While the report gives examples of human rights abuses committed by the executive and the military, it fails to conclude or even indicate that these abuses are all symptomatic of the same fragile and insecure political system. While a complete analysis of the political landscape, or a thorough prognosis are beyond the scope of the report, the failure to interweave the sources of the abuses with the descriptions of the
19
Critique 1995
abuses tiiemselves is a troubling omission. The structure of the report dilutes the impact of its evidence by chopping up the incidents and putting them under discrete headings.
In June, the National Assembly expelled Sam Rainsy, a member of the originally elected Constitutional Assembly from Siem Reap, without allowing for any debate. An outspoken critic of the government on a number of issues, Rainsy had recently been expelled from his party, FUNCINPEC. He had also been victimized by threats against his life, and the lives of his family, apparently from the members of the RCG. The National Assembly clearly violated Article 95 of the Constitution, which provides grounds for the removal of an elected official — the loss of party membership is not one of these. While the expulsion seems a dear indication of the willingness of the RCG to violate the rule of law in order to enforce conformity of opinion, the report simply called Rainsy's ousting "an indication that the governing coalition was unwilling to tolerate dissent among members of the parties in the coalition."
The report fails to connect Rainsy's expulsion with the arrest and beating of his bodyguards in July, which are discussed under different headings. The four men reported that 30 to 40 soldiers detained them at a Ministry of Defense base. The soldiers beat and interrogated the guards for 16 hours, and demanded that they identify Rainsy as linked with the Khmer Rouge. They were told, according to one report by Amnesty International, that they had been arrested "for the political crime of involvement with the IChmer Rouge."
There was further evidence of political repression. As the report mentions, FUNCINPEC Secretary General Norodom Sirivudh was arrested for "his alleged involvement in an assassination plot against Second Prime Minister Hun Sen," but was allowed to depart for France in December in a deal brokered by lOng Norodom Sihanouk. In addition, there was a grenade attack in September on BDLP headquarters, after the party was denied permission to hold a congress in Phenom Penh stadium.
The report states that there was "one reported case of a killing by government agents for political reasons." Two men in Mong Russei district, Battambang province, were arrested and detained at gunpoint by about 30 members of the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces (RCAF). No
20
Cambodia
reasons were given and no arrest warrant was produced. The men were subsequently killed. Local authorities were unwilling to investigate the killings, stating that the men were alleged to be members of the Khmer Rouge. While the report states that the two men killed were "suspected IChmer Rouge members," Amnesty International reports that the villagers and relatives insist that the members were Royalist FUNCINPEC party members, and that this was the reason for their killing.
In an indication of the difficulties involved in bringing the military to justice, the two local militia men arrested for the murders were later released. The State Department notes that there were reports that the military had pressured the court to release the suspects. Political expression in Cambodia is increasingly limited by the military and the executive. The report describes the detention of six people for the peaceful expression of political views. Four of the six were arrested and detained on August 5, 1995 while tying copies of leaflets to balloons in advance of the visit of U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher. The leaflets contained political statements critical of the RCG and FUNCINPEC, but in no way advocated violence. The fifth and sixth detainees were the author of the leaflet and another man allegedly involved in its distribution.
As evidenced by these examples, the accusation of Khmer Rouge membership is a common excuse for arrest, detention, and intimidation. It is important that such accusations, without further evidence, do not give the military, the police and the executive carte blanche to act against individuals vdth impunity. This trend, which is not mentioned in the 1995 report, should be the subject of careful scrutiny in future reports.
The Cambodian press came under attack in 1995, with the RCG using a variety of means to silence criticism. The report states that "the government sometimes limits press freedom in practice," but does not develop a full, dear picture of the pressure the government is exerting, nor of its effect. An ominous new press law went into effect in September, whose impact the report underemphasizes. The report states that human rights groups and journalists criticized the law, but does not fully explore how threatening it is. The new press law allows for criminal sanctions for publication of material that "may affect the national security or political
21
Critique 1995
stability of the country." The government has refused to provide a definition of "national security," which has an intimidating and stifling effect. The threat is real, when viewed in the context of the government suspension of publication of newspapers, confiscation of their property and jailing of journalists. Criminal convictions of editors were widespread, and those affected included the editor of Samrek Reask Khmer (Cry of Khmer People), the editor of Voice of Khmer You, the editor of Khmer Ideal, the editor of Sereipheap Thmei (New Liberty News), and the editor of Odom K'tek Khmer (IChmer Conscience). In addition, three journalists — all critical of the RCG — have died in suspicious circumstances since 1994, and the government has not successfully identified or convicted those responsible in any of these cases.
Intimidation of the press has taken other forms, too. Printers for the English-language Cambodia Daily refused to print one issue of the paper after Second Prime Minister Hun Sen questioned whether the paper could legally operate since it did not have the necessary government approval. The Daily was forced to find another printer. In a separate incident, Hun Sen told the inhabitants of the village of ICraingyov that their attack on a newspaper critical of a development project overseen by Hun Sen was justified. In this case, the printer for the newspaper {New Liberty Nem) refused to print any further issues of the paper or any other opposition papers.
Widespread and severe institutional shortcomings in the Cambodian legal system continued to frustrate its ability to protect human rights. The report accurately describes the court system in Cambodia, and does so in far greater detail than in 1994. It acknowledges that there is "widespread corruption among judges who do not receive a living wage"; verdicts and the pre-trial custody status of criminal defendants are often determined by bribes; trials last an average of one hour; statements from witnesses and the accused are often the result of threats or beatings; and judicial independence is additionally hampered by the CPP's refusal to allow non-CPP-affiliated judicial candidates to be appointed to the bench. The report also properly acknowledges that the system is flawed due to the shortage of attorneys (Cambodia's first graduaUng class of lawyers in over 20 years will graduate from law school in 1997), and that the situation
22
Cambodia
has been ameliorated by NGO-trained defenders and NGO defense lawyers. However, it fails to note that the shortage of defense attorneys will continue to plague the system because the government has limited the practice of NGO-trained defenders to the end of 1997. It also fails to note that the Cambodian Bar Association has severely limited admission of these defenders — Cambodian nationals trained under U.S. AID auspices — to its ranks.
The proper and fair functioning of the judiciary is further undermined by the lack of clear law and procedures in Cambodia. The Penal Code drafted by UNTAC remains in effect, as does the Criminal Procedure Law, which dates from the State of Cambodia period (1979-1991). The report states that "the Government frequently ignored these provisions." This is a remarkable understatement. The report also properly states that the judges often do not have copies of the laws, effectively denying them even a chance of complying with them. In addition, the majority of judges lack formal training and therefore»do not understand basic legal concepts such as the presumption of innocence, making for uneven decision-making."
The judiciary is further impeded in its attempts to thwart human rights abuses because, as the report acknowledges, "civilian courts are often unable to try members of the military." Once again, however, the report understates its point: in effect, the military refuses to be tried by civilian courts. While the report indicates that the military court system suffers from the same problems as its civilian counterpart, the military court is additionally weakened because its jurisdiaion is not made clear by law, and because it is located in Phnom Penh, making it difficult to try military personnel in the provinces.
Detainees are often held for lengthy periods of time before being charged, and while detained, are often severely beaten. As the report indicates, this occurs "particularly during interrogation." The report does not state that beatings and torture appear to be more common in cases where the defendant is alleged to be a member of the Khmer Rouge, or where the victim is a police officer or someone VAth ties to high-level government officials.
23
Critique 1995
The report properly describes the conditions of prisons in Cambodia, which have improved in certain respects, and deteriorated in others. The report typically distances itself from its own evidence by quoting human rights workers as reporting a resumption in the use of shackles and thè holding of prisoners in small, dark cells. The report also describes increased overcrowding, food and water shortages, and poor security. The Phnom Penh Post published an article about the prison in ICampong Speu, where prisoners were reportedly starving to death. Many of the prison commandants have responded by severely limiting access to prisons and prisoners by human rights monitors. The report also adds that "[t]here were unconfirmed reports of the existence of small, illegal detention facilities in several provinces."
In Kompong Cham the United Nations reported that fear of escape by prisoners had caused the prison commandant to require that prisoners be locked in cells 23 hours a day. The U.N. also reported — though the State Department did not — that prisoners generally lacked medical treatment, and that they lacked access to NGO defenders and to bail unless their families took the initiative.
Prostitution, and especially child prostitution, is an increasingly serious problem in Cambodia. The Cambodian Women's Development Association estimates that the number of commercial sex workers has burgeoned to 17,000. The report estimates that roughly one third are girls aged 12-17. The U.N. reports that there are increasing reports of kidnapping and trafficking in virgin children sold by poor families in provincial districts.
The Vietnamese in Cambodia continue to suffer from discrimination. Here again, the State Department fails to note what the U.N. has reported: that certain provincial and municipal authorities have been directed to register, detain and expel "illegal aliens." It does note that because there is no nationality law, it is difficult to determine who is an alien.
Overall, the State Department's report on Cambodia for 1995 is fair and accurate. Its weakness lies not in its compilation of egregious human rights violations, but in its failure to provide an overall picture of the political drama that is unfolding in Cambodia, and the context within
24
Cambodia
which systematic rather than isolated human rights abuses continue to occur.
25




I;
