Liberia
^he State Department's 1995 report on human rights in Liberia is a generally accurate and comprehensive picture of the complicated situation in that country. While this year's report improved in certain areas that were identified in the 1994 issue of the Critique, it nonetheless continues to be lacking in other respects. Particularly troubling are those problem areas that were identified in prior editions of the Critique. Specifically, the report continues to display bias in its characterization of the conduct of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Ceasefire Monitoring Group (ECOMOG). The report should also have made much stronger summary statements about the situation of women in Liberia, given that so many of the individual incidents of killings, torture and gender-specific abuse reflect a clear pattern of targeted attacks against women.
There are several improverrtents in this year's report. Its introduction is clearer now that it identifies the various factions involved in the civil war. The report also includes a more accurate section on freedom of speech and the press. Last year's edition of the Critique noted the inconsistencies in this section between topic sentences and the paragraphs that followed. In contrast, this year's section is written in a much more consistent manner. A particular improvement is the listing of specific examples of problems facing journalists, which thereby inhibited a free press. These examples included the beating of a British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) journalist by a police major associated with the Labor Ministry, and the beating of another journalist with The News by United Liberation Movement for Democracy in Liberia (ULIMO)-Krahn fighters.
Nonetheless, the section on freedom of speech and the press could be further improved. Specifically, the report should have noted that reporters outside Monrovia ran the risk of attack and harassment by ECOMOG soldiers who confiscated equipment and otherwise prevented journalists from reporting on events. Similarly, while the report states that journalist James Momo received death threats, it neglects to mention that Momo was beaten and had his camera confiscated by ECOMOG soldiers. The report also fails to mention an incident involving freedom of speech that would have cast doubt on its assertion that no member of
139
Critique 1995
the Monrovia-based consortium of human rights NGOs reported any governmental interference with its activities in 1995. In fact, according to the Catholic Justice and Peace Commission (CJPC), the management of the official Liberian Broadcasting System interfered with a CPJC radio program entitled "The Justice and Peace Forum." The program, which reported on human rights abuses by the various warring factions, was canceled without explanation in mid-September.
Several other parts of the report could also have been improved. Specifically, the report still demonstrates bias in favor of ECOMOG. This bias is particularly troubling since this weakness has been identified in previous editions of the Critique. For instance, while abuses perpetrated by certain factions are set forth as undisputed facts, ECOMOG's participation in human rights abuses is couched in more equivocal language.
Similarly, the report downplays human rights abuses committed by ECOMOG soldiers by sandwiching its descriptions of negative situations between positive statements, or by describing the negative act in a tone that belies the seriousness of the act. This is frequenUy apparent by the use of topic sentences that do not conform to the body of the paragraph. For example, the report states that ECOMOG is the military force supporting the transitional government, that it continued its humanitarian role and maintained a protective cordon around the cities of Monrovia and Buchanan. Yet the paragraph ends with the terse statement: "[tjhere were reports that a few ECOMOG soldiers committed human rights abuses such as arbitrary detention." As written, this .statement minimizes the seriousness of arbitrary detention carried out by ECOMOG.
The report also states that "there were reports that some ECOMOG soldiers beat individuals at checkpoints," but this comment is made after being couched in a paragraph which states that "to protect the 1.2 million people in Monrovia and Buchanan from rampant lawlessness and banditry ECOMOG established a protective cordon around those cities."
The report is also inaccurate in maintaining that "ECOMOG generally discouraged large scale parades or demonstrations for security reasons." In fact, demonstrations were not merely discouraged, but
140
Liberia
prohibited; as reported by the BBC, ECOMOG banned such "protests, demonstrations, and other potentially riotous forms of rallies as directed by the Liberian National Transitional Government" (LNTG). The report also fails to note that ECOMOG troops have developed a notorious reputation for extortion and looting, such that some Liberians contend that ECOMOG is an acronym for "every car or moveable object gone."
Finally, the discussion of ECOMOG would have been improved if it had accurately described the structure — or perhaps more precisely the lack of structure — within which ECOMOG operates. Currently, there is no official document that delineates the precise relationship between ECOMOG and the state of Liberia. In practice, ECOMOG has often carried out functions which should be the responsibility of the Liberian government, and when an organization challenges its authority, ECOMOG resists, as it did whçn the Liberian human rights community attempted to define ECOMOG's jurisdiction.
Similarly, the report should have also indicated that ECOMOG forces are in principle answerable to the ECOWAS defense commission. Yet ECOWAS has done little to ensure ECOMOG troops are properly trained, briefed on their roles as peacekeepers or made aware of international humanitarian law. In addition, there is no organized ECOMOG structure to discipline ECOMOG forces. The report could have also noted that Liberian courts have no jurisdiction over ECOMOG soldiers, and therefore those soldiers likely have no fear that their acts may be punished.
Besides the inadequate discussion of ECOMOG, the report should have also noted the lack of human rights provisions in the August 19 peace agreement and in the structure of the second transitional government (LNTG-II). As pointed out by both Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch/Africa, a failure to include provisions guaranteeing human rights and to provide a mechanism to address past human rights violations makes it more likely that the various factions will engage in further human rights violations to gain power.
The report also does not adequately address the ineffectiveness of the peacekeeping forces and the government in reporting or investigating human rights abuses. The April 9, 1995 massacre at Yosi, where
141
Critique 1995
62 civilians were killed, is illustrative of this failure. After the Yosi massacre, the report of the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) merely repeated observations made by UNICEF workers, while also stating that UNOMIL only had limited abilities to document such incidents. (The effort to create a human rights monitoring role within UNOMIL has apparently been abandoned.) LNTG-I similarly failed to pursue perpetrators of various human rights abuses. For instance, LNTG-I announced that it would set up a commission of inquiry to investigate the massacre of 50 civilians in Paynesville in December 1993. Subsequently, LNTG-I did nothing to pursue the alleged perpetrators.
The report should also have noted the danger of faction leaders assuming positions of power in LNTG-II. As Samuel K. Woods, a Liberian human rights activist, has stated: "To have criminals and warlords who have killed our people, to then emerge as the leaders of our people, is a contradiction." Illustrating this problem is a statement by Charles Taylor, leader of the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL) and a Council of State member, who maintained that only two people were lulled in a massacre around Kakata on October 8, 1995, instead of the 60 that were widely reported to have died. Similarly, the Liberian Peace Council (LPC), another Council of State member, executed four of its own commanders for human rights abuses. Yet as Amnesty International stated: "If the long-standing disregard for human rights is to be reversed, justice not further human rights abuses is needed."
The report should also have expanded its explanation of the status of the Armed Forces of Liberia (AFL). It maintains that the AFL was "largely inactive," although this is contradicted by reports that the AFL warned against holding demonstrations and public meetings during scheduled peace talks.
Finally, contrary to the State Department's own instructions to those preparing the Countiy Reports, the report should have identified the various actions taken by the U.N. For instance, the report should have noted that the U.N. named a chairman, Gerardo Martínez Blanco, to implement a mandatory arms embargo against Liberia, and that UNOMIL had a new military observer, Mahmud Muhammad Talah
142
Liberia
appointed. And in June 1995, the U.N. Secretary General recommended that UNOMlL's presence be terminated if peace talks did not progress. The need for an expanded discussion of the U.N.'s actions in Liberia is important, since UNOMIL, as an independent international presence, is in a critical position to implement peace agreements and to report on human rights violations.
143

1
:


t;
