Mexico
*he State Department's 1996 report on human rights practices in Mexico reproduces many of the same errors and weaknesses identified by previous editions of the Critique. The report relies excessively on the National Commission for Human Rights {Comisión Nacional de Derechos Humanos: CNDH) and other official sources for information, and excludes other independent and reliable sources. Furthermore, the report overemphasizes formal guarantees afforded under Mexican law, without assessing their vigor in practice. As in previous years, it also discusses certain abuses without providing much context. In spite of its breadth, the report omits important incidents as well as crucial facts in cases which are cited. Its assessments of government responsibility for abuse are often ambiguous, contradictory and at times misleading.
Tensions in U.S. policy toward Mexico between concern for human rights and other political and economic interests continue to be apparent in the report. It is generally cautious in ascribing responsibility for human rights violations to the Mexican government, the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party {Partido Revolucionario Institucional: PRI) and the administration of President Ernesto Zedillo. U.S. trade and investment interests and geopolitical concerns are secured by the commitment of President Zedillo and his party to continue Mexico's course of economic and institutional reform. The PRI also offers some measure of political stability, in spite of its selective use of anti-democratic and authoritarian practices. Not surprisingly, the conflict between U.S. political and economic interests and the State Department's human rights mandate is evident in the report's lack of sharpness and clarity.
During more than 60 years in power, the PRI has developed a complex political structure that is still often synonymous with state power (hereinafter sometimes reflected by the expression "PRI/government"). The PRI political machine incorporates, either formally or through alliances, multiple social organizations, including opposition political parties. At present, Mexican civil society is pressing for reform and democratization of the country's political institutions. The PRI has been
145
Critique 1995
sensitive to some pressures, as evidenced, for example, by greater electoral transparency; however, government officials continue to use authoritarian means to control opposition forces. The PRI also uses its social organizations to divide civil society and stifle or co-opt opposition voices.
In spite of the report's deficient analysis, government responsibility for human rights abuses emerges from a close reading of the data it presents. For example, the report notes that at least 34 extrajudicial killings in 1995 are either attributable to government security forces or contain some indications of government complicity, and that another 100 politically motivated killings have gone unprosecuted. The report mentions over 50 cases of alleged torture by security forces and another 50 rape charges against government officials. Some 160 arbitrary arrests and detentions are mentioned, as well as a number of forced disappearances. Meanwhile, independent human rights NGOs report that the actual number of violations in these areas is even higher. The report describes a severely flawed judicial system, with problems of corruption, lack of judicial independence and lack of due process. Also mentioned are cases of involuntary sterilization of women, intimidation and persecution of members of the press, complaints of electoral fraud and unpunished violence against homosexuals. The report repeats the CNDH's disturbing conclusion that 280 different government agencies were "presumably responsible" for human rights abuses. But the report offers scant evaluation of the Mexican government's responsibility for such abuses. Instead, the introduction asserts: "[t]he Government generally respected the human rights of its citizens. ..." Such vague conclusory statements prove to be disingenuous when independent sources of information are consulted and critical analysis is applied to the facts.
The impunity of military personnel for well-documented human rights violations committed in Chiapas, and of judicial officers for corruption and violation of due process, clearly implicate the government in these violations. The report brings critical analysis to bear on issues of discrimination, such as the combination of prejudice and state action regarding women and homosexuals, but slips noticeably when the focus turns to issues such as the impunity of state agents.
146
Mexico
The report's only yardstick for measuring government efforts to reduce human rights abuse is the work of the CNDH and government compliance with its recommendations. Such practice is unfortunate given the CNDH's limited resources, autonomy and involvement in much of the actual human rights reporting in Mexico. As a creation of the government, the CNDH's power is limited to making recommendations; other officials and agencies must decide whether to heed them. Most importantly, the CNDH was divested of much of its responsibility by the creation of state level human rights commissions {Comisiones Estatales de Derechos Humanos: CEDH). For example, the CNDH has issued no recommendations concerning the military's conduct in the Chiapas conflict. Meanwhile, the CEDH have been largely ineffective. Though technically responsible for collecting and reporting on the vast majority of abuses in Mexico, they have, often been negligent in investigating complaints, and are politically compromised by their relationships with state and local authorities.
The report's review of government compliance with the CNDH's recommendations offers no hint of the substance of those that were followed and those that were not, or the probable explanations for the governmental response. Some evidence suggests that in politically sensitive areas, the compliance rate is rather dismal. The National Network of Non-Governmental Human Rights Organizations {La Red Nacional de Organismos Civiles de Derechos Humanos "Todos los derechos para todos") found that in Chiapas the government had complied with only 27% of the CNDH's recommendations.
The report's only references to non-govemmental sources, other than newspaper accounts, are to Amnesty International, the International Labour Organisation (ILO), a women's organization in Chiapas, and a report on free speech published by a Mexican magazine. The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (lACHR) of the Organization of American States currently has approximately 30 pending human rights cases regarding Mexico, yet no reference is made to this fact or to the lACHR as a potential source of information. Numerous complaints have been filed against Mexico with the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, to which the report makes no reference. The report
147
Critique 1995
mentions that ministerial consultations were held under the North American Agreement on Labor Cooperation (NAALC), the labor side agreement to the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). However, the decision by the National Administrative Office (NAO) which led to such consultations, and reflected poorly on Mexico, is not mentioned in the report's section on labor rights. Human Rights Watch/Americas and the Minnesota Advocates for Human Rights published significant reports on human rights violations in Mexico in 1995, but the State Department fails to mention these sources. NGOs working in the area of human rights in Mexico number over 150, yet only one Mexican NGO is cited by the report as a source of information. There is no indication that additional Mexico-based human rights groups were consulted.
The section on political and other extrajudicial killings contains a particular focus on violence in the state of Guerrero, but provides only a cursory review of other prominent cases which arose in 1995. For example, the report addresses too superficially the persecution and acts of violence against the Revolutionary Democratic Party {Partido Revolucionario Democrático: PRD). The "Miguel Agustín Pro" Human Rights Center {Centro de Derechos Humanos Miguel Agustín Pro Juárez, A.C. : PRODH) maintains that in the first year of President Zedillo's administration more than 100 members of the PRD were assassinated. According to the PRODH, the frequency of such killings has doubled since the administration of Zedillo's predecessor, Carlos Salinas de Gortari. CNDH figures cited by the report, referring to the number of cases investigated by CNDH since 1992, give the impression of a problem which is much smaller in scale.
By selectively reporting statistics, the report also downplays the problem of torture. CNDH figures cited by the State Department suggest a marked decrease in the number of torture complaints filed with that entity in 1995; however, since the creation of 33 state and Federal District (Mexico City) human rights commissions (all of whose statistics are not cited by the report), the CNDH no longer receives the majority of complaints. For example, the report does not mention that the Veracruz State Human Rights Commission has received almost 6,000
148
Mexico
complaints, including many of torture, against members of the police and the judicial system. The report recognizes structural difficulties with bringing to justice those responsible for torture, such as the high burden of proof on the victim, but generally ignores the Mexican government's responsibility for such incidents.
The report does not adequately address the PRl'govemment's use of the legal system to weaken the political opposition. It states ambiguously that the detention of opposition political activists is "neither widespread nor systematic, but does occur frequently for short periods of time." For example, a court in the Federal District ordered the arrest of leaders of the traditionally oppositionist labor union of the Ruta-100 bus company in Mexico City {Sindicato Único de Trabajadores de ¡a Ruta-IOO: SUTAUR) on charges of internal union corruption. The report did not mention that Judge Polo Uscanga (who was,later murdered under circumstances suggesting that he was assassinated) resigned from the court due to pressure he received from the President of Federal District Superior Court. This pressure came after Judge Polo Uscanga refused three times to order the arrests of the union leaders because of insufficient evidence. The judge appointed in Polo Uscanga's place issued arrest orders only three days after entering office, which raised reasonable doubts as to whether the new judge actually reviewed the eleven volumes of transcripts concerning the case before making his decision.
Persecution by prosecution also occurs in many rural areas where local officials wield unbridled power. Government and PRI party officials often fabricate charges against rural, indigenous, labor and political party leaders to weaken their opposition. In Oaxaca, for example, prosecutors brought a series of questionable charges of crimes of moral turpitude against leaders of the Union of Indigenous Communities of the Northern Zone of the Isthmus {Unión de Comunidades Indígenas de la Zona Norte del Istmo: UCIZONI), which is based in the town of Matías Romero. UCIZONI leaders claim the charges have been brought to impede and distract attention from the investigation of the murders of UCIZONI leader Armando Augustin Bonifacio and other UCIZONI officials by local bosses {caciques).
149
Critique 1995
The report ignores the widespread persecution of debtors after the peso devaluation in 1994. Banks in Mexico have collaborated with the police, courts and prosecutors to extort and intimidate individuals to pay loan interest rates that are among the highest in the world. The Unión Nacional de Productores Agropecuarios, Industriales, Comerciantes y Prestadores de Servicios "El Barzón," a large association of indebted merchants, farmers and business entities, was organized to challenge bank practices of charging exorbitant interest rates, repossessing property and instigating legal actions against the debtors. El Barzón also claims that vandalism to offices, threats and attacks against its members have occurred on the orders of creditors and with the complicity of government authorities. Some El Barzón leaders were reportedly jailed illegally by the government in the last year. Another debtor organization, the National Association of Credit Card Users, requested the intervention of the Federal District Human Rights Commission (with jurisdiction in Mexico City) against the legal departments of certain banks, which had threatened to utilize the judicial system to imprison thousands of credit card users and embargo goods and services. According to the PRODH, half of the six million credit card users in Mexico have no possibility of repaying their debts.
The recent economic reforms and devaluation have had noticeably negative effects on public safety and civil liberties, and exacerbated the general feeling of lawlessness in Mexico. The report understates these trends. The Mexican government has responded with new public safety legislation, including the recently approved Law of the System of National Public Security, and the proposed Law against Organized Crime. Human rights observers in Mexico consider the legislation to be authoritarian and threatening to civil liberties. Some of the developments not mentioned by the report are the result of U.S. pressure for Mexico to combat drug traffickers. Articles 16, 20, 21 and 22 of the Mexican Constitution, which guarantee individual rights and liberties, have been reformed in anticipation of the proposed Law against Organized Crime, modeled after the far-reaching Racketeering Influence and Corrupt Organizations (RICO) statute in the United States. Given the pattern of human rights abuse in Mexico, human rights observers fear the new law, if passed, vsáll
150
Mexico
be used as an additional pretext for the persecution of political and social opposition to the PRl/govemment.
The militarization of civil police forces in several areas also bears mention. Because of widespread corruption, military officers have been given authority over police forces in Chihuahua, Morelos and Mexico City. Military personnel also have been used as agents of the Public Ministry {Ministerio Publico). This measure is highly threatening to civil liberties, because the Mexican military has been the source of many human rights violations and alleged corruption, and enjoys considerable impunity and independence from the civilian court system.
TTie report concludes that the Mexican government generally respects freedom of speech and the press. It does not mention that journalists are routinely harassed by police and government officials and private citizens who enjoy official protection. For example, in Nuevo Laredo, Tamaulipas, the newspaper El Mañana has faced censorship and harassment as a result of its opposition to the PRI. El Mañana's publisher has also claimed that she and reporters have received death threats in response to the paper's consistent and open criticism of the PRI/government.
The report asserts that the Mexican government has not forced a radio or television station off the air; however. Radio Huayacocotla, a short-wave radio station which broadcasts to indigenous communities in the northern sierra of Veracruz, and Radio Polanco, in Guadalajara, were forced off the air last year for alleged "technical violations." Radio Huayacocotla's manager is convinced, based upon past incidents of harassment, that the alleged violations were fabricated. In the last two years, the director of the station has been accused of broadcasting "coded messages" and promoting violence among indigenous communities, without substantiation.
Government pressure on the media via its regulatory authority is a serious issue in Mexico, which the State Department downplays. Without an examination of actual incidents, the report's brief discussion is not particularly illuminating. It repeats suggestions by critics that the government's power to grant or revoke licenses, which can pose a problem in almost all countries, has a chilling effect on free expression; however, the evidence suggests that the Mexican government is using this power
151
Critique 1995
excessively, and the report should have discussed this. Radio Huayacocotla, for instance, maintains that it has repeatedly been denied a license to broadcast over the AM-band because of the viewpoints aired by the station. Manipulation of the licensing power may well chill the competition needed to diminish the influence of the pro-government media company, Televisa, which controls 80% of Mexico's television market.
The report does not mention the government's large purchases of advertising space and provision of subsidized newsprint to papers, which undermine the independence of the press in Mexico. Such practices have had the effect of making newspapers financially accountable to the government. Threats to deny such government privileges have often proven useful for the government to maintain control over the press. Only four national print outlets have dared to be openly defiant and independent of the government: the dailies El Financiero, El Norte and Reforma and the weekly news magazine Proceso.
Rural Mexico saw numerous violent acts and human rights violations in 1995, especially in the southern states with large indigenous populations. The government has used these outbreaks of violence to justify an increased militarization of the countryside; military posts and checkpoints have become increasingly common. The report dedicates a lengthy section to the well publicized massacre of 17 peasants in the state of Guerrero, but does not capture the dimension of the problem in the countryside. Human rights groups, peasant organizations and indigenous rights groups describe a persistent conflict over land and other issues between peasants and ranchers. Local authorities, under the control of the ranchers, are generally recalcitrant in adjudicating and enforcing peasants' claims. The political manipulation of local bosses, the resort to violence by rural strongmen, and the denial of judicial remedies generate conflict, confrontation, violence and multiple human rights violations.
The report suggests that "local political rivalries," "family feuds" and peasant "invasions" of private property are at the root of rural violence; however, it fails to recognize the links between local caciques, the PRI and government officials. Private militias, such as the guardias blancas ("white guards") in Chiapas, operate with impunity, often with the acquiescence
152
Mexico
of state security forces, as in the case of the municipality of Chicomuselo. On January 10, 1995, guardias blancas armed with semi-automatic weapons confronted indigenous protesters who had occupied Chicomuselo's city hall. Violence erupted and at least six individuals were killed. State and local police officers observing the event failed to intervene in a timely manner to prevent the violence, and, according to some reports, joined with the private mihtia in their attack on the protesters. The case remains open, but lack of cooperation from state authorities has slowed the work of a special federal prosecutor.
Peasant invasions usually occur after long and frustrated attempts by the peasants to obtain government adjudication of land disputes. Even after a favorable adjudication, government officials often fail to implement the decrees, which leads to further violence. Three cases of human rights abuse against members of UCIZONI in 1995 illustrate various levels of government responsibility and complicity. In early 1995, a 30-year-old land dispute vsath local ranchers was finally adjudicated in favor of the indigenous peasants, but the ranchers blocked execution of the decree. In November 1995, Bias Santos Vásquez of UCIZONI was assassinated, allegedly by some of the ranchers. UCIZONI sees the assassination as part of the ranchers' ongoing intimidation of the peasants and resistance to the execution of the decree. Formal accusations have been filed against members of a particular ranching family, but no arrests have been made. As of April 1996, the peasants had still had not received possession of the land at issue.
The same month, Armando Agustín Bonifacio, a member of UCIZONI's board and a prominent leader in Mexico's indigenous rights movement, was assassinated under similar circumstances. He had been defending a group of peasants who fled from their village of origin, Santiago Tutla, because of harassment by local political bosses aligned with the PRI. Agustín was murdered on November 30 by a group of five armed men. the police thus far have failed to apprehend the gunmen, despite their being identified by witnesses. At the same time, local officials continue to intimidate members of the peasant community, alleging that UCIZONI leaders are members of the Chiapas-based rebel
153
Critique 1995
Zapatista Army of National Liberation (Ejército Zapatista de Liberación Nacional: EZLN).
Finally, in December 1995, Juan Carlos Beas Torres, an officer of UCIZONl, and 12 other members of that group received numerous death threats. Beas's case has been marred with confusion because of official government reports that he was under investigation for fraud and corruption against his own organization. Allegedly such charges were filed by UCIZONl's president, but this was untrue. The Public Ministry later admitted that no charges against Beas were pending. The case demonstrates the same pattern of harassment found in other cases, consisting of attempts to divide an independent organization and damage the prestige of its leaders.
Patterns of government neglect with respect to the claims of indigenous peasants, and false accusations against their organizations and leaders, were similarly at the root of the Guerrero massacre. The report mentions the work of CNDH, but fails to mention the allegations against Governor Rubén Figueroa for planning the repression and participating in his administration's subsequent state-level cover-up. The report also fails to assess critically the delays and other deficiencies and irregularities in the state-level investigation, such as the failure to take statements from many witnesses, threats against witnesses and the state's failure to comply with CNDH recommendations. In 1996, Figueroa was forced to resign, and was found by a two-judge commission of the Mexican Supreme Court to share, at a minimum, responsibility for the cover-up. Independent human rights organizations had alleged his involvement since the beginning of the investigation, supported by testimony from a local mayor. Progress in the Guerrero case was obtained primarily as result of public pressure. The Supreme Court and federal authorities refused to become involved with the case until recently, even though their intervention was solicited from the start by human rights advocates and the victims' families, who argued that the matter fell within the court's authority over cases affecting the well-being of the nation.
Notwithstanding official resignations, dismissals and the criminal proceedings currently underway, the case is still indicative of problems within the judicial system of investigating and prosecuting human rights
154
Mexico
violators. In spite of recommendations by the CNDH, no measures have been implemented to restructure the police force or prevent the recurrence of similar acts of abuse and cover-up. In the 12-month period following the June 28 massacre, over 100 extrajudicial killings occurred in the same region of Guerrero. All have remained unsolved. In light of these facts, the report's general reference to "family feuds" as the source of more killings is grossly misleading.
Another example of the report's failure to assess meaningfully governmental non-compliance with CNDH recommendations concerns the killing of two peasant leaders in the community of Plan de Encinal, Veracruz. The report mentions only that state officials blocked attempts by Amnesty International to conduct autopsies on the victims, and states that authorities have made no progress on the case. The report fails to mention that the Veracruz State Human Rights Commission identified the probable guilty parties and asked that arrest warrants be issued, but authorities have failed to act. The case was presented to the lACHR by PRODH and the Center for Justice and International Law. In April 1996, the offices of PRODH were burglarized, and the file of this case was the only item taken.
The report correctly identifies the conflict in Chiapas as an internal conflict in which international humanitarian law is applicable; however, it fails to mention that the Mexican government refuses to take such a view. The government styled their military offensive a "judicial operation," with "support" by the army to carry out arrest warrants against the Zapatista leadership. During the offensive, the Mexican Army invaded and ransacked the homes of peasants who had fled out of fear of the army's advance.
The report's account of the expulsion of U.S. cler^man Loren Riebe, along with other priests working in Chiapas, is misleading. The case should have been easy to report since Riebe provided thorough
information regarding the situation to the State Department. The «
Mexican government alleges he was inciting peasants in Chiapas to participate in land invasions, based on testimony by a woman who claims she overheard Riebe planning peasant land invasions with Bishop Samuel Ruiz at a local religious celebration. The content of the claim lacks
155
Critique 1995
credibility on its face. Riebe has documentation, submitted to the State Department, that proves he was in the United States at the time the conversation is alleged to have occurred. The report fails to assess the Mexican government's claims. The report also is misleading when it states out of context that Church leaders were "pleased" with their meeting with government officials on the matter.
The passage dealing with the Chiapas conflict recites the official military version of events concerning three heavily documented cases of extrajudicial killings committed by the Mexican Army during the January 1994 hostilities. At the beginning of its discussion of the cases, the report states: "The law does not require civil trial of soldiers involved in civil crimes, and the military continues to handle such cases." This is erroneous. Article 13 of the Constitution states that military personnel should be judged by civil tribunals for crimes against civilians. The practice of submitting military personnel only to military tribunals for crimes against civilians is contrary to Article 13. The three cases included in the report concern: five men shot at close range at the Ocosingo market with their hands bound behind their backs; the murder of 11 individuals at an Ocosingo medical clinic; and the disappearance of three men from the community of Morelia in the municipality of Altamirano. The report begins the account of each case with a similar phrase: "the military alleges. . . , the army claims. . . , the army continues to stand by its assertion. . . ." It makes no attempt to critically assess the military's claims, and fails to shed light on the incidents, despite information readily available from independent sources.
The report repeats the army's claim that Second Lieutenant Arturo Jiménez Morales, the officer allegedly responsible for killing eight civilians at the Ocosingo clinic, committed suicide after being questioned by military authorities. It ignores the fact that eleven individuals were killed, not just the eight attributed to Jiménez, and fails to critique the military's version of the events and the suspicious "suicide" of Jiménez. Human Rights Watch/Americas issued a report in 1995 which found serious irregularities and contradictions in the army investigations and reports on these matters. The army prosecutor's report on the clinic deaths does not take into account any of the testimony provided by civilians. Jiménez is
156
Mexico
not listed among those interviewed by the prosecutor. He was only later questioned in April 1994 by high-ranking officers at the Ministry of National Defense in Mexico City, after which he allegedly committed suicide.
The army prosecutor also did not report the contents of Jiménez's confession. The report from a separate internal investigation of the alleged suicide does not explain why Jiménez was not immediately disarmed and placed into custody after confessing the crime. Other questions casting doubt upon the alleged suicide are not adequately answered by the army's report. In fact, the alleged responsibility and suicide of Jiménez only became public after it was revealed by military authorities to the director of Human Rights Watch/Americas in April 1995.
In the case of the three men disappeared from Morelia, forensic experts from Physicians for Human Rights have positively identified their remains in a clandestine grave. The report admits their remains were discovered, but fails to note that the CNDH has refused to recognize the experts' work and continues to officially list the cases from Morelia as unresolved "disappearances." The government, meanwhile, has closed its investigation of the "disappearances" without seeking to bring anyone to justice.
With respect to human rights violations, the report includes no analysis of the failings of the internal army investigations, the lack of public accountability and the failure of the army to prosecute any of its members for crimes against civilians. The repetition of skeletal, official military versions is again misleading. The report offers no critical assessment of the work of the CNDH in response to human rights violations committed during the Chiapas conflict, and the CNDH's failure to make recommendations concerning the Mexican military.
In the area of labor rights, most problems in Mexico stem from the PRI/government's efforts to control the labor movement through "corporative" unions affiliated with the PRI or otherwise aligned with it. The report recognizes the link between the major unions and the PRI, but fails to analyze complaints concerning the right to free association and the right to organize and bargain collectively in this context. A pattern of
157
Critique 1995
violations of the rights of independent unions and their organizers is discernible from the complaints brought before domestic human rights groups and international fora such as the ILO and the NAO. This pattern includes: the government's failure to protect workers from intimidation and unjust dismissal which result from their attempts to form independent unions; inadequate access to judicial remedies or, in some cases, deficiencies in the remedies themselves; and the imposition of technical obstacles to the registration of independent unions. The report does not adequately recognize this systematic infringement of the rights of the independent labor movement.
The report credits Mexico for the formal guarantees of labor rights contained in the Constitution and the Federal Labor Law (LFT), without critiquing sufficiently their application. Pro-union provisions of the law work favorably for pro-government unions aligned vsdth the dominant Confederation of Mexican Workers {Confederación de Trabajadores Mexicanos: CTM), which is affiliated with the PRl. As the NAO's findings suggest, the protections of the law are enforced unequally. The LFT is supposed to protect unions from government interference in their internal affairs; however, from a practical standpoint, this enables pro-government union leaders to consolidate power, stifle internal opposition and act undemocratically. The complaint submitted to the NAO by workers at the SONY subsidiary, Magnéticos de México (a maquiladora in Nuevo Laredo, Tamaulipas), included allegations against the official, CTM-backed union for the use of strong-arm tactics in collaboration with the employer. The local labor tribunal also placed technical obstacles to the registration of an independent union. The report recognizes the problem of internal union democracy and transparency, but fails to link it to PRI corporativism and government complicity in the infringement of labor rights.
Independent social organizations regularly complain of intervention by the government and the PRI to "divide and conquer," or effectively co-opt their organizations. Usually members are recruited inside the organizations and provided with money and resources to create parallel leadership or organizations. Such tactics facilitate the legal recognition of pro-government faaions and the denunciation of independent leaders
158
Mexico
as corrupt, or in some cases tiie filing of criminal charges against the independent leaders of these organizations. The Fray Bartolomé de las Casas Human Rights Center of the Diocese of San Cristóbal, Chiapas, has received numerous complaints of such tactics from local chapters of the Regional Association of Collective Interest (Asociación Regional de Interés Colectivo), an association of indigenous ejido cooperatives. Charges of corruption against PRI-backed union leaders are rarely, if ever, prosecuted, while charges of corruption against independent leaders allow selective persecution by prosecution of the opposition.
The debate over social security reforms in 1995 provided another example of how rights to freedom of association and expression are restricted. Reforms to Mexico's social security law provoked serious divisions, including within the PRI-aligned labor movement. Labor activists and union leaders who vigorously opposed the reforms and the official position taken by the CTM hierarchy were intimidated and accused by government officials of having links with the Zapatista guerrillas. In general, the government program to privatize public entities has met with significant opposition and protest from independent labor groups and leaders. Complaints of selective measures being used to intimidate such opponents of privatization have increased.
Some of the problems in the area of labor rights may have technical legal solutions, as suggested by the ILO and NAO recommendations, but past practice suggests that technical perfection of the law will not suffice to end the pattern of abuse of labor rights in Mexico. The report fails to take this context into account in its assessment of the Mexican government's respect for the right of association and the right to organize and bargain collectively.
In its assessment of Mexico's respect for political rights, the report states that the government no longer restricts the activities of political opponents. Such a statement is not completely true; continued violence against PRD activists suggests that the government's old habits die hard. Moreover, the PRI continues to manipulate elections in a variety of ways. For example, the PRI overspends its opponents by large margins in campaigns, which the opposition alleges illegally include government funds. In the 1995 Tabasco election, for example, the PRI candidate for
159
Critique 1995
governor allegedly spent US$70 million, which was 60 times over the legal limit on campaign spending. Opposition candidates commonly claim that the PRI uses its vast resources to buy elections and even opposition candidates. Ledgers leaked to the press from the PRI's 1995 Tabasco gubernatorial campaign indicate that PRD leaders were among those paid off.
Furthermore, the government intimidates opposition candidates by auditing or conducting criminal investigations against candidates or family members before an election. Opposition candidates often find it difficult to acquire advertising space in the media and must cope vrith negative media reports from pro-government television prior to an election, as occurred in Tamaulipas during November, 1995. The PRI also mobilizes its affiliated labor unions and social organizations to gamer support for party candidates and pressure members to support party candidates by linking job security to voting for the PRI.
The report does not thoroughly assess the accuracy and fairness of the election process during recent federal and state elections. Though the Mexican government attempted to demonstrate the legitimacy of the elections by having election monitors from participating parties and civic organizations, there have been credible reports of irregularities in the monitoring process. In Tamaulipas, for example, a non-governmental report cited that one half of the monitors from the PRD were denied observer status by electoral officials on election day due to technical errors in documents improperly completed by the Federal Electoral Institute, which runs and monitors the elections.
The report also omits important criticism of the selection process for voting place officers. The District Boards of the Federal Electoral Institute randomly select 15% of registered voters from a voting district to be included in a pool of potential voting-place monitors. The District Board then selects those who will be invited to take a special training course; however. District Boards have been accused of manipulating the process to fill the pool with their personal selections. The report also fails to mention problems posed by Mexico's process of invalidating votes from polling places where fraud is alleged to have occurred. By voiding all results from such polls, the Federal Electoral Institute effectively
160
Mexico
disenfranchises a whole bloc of voters. This process could be used to neutralize entire blocks of support for opposition parties simply by alleging (or committing) fraud in particular districts.
The State Department's 1995 report on Mexico lacks in depth what it has in breadth. Its continued excessive reliance on governmental sources appears to reinforce a tendency to eschew critical analysis. As suggested in previous editions of the Critique, future reports would benefit from greater attention to non-governmental sources, especially Mexican human rights groups. Their reporting may compel the State Department to take a fresh look at its analysis of a situation that now requires more probing attention than it has so far received.
161





w:
