Nigeria
hen the State Department reported the state of human rights in Nigeria in 1994 as "dismal," it apparently did not foresee the need for a description of "worse than dismal." Thus, in its 1995 report, it merely says that the human rights situation in Nigeria "worsened" in 1995. This is unfortunately correct. Human rights in Nigeria reached a new low in 1995, and the report has generally taken pains to detail the more significant abuses and to provide sufficient examples of other human rights violations. What is more disconcerting than any shortcomings in the report, however, is that the State Department's criticisms of human rights violations in Nigeria in 1995 was both too little and too late. In particular, U.S. condemnation came too late in the case of Ken Saro-Wiwa and his eight co-defendants who were executed in November. The public outcry and diplomatic initiatives that followed the execution of the nine Ogoni would have been better spent in an attempt to save their lives rather than to criticize their deaths. A principal purpose for the gathering by the U.S. government of this type of information concerning human rights abuses abroad must be not just to monitor human rights violations as they occur, but to predict and take steps to prevent events such as the senseless killing of Ken Saro-Wiwa and others like him.
The execution of Ken Saro-Wiwa and his eight Ogoni co-defendants received a great deal of international publicity and condemnation. The biased nature of the tribunal that convicted Saro-Wiwa and the others emphasizes one significant reason for concern over the escalation in executions in Nigeria in 1995. A majority, if not all, of those executed in 1995 were also convicted by special tribunals set up by the military government. The Committee for the Defence of Human Rights (CDHR), a local NGO, estimated that there are more than 800 convicted armed robbers on death row. Persons accused of armed robbery, for example, are tried before special Robbery and Firearms Tribunals that lack fundamental notions of due process, and there is no right of appeal from the decisions of these tribunals.
By October 1995, more than 86 persons had been executed for armed robbery. Between July and September, CDHR reported 75 executions: 43
163
Critique 1995
in Lagos, 18 in Delta State, and 14 in Akwa-Ibom State. Amnesty International noted that in addition to the 43 persons executed in Lagos on July 22, six more were executed on July 26 and five in Adamawa State on the same day. The report, which notes that "in practice tribunal proceedings often deny defendants due process," fails to mention the increasingly deadly results of proceedings in these tribunals. This does not mean the State Department has to take a stand in opposition to the death penalty, which lies outside the mandate of the Country Reports. Rather, the alarming rate of executions in Nigeria must be placed within the context of the report's discussion of the denial of fair public trial stemming from specially formed tribunals.
The 1995 report provides an excellent discussion of extrajudicial killings in Nigeria. Occasionally in past years, the Crititfue has noted a lack of attention to the extremely serious problem of frequent killings of Nigerian citizens by police and other security service personnel. This year's report not only states forthrightly that the police and security forces "commonly engaged in" extrajudicial killings, but also emphasizes the Nigerian government's failure to hold its security personnel accountable for their excessive uses of force. In addition, the report provides a detailed list of examples of extrajudicial killings that occurred in 1995. Clearly, the Abacha government has done nothing to improve upon the atrocious record of its predecessor in this area. In fact, it appears that Abacha's own willingness to resort to violations of fundamental human rights to repress his critics is paralleled by the lower ranks of the police and the security forces, who also abuse their authority with impunity. One statistic reported by CDHR that the report does not include is that between April and June, 1995, 34 persons were killed by police in Lagos and Oyo states alone. The police apparently claimed that all of those killed were armed robbery suspects. One of the deceased was aged 16.
For those of its critics that the Abacha government chose not to kill — judicially or otherwise — extended incarceration increasingly became the norm. One major flaw in the reporting of arbitrary detentions and arrests is the report's frequent failure to state whether those persons incarcerated during the course of 1995 had been released at year end.
164
Nigeria
Although the report does recount the names of persons who were arrested in 1993 and remained in detention at the end of 1995, it often does not provide the same information for those arrested in 1995. It was often the case with the persecution of political figures that they were imprisoned briefly and then released. Therefore, it was often difficult to know whether someone sentenced to five years in prison is still actually imprisoned in any given year. The Abacha government, on the other hand, has demonstrated an increasing willingness to leave its critics in prison indefinitely.
The report notes that Sylvester Odion-Akhaine, secretary general of the Campaign for Democracy, was arrested on January 17, 1995. No further explanation is given as to whether, by the end of the year, Mr. Odion remained in prison and whether he had been charged with any crime. This type of reporting is essential and should in any event be part of the State Department's efforts throughout the year to track the status of political prisoners.
A number of examples of arbitrary arrests escaped the State Department's attention in 1995. For instance. Dr. Charles Ugboma, a doctor who treated M.K.O. Abiola, legitimate winner of the 1993 elections, in prison, was arrested and held incommunicado. CDHR reported the arrest on February 20 of Samson Ranti, chairman of the Kwara State Public Service Joint Negotiating Council, and on March 27 of Bisi Fakayode, chairman of the Nigerian Labour Congress in Kwara State. On June 13, government forces arrested Alao Aka-Bashorun, chairman of the Democratic Alternative (DA), and Dr. Onje Gye-Wado, a member of DA's National Coordinating Committee. Aka-Bashorun was arraigned 12 days later and charged with conduct likely to breach public peace. Ayo Opadokun, general secretary of the National Democratic Coalition (NADECO), was also arrested by government forces in 1995. The Lawyers Committee is not currently aware whether any of these men have been released from jail.
Some of the details recounted in the report are confusing, misleading or simply inaccurate, and a number of proper names are misspelled. For instance, the description of the arrest of CLO employees Steve Aluko and Tunde Akanni (misspelled "Akannu") is confusing in that it is unclear
165
Critique 1995
when, if at all, both men were released from detention. According to at least one source, Akanni remained in detention for 17 days before being granted bail. Dr. Beko Ransome-Kuti was arrested and sentenced to life imprisonment for being an "accessory after the fact of treason." His offense was to distribute the statement of a suspect in an alleged coup plot, Ralph Bello Fadile, to international human rights organizations and diplomatic missions. Furthermore, the report's discussion of the Ogoni arrested in 1995 lends the improper impression that only a handful of Ogoni were detained. Although the exact number is unavailable, credible reports say that at least 100 Ogoni were detained by the government and that even after the execution of Saro-Wiwa and his co-defendants in November, the number of Ogoni who remained in detention far exceeded the dozen or so noted in the report.
Those imprisoned by the Abacha government were often at risk of bodily harm from torture in addition to the hardships normally associated with the abysmal prison conditions found in Nigeria. The constant stream of credible allegations of torture in Nigerian prisons is of particular concern to the Lawyers Committee. This is an issue that has received little attention from the State Department, although it has consistently acknowledged over the years that there are credible reports of torture in Nigeria. In 1995, international organizations recounted that both Ken Saro-Wiwa and his co-defendant Baribor Bera were beaten in detention. Bera allegedly showed the special tribunal scars from the beatings inflicted upon him and stated that he had been stripped naked, tied to a pillar, flogged with a horsewhip, and forced to swallow teeth knocked out by the beatings. CDHR related meanwhile that Clement Tusima, who died in detention, had also been tortured by his detainers. Finally, both Lt. Col. M.A Igwe and Col. G.A. Ajayi alleged that they were subjected to torture and vicious interrogation after their arrests for involvement in an alleged coup plot.
The Abacha government has done little or nothing to ameliorate the problem of prisoners awaiting trial for years. The State Department report, while consistently recognizing the problem of lengthy pre-trial detention, just as consistently fails to emphasize the seriousness of this problem given the length of the detentions and the poor conditions in
166
Nigeria
Nigerian prisons. In the past, the Critique has pointed out that lengthy pre-trial detention affects a number of important rights such as the presumption of innocence, the right to a fair trial and even the right to life. The efforts of local NGOs have been successful in a limited number of cases, but these cases remain sad examples of the magnitude of this problem. Thus, for example, on January 5, the Constitutional Rights Project secured the release from detention of four persons who had each been detained without trial for between seven and nine years. Nevertheless, it will require a commitment by the government to make a significant impact on the number of persons awaiting trial for extended periods of time.
The report once again notes that accusations that the Nigerian government is engaged in a "genocida! campaign against the Ogoni are unfounded." The 1994 edition of the Critique pointed out that although the campaign against the Ogoni has not reached the level of genocide, it should not take a genocidal campaign to evoke a stronger condemnation from the United States government. In July 1995, Human Rights Watch/Africa released an extensive report documenting flagrant human rights abuses by the Nigerian government against the Ogoni people and, to a lesser extent, other ethnic groups in Nigeria's oil-producing region. The Human Rights Watch report details such abuses as extrajudicial killings, indiscriminate shootings, rape, torture, and looting by Nigerian security forces, particularly by the Rivers State Internal Security Task Force commanded by Lt.-Col. Paul Okuntimo. Furthermore, the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization (UNPO) stated in March that: "There appears to be a government policy aimed at strangling the Ogoni community's social, political and economic life. Daily, gross human rights violations are being perpetrated against the Ogoni people by the security forces." UNPO noted that during the Saro-Wiwa trial, gatherings of Ogoni women who were fasting and holding prayer meetings were broken up by security forces using excessive force, including teargas. Clearly, the State Department should be more concerned with the very serious abuses inflicted upon the Ogoni people than with the repeated reminder that those abuses have not yet reached the level of "genocide."
167
Critique 1995
The Abacha government did not spare members of the press who dared to criticize the military government's actions in 1995. The State Department report lists a number of journalists who were arrested for writing, publishing or airing stories critical of the government. But naming other cases would have given a more complete picture of the scope of abuse of press freedom. For example, CDHR reported the arrest of Ocheriome Nnanna, deputy political editor of Vanguard Newspapers on February 20 at his Apapa office. Also in March, police attempted to arrest Dapo Olorunyomi, editor in chief of THENEWS. Not finding Olorunyomi at home, the police detained his wife and three-month-old infant. Olorunyomi apparently went into hiding. In the same month, Olufisayo Alabi, publisher of Osun Voice, was arrested by security agents in Osun State after publication of a story on a regional official entitled "Udofia's Administration: The Reign of Agony." Bala Dan Abu, editor in chief of Majestic Weekly, was imprisoned in April by security forces in Lagos. He was released two days later. Dan Abu's arrest was reportedly in connection with an article called "Problem Pure Abiola." In July, the government detained Lekam Otufodunrin, a reporter for A.M. News.
In less drastic actions, Fidel Egwuche, editor of the Kogi State government-owned newspaper, The Graphic, was suspended indefinitely by the state's military administrator. Colonel Paul Omeruo, who complained of negative attacks on the state and federal governments. In addition, the government announced on July 3 that all newspapers and magazines would have to register with a Newspaper Registration Board and deposit 250,000 Kfljra (approximately U.S.$11,423) and pay 100,000 naira (approximately U.S.$4,569) fee.
The report also notes that a 1991 decree provides that only sitting or retired civilian judges may preside over tribunals hearing "nonmilitary cases." Assuming that this means proceedings in which the accused are civilians, this decree would conflict with the State Department's report that the special military tribunal convened to examine the alleged coup plot convicted and sentenced seven civilians as well as a number of soldiers. The report should have condemned such a contradiction in the Nigerian government's implementation of its own decrees.
168
Nigeria
Over the years, this Critique has paid particular attention to the State Department's description of whether a Constitution is actually in effect in Nigeria, in part because of the confusing nature of the interplay between constitutional provisions and military decrees, which supersede the Constitution. Unfortunately, the language in this year's report is once again confusing and perhaps deceptive. The report notes that "some provisions of the 1979 and 1989 constitutions were observed, although the deaee suspending the 1979 constitution was not repealed, and the 1989 constitution was never implemented." It would seem pointless at this writing, in 1996, to continue to reference the proposed 1989 Constitution which has never been implemented or promulgated into law by a civilian government. Furthermore, the decree suspending the 1979 Constitution specifically suspended the chapter providing for fundamental human rights. The report does not explain what constitutional provisions were actually "observed" and by whom, thereby leaving the incorrect inference that there is some recourse in Nigerian courts to a federal constitution. Finally, the report omits appropriate language in the introduction that was included in last year's report indicating that the government expressly made reference to the continued suspension of constitutional rights, lest there be any doubt on the part of the public. Rather, as the report only notes much later in its section on the denial of a fair public trial, the military government reiterated in 1995 that Decree No. 12 of 1994 divests the judiciary of any authority to question the actions of the federal government.
169

t:
