South Africa
ike its immediate predecessors, the State Department's 1995 i'report provides a fairly comprehensive overview of human rights practices in post-apartheid South Africa. With the election of the Government of National Unity led by the African National Congress (ANC) in April 1994, South Africa is experiencing a social, political and economic renaissance. No longer accorded pariah status in the international community, post-apartheid South Africa is well on its way to transforming itself into a significant global actor.
In the international media, post-apartheid South Africa is often portrayed as the catalyst that will speed up democratization and development efforts throughout the Continent. In particular, through the Southern African Development Committee (SADC), South African cooperation will be key to the success of regional economic development projects. Unfortunately, discussion of such economic development efforts is noticeably absent from the report, and this constitutes its major flaw — the failure to locate its discussion of human rights within the context of South Africa's economic, social and political development.
In post-apartheid South Africa, the practical realization of first-generation civil and political rights will largely turn on whether the new nation has the capacity to provide an economic environment in which the basic human needs of its citizens can be met. Further, future compliance with first-generation civil and political rights standards will largely depend on whether the Government of National Unity is able to eradicate the vestiges of apartheid, which are starkly apparent in the separate and widely divergent lives that blacks and whites in South Africa still lead. While the report does acknowledge some of the disparities between black and white living standards in the new South Africa, it does not challenge these economic inequalities as human rights issues that may compromise South Africa's future development.
Despite these flaws, the report correctly includes discussion of the interim Constitution and the plans to finalize the Constitution in 1996. But it does not examine South Africans' conception of human rights as revealed through the extraordinary ongoing public discourse concerning the principles and ideals that should be included in the Constitution.
209
Critique 1995
Because South Africa is still at the initial stages of building a post-apartheid society, discussing the constitutional law making process within the context of the current political environment is crucial to an assessment of South Africa's commitment to human rights in the future.
A prime example of such political discourse involves separation of church and state concerns. It has been argued that South Africa should be a secular state — meaning that there would be no official religion but that the state would value the principles of religious tolerance, freedom and diversity. Although this appears to be a fundamental democratic and human rights principle, it was met with some resistance from some South African Christians. According to an article in Constitutional Talk, the official newsletter of the Constitutional Assembly, there was a campaign to give the Constitution an overdy Christian character, led by the African Christian Democratic Party (ACDP) and a group called the Christian Voice. Among other things, these groups were concerned that the interim Constitution does not acknowledge the authority of a Christian God in its preamble, permits abortion and upholds freedom of sexual orientation as a basic right.
There is also widespread discussion as to whether the Constitution's equality provisions will undermine traditional African customary law. As the new South Africa becomes a signatory to international human rights instruments, immediate questions arise as to whether adherence to customary law means that South Africa, the putative leader of the African world, will embrace cultural relativism in its conception of human rights or join the global trend toward a more universal understanding of human rights. Unfortunately, the report does not address these important questions.
Additionally, apart from limited children's and labor rights, the interim Constitution does not protect social and economic rights. Nevertheless, at the Constitutional Assembly, both the Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU) and the National Congress of Trade Unions (NACTU) advocated the inclusion of second-generation social and economic rights in the final Constitution. COSATU, however, tempered its position by stating that the inclusion of social and economic rights should not impose a legal obligation on the state, but should be
210
South Africa
provided for in light of available resources. With this in mind, it is evident that many South Africans are concerned with religion, traditional African ways of life, and social and economic rights. Accordingly, as some of this popular thinldng could be enshrined as principles in the new Constitution, the report is remiss in not examining the constitutional lawmaking process within the context of the debates that surround it.
The report also fails to examine human rights within the broader context of economic development. Future reports should monitor the South African government's efforts to foster sustainable development and alleviate poverty, particularly in predominantly African communities. The Government of National Unity has introduced a number of policies designed to reduce government expenditures, relax exchange controls, remove barriers to competition and foster infrastructural development. South Africa's public corporations are of particular importance to the government's infrastructural development program. Transnet, the state-owned transport group, and ESKOM, the public utility agency that supplies electricity, are ranked as South Africa's 10th and 11th largest businesses respectively, in terms of assets. The expansion of government infrastructural development programs and comparable initiatives in the private sector will create new jobs which will have direct bearing on South Africa's chronic unemployment problem. At present, the unemployment rate in South Africa is a staggering 40% in the formal economy.
The most difficult challenges facing the new South Africa as it strives for economic development involve the enduring vestiges of apartheid, particularly the disparity between black and white living standards. According to a 1995 "Country Profile and a Fact Sheet" distributed by The Africa Fund, a research group established by the American Committee on Africa in 1966, South Africa's per capita GDP of $3,885 compares favorably with those of many nations within the industrialized world. The gross disparity of income, however, between black and white is significant, with the white GDP per capita being $14,920 compared to a paltry $1,710 for blacks. Further, whites continue to control approximately 54% of post-apartheid South Africa's national income, even though they comprise only about 13% of the population. Africans, on the other hand, have only a 36% share of the national income. In
211
Critique 1995
short, whites have personal incomes per capita about 9.5 times those of Africans, 4.5 times those formerly designated as "Coloureds" and three times those of Asians. Ultimately, to be black in South Africa still largely coincides with economic disadvantage. It is a significant omission for the report to ignore these economic inequalities.
The report correctly notes that South Africa experienced less politically motivated violence in 1995 than in 1994, according to the Human Rights Committee of South Africa, with less than half the number of violent deaths. The committee, which is an independent monitoring group, has found that an average of 97 politically motivated killings occurred every month in 1995, compared to 223 a month in the previous year.
Although the report focuses attention on KwaZulu Natal, where over two-thirds of the country's political killings occurred in 1995, it fails to mention the Human Rights Committee's explanation for the falling rate of political violence. Specifically, the monthly death toll in KwaZulu Natal has dropped by one-half. The Human Rights Committee stated that "the continued presence of the police and the army in trouble spots is an important factor which, taken together with the political will of the Inkatha Freedom Party to demonstrate the province is governable, helps to provide an explanation." Nevertheless, the Human Rights Committee also pointed out that while deaths in KwaZulu Natal had dropped, political intolerance remained high. In short, the report fails to consider the committee's plausible explanation for the drop in the number of political killings in KwaZulu Natal, which is that "large-scale indiscriminate attacks have given way to more well-organized targeted attacks against specific individuals."
Additionally, the report fails to state that the political violence in KwaZulu Natal continues to have a devastating impact on daily life in that region. The political violence has had a particularly severe impact on the Mandisi/Isithebe industrial complex region on the north coast of KwaZulu Natal, which has seen production slide by as much as 50% at some of its textile, clothing and metal factories. The violence has caused workers to fear for their lives. Consequently, workers are routinely absent
212
South Africa
from work and either report to work late or leave early to avoid traveling to or from work when it is dark.
The report provides a scant overview of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission created through the legislative action of Parliament and signed into law by President Nelson Mandela. Archbishop Desmond Tutu, the Anglican Archbishop of Cape Town and 1984 Nobel Peace Laureate, was appointed to head the commission by President Mandela's Cabinet on November 29, 1995. Sixteen others were also named to the commission, which began its hearings in April 1996. Charged with probing human rights abuses committed during the apartheid era, dating back to 1960, the commission's examination of the past will have serious political ramifications for South Africa's future.
At present the commission is organized into three sub-committees. The body will investigate all politically motivated crimes committed by members and allies of the former apartheid regime, as well as violations perpetrated by members of the liberation movements. In exchange for full disclosure of their crimes, one committee has the discretionary power to offer former human rights violators amnesty and indemnity from prosecution. Finally, another committee is charged with the administration of a reparations program for victims, the families of deceased or living victims and those who lost property during the struggle for freedom.
The report correctly states that on December 15, 1995, South Africa ratified the 1979 Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), which came into force on September 3, 1981. There is no mention, however, of the practical effect of this ratification. Section 8(1), commonly referred to as the equality clause, guarantees to every person the right to "equality before the law" and to "equal protection of the law." Adoption of the CEDAW will have an impact on the ongoing tension between many South African women who seek to fully participate in South African society on an equal footing with men and more traditional leaders who argue that application of the interim Constitution's equality clause and universal human rights standards to customary law will undermine African culture.
213
Critique 1995
In particular, at least one commentator, Fulbright Scholar ICim L. Robinson, formerly a Visiting Researcher at the Gender Research Project of the Centre for Applied Legal Studies at the University of Witwatersrand, has called for the new Government of National Unity to pay particular attention to the constitutionality of section 1 l(3)(b) of the Black Administration Act 38 of 1927 (sectionn(3)(b) of the Black Administration Act) and section 27(3) of the KwaZuIu Act of the Code of Zulu Law and the Natal Code of Zulu Law (section 27(3) of the KwaZulu Act). Section ll(3)(b) of the Black Administration Act provides that African women married under customary law have the legal status of minors. Under section 27(3) of the KwaZulu Act, women are subject to the marital authority of their husbands. Robinson argues that it is highly questionable whether these provisions are truly customary law. Nevertheless, notwithstanding the putative cultural basis for such laws, Robinson correctly argues that such laws should be repealed because they are incompatible with the development of a post-apartheid democracy, have severe social and economic consequences for African women, impede African women's participation in the Reconstruction and Development Programme and contravene the basic constitutional promise of equality. In short, the report does not discuss these important legal and social questions that have direct bearing on whether women, particularly African women, will be able to fully participate in South African society.
One of the first announcements made by President Nelson Mandela after the April 1994 election was related to the domestic application of principles enshrined in the Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989). The report fails to state that South Africa, through its Ambassador to the United Nations, Josiah Jele, ratified the convention on June 16, 1995. The report correctly notes that several of President Mandela's "Presidential Initiatives" under the Reconstruction and Development Programme (RDP) are directed toward child welfare. In particular, the report correcdy states that there are now programs in place to provide free health care to pregnant mothers and children under the age of six, as well as school nutrition programs to provide meals to primary school children. However, the report does not state whether these programs are comprehensive. According to Minister Jay Naidoo, who until recently was
214
South Africa
in charge of the Reconstruction and Development Programme, some 4.5 million children from 8,000 schools were benefitting from the school nutrition scheme. However, according to an article published by the Washington Office on Africa, 5.5 million children are receiving the "Mandela sandwich" of peanut butter and a cup of soup, which provides 25% of the minimum daily nutritional requirements in some of South Africa's poorest areas and results in increased classroom attendance. In light of these differing estimates, next year's report should focus on whether such programs are comprehensive and made available to all South African children, particularly those in remote rural areas.
The report should have also included discussion of the White Paper on the RDP tabled on November 15, 1994, in which the new government discussed its intention to ratify the Convention on the Rights of the Child within the context of its reconstruction of the welfare and educational systems. The White Paper appeared in draft form on September 23, 1994, and was published in fmal version in March 1995. Representing the Government of National Unity's most comprehensive statement on education and child welfare, the White Paper states that South African children will be entitled to ten years of free and compulsory education. This proposal, however, was not fully implemented in 1995 due to financial constraints. The White Paper also proposes equal access to all educational institutions and the equalization of per capita expenditures per student, irrespective of race. Additionally, the report does not provide any background information whatsoever on the larger social conditions that constrained black access to education and destabilized schools and educational programs throughout South Africa, particularly in African communities. According to the Institute of Multi-Party Democracy, in the two decades prior to the April 1994 elections, educational inequities gave rise to massive resistance by black students and teachers that resulted in a deep crisis in the education system, which was most severely felt in African schools.
In short, the years of activism against apartheid education and other educational disparities through school boycotts, strikes and other protest tactics has made it difficult for educators to establish a new culture of learning in some South African schools. Future reports should focus
215
Critique 1995
attention on black access to educational opportunity and inequitable funding of schools in predominantly African areas as compared to schools in predominantly white areas. It should further include updates on the efforts of Minister of Education Professor Bengu to create a responsive national Ministry of Education with nine semi-independent provincial ministries.
Although the report states that the Constitution explicitly prohibits discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation, it does not elaborate on the importance of the inclusion of this provision. While pervasive social discrimination against lesbians and gay men in South Africa exists, it appears that the Government of National Unity, as well as those involved in the constitutional lawmaking process, are committed to ensuring that such discrimination is not sanctioned by law and is legally prohibited. According to the International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission, South Africa's interim Constitution is the only national constitution which prohibits discrimination based on sexual orientation. Moreover, the African National Congress has proposed allowing lesbians and gay men to serve openly in the military. The atmosphere of relative tolerance for diversity in South Africa has allowed a vocal gay rights community to develop, galvanized in part by the virulently anti-gay statements made in August 1995 by Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe, who was subsequently the target of highly visible protests when he arrived at Johannesburg airport for a SADC summit.
The report makes only fleeting references to South Africa's notoriously high rate of violent crime, which escalated in 1995 and threatens to inhibit future international investment and consequently economic development. According to the South African Police Service's National Crime Information Management Centre, in the first seven months of 1995, 1,126,101 serious crimes were reported across the country, excluding the old homelands. This included more than 10,000 murders — or one every 29 minutes.
The report fails to mention that the Human Rights Committee of South Africa (HRC) stated that at least 507 people died in police custody in South Africa during 1995 — a figure confirmed by police authorities.
216
South Africa
HRC National Director Patrick Kelly commented: "I would call it a national crisis that such a high number of people are dying in police custody whatever the reason may be." The police did not challenge the figure other than to add that it included deaths at the hands of other prisoners, detainees dying of natural causes and people shot by the police during escape attempts.
The report should also have paid greater attention to land issues, which are charged with intense sodo-historical resonance in South Africa. Under apartheid, blacks were denied ownership access to 87% of the land in the country because it was reserved for whites. Further, an estimated 3.5 million blacks were fordbly removed from land that was allocated to whites. In 1995, South African Land Affairs Minster Derek Hanekom proposed legislation intended to offer security to millions of blacks denied land ownership rights under apartheid. Hanekom also proposed related legislation to set up a number of land reform mechanisms including the establishment of a Land Claims Court and Commission. Briefly, these mechanisms were intended to give tenants the right to apply to buy land over which they historically had constructive possession, which will have the effect of increasing the number of black farmers and landowners. But, according to South Africa's premier public interest law organization, the Legal Resources Centre (LRC), "removal of legal impediments represents nothing but the unlocking of a door." Recognizing the inevitability that poor South Africans will have difficulty gaining access to such land reform mechanisms, the LRC has established a special Land and Development Unit, and in every LRC office across South Africa at least one lawyer is involved in preparing submissions to the Land Claims Commission. Future reports should monitor developments in the area of land reform with an emphasis on whether poor South Africans, particularly those living in rural areas, have meaningful access to mechanisms intended to counteract the vestiges of apartheid land policies.
In sum, the State Department's 1995 report is comprehensive in listing the various human rights concerns fadng post-apartheid South Africa. However, the listing of these concerns appears disjointed, as if the rights discussed have no relationship to one another. Given the nascent stage of development of post-apartheid South Africa, it is apparent that
217
Critique 1995
all of the human rights interests discussed in the report should be understood and examined within an integrated context. Where the interests of a new nation are involved, human rights observers must be especially cognizant of the intersection between human rights and development. Ultimately, in post-apartheid South Africa, the protection of first generation civil and political rights largely depends on continued reconstruction and economic development.
218
