AFGHANISTAN
The report on Afghanistan has two major weaknesses. Like earlier reports, it is strong on abuses by the Kabul government and Soviet troops but weak on abuses by the U.S.'SUpported mujahidin resistance. It also appears to rely more on information about past abuses than on current evidence, ignoring some changes ~ still relatively minor — in rights practices by the authorities. It fails to mention, for example, the finding of the U.N. Human Rights Commission's Special Rapporteur, Felix Ermacora, that respect for human rights improved to some extent in areas controlled by the government and instead tries to cast doubt on his fmdings.
The report ignores several well-documented incidents and patterns of violations of international human rights and humanitarian law by the mujahidin and fails to single out the resistance organizations with the worst human rights records. Instead, it gives the mujahidin credit for humane treatment: The mujahidin generally interrogate and release captured Kabul regime enlisted men and hold some captured Soviet personnel as prisoners...."
While the report notes elsewhere that "Soviet and RA [Republic of Afghanistan] forces as well as some mujahidin groups have executed prisoners in the field," such statements downplay the problem of political killing by two parties in particular, the Hezb-e Islami led by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar and the Hezb-e Islami (Khales) led by Yunus Khales. One especially savage incident gets no mention at all — the massacre of the Afghan government garrison at Torkham, which defected en masse to the Pakistani garrison across the border in Landi Kotal in November 1988. After several days of interrogation, most of the defectors were tiuned over to the custody of the Hezb-e Islami (Khales). They were taken to Shamshattu, a resistance military camp in Pakistan, where over 70 of them were summarily executed. The bodies were dumped inside Afghanistan by the side of the road between Torkham and Jalalabad. According
Critique
to mujahidin interviewed by Asia Watch at that site, the bodies were packed in tea crates and delivered by Pakistani military officers in Pakistani army trucks.
The report also fails to mention the explicit policy of many mujahidin groups of executing captured Afghans foimd to be "Communists" on the grounds of "apostasy." This practice, which some mujahidin argue is required by Islamic law, is openly discussed and advocated. There are photographs and videotapes of such executions which are in clear N^olation of the international laws of war. The report notes that "in areas not controlled by the reg^e, civil and criminal cases are tried by Islamic judges (qazis) and community elders under Islamic, or Shari'a, law and according to Afghan custom," but it offers no evaluation of the extent to which these procediu'es conform to international human rights standards.
In another apparent effort to downplay the excesses of the mujahidin, the report states, "regime accusations that the mujahidin summarily executed regime officials following the capture of Konduz in August have not been substantiated." But that observation does not adequately summarize what is known of these events. The report states, accurately, that "resistance sources themselves acknowledge that the mujahidin who entered Konduz behaved in an undisciplined manner." In fact, resistance soiu"ces acknowledge summary killings, looting by both some mujahidin and citizens of Konduz city, and some rapes.
It is also remarkable that the report on Afghanistan does not mention, even in passing, the assassination in Peshawar on February 11,1988 of Professor Sayd Bahauddin Majrooh, founder of the Department of Philosophy of Kabul University and Director of the Afghan Information Centre since 1981. (His killing is mentioned briefly in the report on Pakistan.) While some believe that Professor Majrooh was killed by the Soviet-supported Afghan secret police, there is some evidence pointing to agents of the Hezb-e Islami.
In its discussion of land mines, the report accurately describes the threat to human life and limb by the numerous unmarked mines left by the departing Soviet forces and the Afghan government. It fails, however, to note that the smaller number of mines, especially anti-tank mines, left by the mujahidin also pose a threat to civilians.
10
Afghanistan
The report needs to be more specific in its discussion of torture by the Kabul government. According to some reports, including those of Amnesty International (AI) and the U.N. Special Rapfwrteur, the use of torture may have decreased in 1987 and 1988. The State Department cites but takes no position on the AI findings. The country report also cites a 1988 interview with a released prisoner who stated that he had been tortured, but it does not state whether the torture occurred in 1988 or several years earlier. We recognize that the enormous number of abuses committed by Soviet and Afghan government forces durii^ the nine years of Soviet occupation overshadovs^ any consideration of the current human rights situation in Afghanistan. Even so, the distinction between past and present abuses is important because prisoners are often released after years of imprisonment and their accounts of arrest and interrelation may not reflect current practice. Since the Country Reports purport to describe the situation during a particular year, they should make clear when abuses occurred.
11

^ . . ■ ,	^ V	.	- n..
^R;»! Olí-, I-•	''.x'	'
, - ,	. u- •■ . • -M	>• r.^'-r-'	.. . , w	-I.
.. ,. . 1 «r	• ' .-.•M/.-7 -v. I-.-" ■ •• 'lU i- 5	' •
ta • ,í' .	" i • ^ . . w. ■>•• ■ . ! >.. • • •.
.	. (>:•	• •« ¡«"li	• ■	"Ti '
•Í .	Í ' ' . y'y	^ i •	i' ' • '<1 i'. o • '*
j^',. '•..	•••	••»••', -f/.'».	; ' «. '«i^flt- • '
-u	r	• .	. , t ' V - jtí'jv , •
.»<.}, .f.	-..a-' •	■	«>«■•	!i J	I J<".»
