ANGOLA
The Introduction to the Country Reports for 1988 asserts that the reports "take into account the fact that terrorists and guerrilla groups often kill, torture, or maim citizens or deprive them of their liberties; such violations are no less reprehensible if committed by violent opponents of the government than if committed by the government itself." Unfortunately, this general statement has not been applied in practice in the report on Angola. Although the report enumerates many of the abuses committed by Angolan government forces, known as FAPLA, it is either silent about abuses committed by the U.S.-back-ed guerrilla forces attempting to overthrow the government, known as UNTTA, or it treats these cursorily or as "allegations." In contrast to many of the reports on other coimtries, the report on Angola for 1988 is a step backward from the report published by the State Department in the previous year. That is because the report for 1987 contained a section on "Violations of Humanitarian Law in Armed Conflicts." As was the practice in all the reports for 1988, this was deleted. In the case of Angola, the deletion had the effect of removii^ some of the few references to abuses by UNITA.
An example of the inadequate manner in which UNITA abuses are dealt with in the report is the discussion of the use of landmines. The State Department notes that allegations of abuses have been made <^ainst all the parties to the conflict and then states:
There are no reliable casualty figures, but the international press focused on the large number of civilian casualties due to the extensive use of landmines. Upwards of 20,000 persons may have lost limbs as a result of the widespread use of landmines.
This description is inadequate in at least three respects. First, introducing the issue by referring to the "international press" distances the State Department from the question and implies that it has become a partisan issue. Second, the State Department avoids a specific attribution of the use of
13
Critique
landmines to UNTTA, although there is extensive evidence that the great majority of civilian N^ctims of landmines in eastern Angola were injured or killed by UNTTA-planted mines, while many civilian victims of landmines in northern Angola were injured or killed by FAPLA-planted mines. Third, the State Department does not differentiate between civilian victims who suffered from mines used consistent with the laws of war and those who suffered from the indiscriminate use of mines or mines deliberately planted to kill and maim civilians. Since UNTTA planted many mines in footpaths to agricultural fields, or at the sources of water, apparently in an effort to make it impossible for civilians in those areas to sustain an agricultural existence, the State Department should have pointed out that this use of landmines violates the laws of war. (Also, curiously, the report refers to "lost limbs" but does not mention deaths.)
The inadequate discussion of the landmines issue relates to the principal abuse committed by UNITA unmentioned in the report: its use of starvation as a weapon. This abuse has caused immense suffering and is responsible for massive dislocation. Although the report mentions estimates that "about 700,000 of the 8 to 9 milUon population have been displaced internally, in addition to some 400,000 refugees resident in neighboring countries," it does not provide any explanation, and does not mention that many Angolans must go hungry in an extremely fertile land because use of landmines in Helds and attacks on civilians by UNTTA have made farming impossible.
An exception to the general failure to discuss abuses by UNITA other than as allegations appears in the following sentence in which the State Department speaks in its own voice: "Civilians also have died as a result of UNTTA actions, such as attacks on ground transportation and other economic targets." That statement would have been more significant, however, if it had been placed in the context of a discussion of UNTTA's strategy of starving ci^ilians in government-controlled areas. The attacks on ground transportation have made the delivery of food in those areas extremely hazardous.
Another problem that is not discussed in the report reflects another aspect of UNTTA's insurgent strategy: its attempt to demonstrate that, unlike the government, it can feed people in areas it controls. Refugees interviewed by Africa Watch reported that UNTTA engaged in a practice of capturing civilians
14
Angola
and taking them to its territory against their will to farm for UNITA. The country report limits itself to asserting that "both sides acciised each other of relying on forced conscription of young males for recruitment into the military forces." As for forced labor, the report deals only with government restrictions on the right to strike and on penalties for breaches of labor discipline while ignoring UNITA's use of compulsory agricultural labor. Those who have been forced to perform agricultural labor for UNITA number in the thousands.
The discussion in the report of abuses by the Angolan government is relatively thin, but does not appear to have suffered from political distortion. It acknowledges that torture is not practiced; notes that prison conditions are poor; reports that there have been no disappearances; states that the number of political detainees and prisoners is not known; observes that "[tjhe deterioration of the security situation has exacerbated the general decline in judicial safeguards and due process"; reports that "a large number of persons have been detained by the Government on suspicion of ties wth UNITA, and in some cases held for years without beii^ charged or brought to trial"; and notes that there is no free press. "In fact," the report states, "the Angolan people live under censorship, intimidation, and Government control of the media. Opposition views are not tolerated...."
Although the report on the government could be strengthened by more detail, it seems fair. In contrast, the failure to discuss UNITA's abuses unfairly spares a U.S.-funded guerrilla force the criticism that is warranted if the principle stated in the Introduction to the Country Reports were to be upheld.
15
Crili
ritti




rtc «ijil} w .»
■ss

JiM thn 'g
■ Uiat ihrt-er:
• --------

b
iwi,

'"infiaWitódat-r^^
erniari
Mcb tt» tfXAtd^ «« iroufid tiaiifponstìoa aad uIìmi- ixsoìioeùc tj
TtÉHMmwilwniilin ni fir ^llì|inl'Mì(pifllr1llr_f^■^r-nTr7rffr^■1!^^"p'-r^ imlUlìilWf «f ft dbmiiM of UNII'A's	of	cì^
«MMMrtMM «cult. Ti» ftifMà;», ofi (PMMNÌ.criMiKpr!^^
' àlidi
JiMtii^SBmài r^iwN^a ì3m UHTTA
