ARGENTINA
The report on Argentina presents a largely accurate picture of human rights conditions. Argentina is approaching the end of President Raul Al-fonsin's six-year term and, despite tragic economic problems and dim prospects for the future, its population has continued to enjoy the benefits of hiunan rights observance.
The most troubling developments for democracy and freedom in 1988 were the two military rebellions by a faction of the Army popularly known as los campintadas, the painted faces, because they darken their faces with camouflage paint when "in operations." One rebellion took place in January in Monte Caseros, Corrientes, and the other in December in Villa Martelli, Buenos Aires province. The report mentions these rebellions but fails to indicate the seriousness of their challenge to civilian authority. The second and more troubling incident involved by some accounts up to 800 officers, all of them belonging to elite corps. As the report states, it resulted in four deaths ~ three of them civilians and one a member of the police -- and yet its leader, Col. Mohamed AK Seineldin, is being prosecuted only for "mutiny," a military offense, and there is no criminal prosecution under way for homicide. The report is right in noting that the Alfonsin administration claims not to have made concessions to the mutineers in exchange for their siu'render. But it fails to mention the huge concession implicit in only Seineld^ being under arrest (in a comfortable officers' club). The mutineers also succeeded in achieving part of their demands: they obtained a large salary increase and forced the resignation of the Army Commander.
As for the Monte Caseros rebellion, it is simply not true that "most of the participants" were arrested and awaiting trial In fact, only its leader, Lt. Col. Aldo Rico, and a handful of others are being prosecuted, under military jurisdiction. The report is also wrong in saying that "at year's end [they] awaited trial in Villa DeVoto military prison." They were not being held in Villa DeVoto
17
Critique
prison, which in any event is not a military prison; rather, they were being held in comfortable Army officers' quarters. A few other officers linked to the carapintadas are either under arrest or at large with warrants outstanding for their arrest.
In the section on political killings, the report gives the impression that the many attempted bombings have been the work of both rightist and leftist groups. In fact, until the January 1989 attack by a left-wing group on the military regiment in La Tablada, observers agreed that the left was not responsible for any violence (with the possible exception of an obscure bank robbery in December 1988). Attacks on right-wing figiu-es or institutions were considered either the result of in-ñghting among rival groups or of attempts by the right to sow confusion.
The report is generally accurate in discussing the prisoners inherited from the military dictatorship. However, by year's end only one of them (not four) remained in prison; his case is currently before the Supreme Court. It is also not true that the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (lACHR) issued a ruling gainst Argentina in one such case, involving former Air Force non-commissioned officer Osvaldo López. In fact, the lACHR requested a review, which was imdertaken by the Argentine courts and resulted, in 1987, in a reduction of sentence and López's release. When the case, which was brought by the Centro de Estudios Legales y Sociales (CELS) and Americas Watch, came to a final decision, however, the lACHR found no violation on the part of Argentina, even though López was left with a conviction based entirely on a confession obtained by torture in 1977.
Finally, the most serious episode of street violence, which took place on September 9, 1988 in downtown Buenos Aires during a major labor demonstration, is partially misrepresented in the report. The report describes the episode as follows:
On September 9, a labor rally in Buenos Aires, protestmg the Government's economic austerity plan, degenerated into large-scale violence. Organizers accused the police of precipitating the violence, and the Government accused extremist groups in the crowd.
18
Argentina
This account omits mentioning that while looting by elements of the crowd was limited to a sii^e street comer, the police used excessive force against many demonstrators who had nothing to do with the violence. While the government defended the actions of the police, that defense should have been criticized in light of the unjustified police violence which all Argentines could plainly see on live television. The report also neglects to mention that some photographic e\idence, ^dely publicized in the Argentine press, indicates that the initial violence and looting may have been provoked, at least in part, by police infiltrators.
19

r • ...	. -J '
.Í

J . -•1«

■ V. . •■ '-fi' '..J ' rr ■ . ■<
V,'.v ' < ' • i' ..	í-ví ^	■
i t . - mT.'' •■'-T O-iitJ-»"
. I	..(It -.;
