CHILE
The country report on Chile could serve as a methodological model for the rest of the volume. It is scrupulously detailed, including a substantial nimi-ber of specific cases followed through the courts, and it relies heavily on information from domestic human rights organizations as well as government statistics. Several factors contribute to the fairness and balance of the report: Chile's human rights conditions are unusually well documented, not only by respected Chilean groups but also by international monitors; the Chilean military's patterns of repressive behavior have been established over a 15-year period; and a bipartisan consensus on policy toward Chile has developed in Washington. Even taking these favorable factors into account, however, the report is an impressive synthesis.
Where direct physical repression is concerned, the report pulls no punches. An introductory paragraph asserts:
Many fundamental human rights remain restricted in Chile.... There were...cases of kidnapings, beating, torture and, in a few cases, murders in which no suspects have been identified or apprehended. Although the number of such incidents decreased compared to 1987, the absence of any resolution to longstanding cases of serious human rights abuses continues to concern both Chilean and international organizations.
Thus the report recognizes the cumulative importance of human rights abuse and does not necessarily identify a decrease in the number of new cases with a resolution of past abuses.
Similarly, in a later section, the report notes, "[tjorture remains one of the most serious, persistent human rights problems in Chile," while stating accurately that the incidence of tortwe appears to have decreased since various security forces signed agreements with the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in 1986. The section on torture is well done, including details of the ICRC agreements; sketches of key cases; the observation that "[j]udicial investigations of torture are seldom concluded, due in large part to the refusal of state security organizations to comply with court orders" to send agents for court
25
Critique
questioning; and an analysis of the comportment of, in particular, the police force or carabineros. Equally meticulous is the section on freedom of speech and press.
The report does not maintain this high standard in the sections on freedom of assembly and association and respect for political rights. Its coverage of problems involving assembly — e.g., arrests during demonstrations or other peaceful, authorized gatherings ~ begins chronologically at the end of August 1988. The impression left is that suppression of assembly was negligible during 1988. Yet this was not the case until the last few months of the year. Although it is true, as the report states, that "[rjestrictions on peaceful demonstrations and association [had been] reduced in 1987 with the legalization of political parties," during the first eight months of 1988 there were numerous political events disrupted by the security forces. Members of political parties in the process of seeking legal status under the 1987 law, for example, and young people promoting voter registration through rallies and marches, repeatedly found their legal gatherings broken up or arbitrarily harassed. The change in police behavior began a few days after August 30,1988, the day General Augusto Pinochet was nominated to be the sole candidate for the presidential plebiscite of October 5, 1988. In addition, as the report notes in the section on political killing, "[sjeveral people were...killed during demonstrations before and after the plebiscite." Those demonstrations were spontaneous rather than organized and formally authorized; nonetheless, the victims were killed through abuse of power aimed at suppressing a nonviolent gathering.
As to respect for political liberties, specifically the right of citizens to change their government, the report limits itself to describing the outcome of the October 5 plebiscite, in which General Pinochet was defeated. It is appropriate to acknowledge, as the report does implicitly, that the Chilean armed forces went ahead with the plebiscite and honored its results when perhaps they could have changed their minds. But this is different ñ-om the Chilean people having a soUdly respected right to change their laws and government, which, according to Appendix A of the Country Reports, the section on political rights should have addressed. The report should also have mentioned the Interior Ministry's provocatively false announcements of voting results on the night of
26
Chile
October 5 and, equally important, the obstacles that citizens encountered all along the path to the plebiscite: the cost of registering to vote, the harassment of party members and leaders, and the waves of death threats which appeared related to the approach of the plebiscite. Similarly, a complete picture of the official attitude toward political rights should have included some mention of the limitations on democracy as outlined in the military regime's 1980 Constitution. Consistent with earlier country reports, however, this one refrains from offering a critique of the 1980 Constitution's "protected" democracy. It thus neglects to mention constitutional Article 8, which provides for the exclusion of Marxist parties and individuals from various forms of political and social participation solely on the basis of their ideol<^. It also fails to note the tutelary role of the military-dominated National Security Council, the appointed Senators (including General Pinochet) who will make up one-foiu'th of the Senate, the prohibition on labor leaders being elected to Parliament, the ambiguous position of the military hierarchy in relation to the civilian authority structure, and the extreme difficulty of amending the Constitution to address such problems. These facts are as relevant to the political rights of Chileans as is the upcoming open presidential election or parliamentary contests.
Nonetheless, this year's country report has httle in common with its predecessors from the initial years of the Reagan Administration. The country report for 1982, for example, under freedom of movement, opened with the declaration that "Chileans are free to leave their country" ~ at a time when 11,000 were officially recognized as political exiles and thousands more considered themselves imable to return home for political reasons. Early Reagan-era country reports on Chile regularly compared the level of repression for the year in question to the level of repression immediately foUowii^ the 1973 coup, noting the favorable contrast and implying that this signified an acceptable human rights situation. Early Reagan-era reports also characterized one major Chilean human rights organization, the Chilean Human Rights Commission, as politically motivated. Such crude misstatements have entirely vanished from the reporting, and the U.S. Embassy in Chile is to be commended, overall, for an excellent report on conditions during 1988.
27


'r.



MiT^
4hi Ib^tMira«
tfl^fOc^lfl


ttti:
^èMiAW «IfouH áím^ lo ^ bas .siahoai bcus nstom xíwq ^ fiD iMfetoririi 'jimfUtá^i vmáUiéoá» tÈi^péniMn^^n^ dttuifttii«^ ¿l^aWd-iÉíáértiiiíytWt
ooSliqbii -
tf	mtltaMM áoitxitlirfbktiq^ fiumm
y^m MuOwft» -)|H ttrtioMn «	laJKÍiiBo^awtvd'
■ ^iifirrii vtiti'r	" "" .É^	jaii^
itf átK* noütsm» ni dMûlïftbït f^iqai ifüntkn fl^pwc wlM*b*3qeHu,ji on
bctt-vte ivsiiM «ec ^eamtpoan tlUbafto tnjw iBnosMi'MuliMi -Mà apaá: nátl0i'<ekipWM0 wïlwedî
ítim tsS^^irnMySmiíb^mf^miitmcnt^	oí
^-fcíi: ylyüyw-fcpKüHi^ialdiani»! mÜ witimi
iitolfflíifMMMMfP«^ Mw MMMMM^Ilf:
