CHINA (People's Republic of)
The report on the People's Republic of China is on the whole thorough and fair, although there is still a tendency to downplay the seriousness of human r^ts abuses in Tibet. Compared with last year's report, however, the reporting on Tibet is far more detailed, perhaps reflecting the increased visibility of the region foUowii^ the demonstrations of late 1987 and March and December 1988 and the severity of the Chinese crackdown. A more nuanced approach is also evident in the 1988 report.
A comparison of the 1987 and 1988 discussions of torture is indicative. 1987: "There are credible reports that public security personnel sometimes use harsh treatment at the time of detention. For example, a number of reliable sources reported that People's Armed Police severely beat several monks who were detained during a demonstration in Lhasa on October 6."
1988: "Credible reports suggest that beatings and other forms of mistreatment, including the use of electric prods, were common among those detained following protests in Tibet. These reports are similar to periodic fragmentary accoimts of alleged treatment of several political dissidents jailed since the early 1980's for political activism related to Beijing's 'Democracy Wall.' TAR [Tibetan Autonomous Region] officials deny that Tibetan prisoners are tortured or otherwise mistreated and have specifically denied the use of electric prods. However, officials have been sparing in their release of information on actual conditions within prisons."
There was no reference in the 1987 report to violations in Tibet of the freedoms of assembly and association. The 1988 report not only notes that regulations restricting assembly were passed in Lhasa in 1987 but also notes that many of those who were detained during demonstrations "apparently did nothing more than demonstrate and shout slogans."
29
Critique
Serious flaws remain, however, particularly wth regard to details of the March and December 1988 protests. In reporting the number of deaths, the report notes only the official Chinese toll in March and only the lowest reported toll in December. At the very least, the report should have cited the numerous accounts giving higher figures.
Similarly, reports, yet addressed by the Chinese government, of deaths in custody of Tibetan prisoners after the March demonstration and accounts of unprovoked killings by Chinese troops during the December demonstration suggest that the State Department goes too far in saying, "No government-sanctioned, politically motivated killings are known to have occurred in 1988."
While the report notes China's refusal to tolerate a Tibetan independence movement in any form, it does so in the section on discrimination — not in the section on freedom of expression. But the use of lethal force to suppress non-violent advocacy of independence is very much an issue of freedom of ejqpression. The report's failure to address it as such allows a reader to conclude that advocacy of Tibetan independence is almost a mitigating factor that should be considered when evaluating the government's use of violence.
The report states, in the section on freedom of assembly, that "since October 1987, at least one Tibetan who allegedly supports independence has been detained and charged with the crime of 'spreading reactionary propaganda and agitation.'" By using the phrase "at least one" the report minimizes the extent of the arrests, which the report acknowledges elsewhere were numerous.
The report also contains a few omissions. Like the 1987 report, it neglects to mention population transfers of ethnic Chinese into the region and the resulting impact on Tibetan culture. While it notes that "in the past" there were reports of forced abortions, it does not mention that the issue has yet to be investigated satisfactorily. (In March 1988, the press reported a demonstration that had occurred at the end of 1987 in Qinghai in which forced abortions had been one of the major issues.) And while the report mentions restrictions on the number of monks at Tibetan monasteries, it does not address other issues relating to religious freedom, such as state control over monastic finances
30
China (People*s Republic of)
and its move into the area of teaching Buddhism (which may or may not be designed to weaken the role of the monasteries).
The portrayal of the functioning of the legal system is generally accurate, although a major point occasionally gets obscured by detail. Thus buried in the section on fair trial is the sentence. The total inmate population in labor camps and prisons may have increased since a 1983 anti-crime campaign, in view of a report that by the end of 1986 over 1 million people had been sentenced as a result of the CTackdown." In fact the whole legal system is subservient to periodic campaigns of this natwe, and this theme should be given a higher proHle in the report.
The report contains some inaccuracies and misleading statements in the sections relating to criminal law and procedure, but they are errors which appear to reflect differences in interpretation of Chinese law rather than a deliberate attempt at distortion. For example, the section on detention describes labor education" and "reform through labor" as non-judicial sentences used frequently against political dissidents. This is true, but it would be worth noting that one reason these sentences are imposed may be to circumvent the procedural protections afforded offenders by criminal
In the discussion of amendments to the Criminal Procedure Code, which extended the period of pre-trial detention, the report fails to note that indefinite extensions are possible, "especially in major or complex cases."
The report notes that Article 43 of the Criminal Procedure Code, which requires that the family and work unit be notiHed when a person is detained, is frequently ignored, resulting in incommunicado detention. But it may not be so much that the law is ignored as that it contains an important qualifying clause, namely that the authorities need not notify anyone of the detention in "circumstances where notification would hinder the investigation."
31
ì%0
È a'^fuí bVgtoffWiáJlM^e
faá) Xtrtf «isruibacK)^^ WBI Isoiinho oJ ^
• nrfs itUíf ^
i 'iojst« «f ^l
íiftliírii'j üiülo
àiâ >Hiy


< ií ■••1'

.i»'
IvtK, tibe	a tj^monÂrk'
«ci^u^l «s^'má	Q^isM- Íb wÜci' Íbnrod »torIkHta
iM «Iv WtíNr ^ mvSt.-í, M ' im«*«*	k émìèi	othtít ^
«MM lllItlÜi^tB	-
i/àr
iH
