COLOMBIA
The report on Colombia provides a generally accurate picture of its tragic state of human rights, and should be read as an important warning signal of the quick and seemingly inerrable deterioration. The State Department's analysis, however, tends to exculpate the armed forces, or to ^ve them the benefit of the doubt, when the available evidence suggests otherwise.
In describing the sources of violence, for example, the report lists the guerrillas, drug traffickers and paramilitary groups, but fails to mention the Army and police forces as a major source of many of the violeiU abuses that take place in Colombia. In addition, the report should have noted that the so-called "paramilitary groups" operate not as independent forces but as hired guns under the direction of either drug traffickers or other powerful rural business interests, or both, and in many cases with tolerance and cooperation of high-rank-ing members of the armed and security forces.
The report quotes Colombian military officials to the effect that military courts are "investigating, prosecuting and incarcerating over 500 military personnel for human rights abuses." If true, this would be extraordinary. The report does not comment on the statement's veracity, but adds: "By the end of 1988, it was not possible to determine how effective these steps were likely to be in ameliorating the problem." In fact, Americas Watch has looked extensively into these investigations, including an examination of military-court records and statistical information. The figure of500 reflects, at best, formal inquiries laimched in response to violations, but these inquiries seldom if ever result in serious punishment, even when criminal liability is well established.
Among the mechanisms that contribute to this impunity is the zeal with which the military courts press to obtain jurisdiction over cases involving soldiers, before lowering a veil of secrecy over the proceedings. Americas Watch inquired about many well known cases, including, for example, the massacres at Segovia and Urabá mentioned in the report; there are no officers in custody
33
Critique
in connection with any of them, and the investigations, when technically still in progress, are uniformly going nowhere. It is surprising, therefore, that the State Department has found it impossible to assess the effectiveness of these steps; we believe there is a strong link between the impunity resulting from the lack of investigative or prosecutorial activity and the mounting number of egregious Niolations of basic rights.
We also take issue with the assertion that many of the left-\mg politidans who have been murdered were "aligned in various degrees with the insurgents." Even if such an alignment might violate the law, the violation has not been properly established. The victims belonged to organizations that are le^timate entities operating openly in Colombia. Whatever the intent behind the phrase, its inclusion is unfortunate because it appears to justify the killings. Moreover, the phrase does not adequately convey the reason why these persons were targeted. In our view, members of left-wing parties and popular-based organizations are killed to intimidate others holding leftist ideas. Guerrillas cannot be readily apprehended, so the killers target those who are easily found and who bear some ideological affinity with the guerrillas.
The report makes a significant contribution in highlighting the role of drug traffickers in political violence, in addition to the criminal violence associated with their regular narcotics transactions. We believe that the drug cartels have become a major force in the political violence in Colombia, complicating the human rights situation in ways that are unique within the hemisphere. We believe that the report should also have stated that this phenomenon is the product of a conscious decision on the part of cartel leaders to exterminate the left in Colombia. The report is correct in sa)ing "there is little doubt" that narcotics traffickers and individual members of the military and police have been involved in assasinations of members of the Patriotic Union, the legal political party formed by the FARC guerrilla group after it signed a peace agreement with the government. The most significant question in Colombia's human rights situation is the degree to which those "individual members of the military and police" act pursuant to or in violation of superior orders. The report is silent on this issue. Americas Watch has found no evidence of a deliberate plan to order mid-level officers to cooperate with the death squads, but there is clear
34
Colombia
eNÎdence that the military high command engages in deliberate obstruction of the efforts to prosecute those ofHcers who participate in death squad killings.
On the question of responsibility for disappearances, the report's mention of the use of similar uniforms by the guerrillas and the armed forces seems designed to introduce an element of doubt. There occasionally has been confusion about the identity of perpetrators of massacres and targeted killings, but the reported disappearances in Colombia are clearly attributable to security forces or their shadowy support ^oups. Kidnappings by the guerrillas, which are frequent, differ from the unacknowledged detentions known as disappearances because guerrillas usually kidnap people for ransom and therefore have no interest in concealing the fact that they are holding the victim.
A major mistake in the report is its statement that torture is "generally not practiced" in Colombia. Even law enforcement officials charged with investigating such cases agree that the use of torture as a method of interrogation is pervasive against suspected political and common-criminal offenders.
Finally, the statistics given on political killings, troubling as they are, are generally lower than the actual statistics for 1988. This is probably the result of the State Department's use of partial figures for the year. Human rights organizations in Colombia say that more than4,000were killed in political violence in 1988; no more than a third of these casualties resulted from combat between the guerrillas and security forces. The estimate of 1,500 ^ven by the report is, therefore, too low. The report also gives the figure of 22 massacres (defmed as ñve or more persons murdered in one single incident) for the first six months. For all of 1988, there were over 60 masssacres so defined.
35


à"
•tea'
Xlhtxm

1íéñ9fioi]
^iiiiw.i ill lim»

•è.

■iii^nli Tiiirifiiiirfr rf^l^ìrfT^lltflV^-T^ liaiiÉ^^riannDoadn ilw<ii>MiH»M>tiilliiiin
«NibilMK Vm^iVfm ^«ÁimictW»^!« » l^t^oabt" tíutl iwritrfJiil «le^bm tafUe ^ary «od pulîcc Wfe ^ mmmÊA"^. d maiéfin .af % f«Sriotk Vstoo.
fOlmtiiiÉ'y* T» U/t^m	ffntfTulhi y (mp >ftf.r k i pc«cc agree
4M' »wO-tt».^! éOi' mm %MftiflifH jjptcài^ m CokiBlbèft*s luunAn
