CUBA
This year's report on Cuba presents a fair evaluation of the Cuban government's human rights practices in 1988. It is a welcome change from the ideologically driven exaggerations of last year's report.
Cuba is a dictatorship which in 1988 was in its 30tb year under Fidel Castro's rule. While there is no evidence that the executions and other gross abuses of the early Castro years continue, the Cuban government persists in systematically depriving its citizens of fundamental civil and political rights, especially freedom of press and expression, freedom of association and assembly, freedom of movement, the right to privacy and due process of law. The State Department correctly highlights these less sensational but pervasive and ongoing aspects of repression which affect the entire Cuban population.
The State Department's previous reporting was motivated by its attempt to justify its special emphasis on Cuba at the United Nations Commission on Human Rights since 1987. In proceedings before the Commission, the State Department depicted the Cuban government as akin to certain right-wing Latin governments — engaging in "secret executions," "systematic torture" and "disappearances" ~ even though there was no evidence of such ongoing N^ola-tions. Faced with these inflated charges, the Commission in voted down a condemnatory resolution by a single vote on a procedural motion. In 1988, a vote based on similar allegations was avoided when the Cuban govenunent invited a delegation of the Commission to Nisit Cuba to condu(^ an investigation into human rights practices. In antidpation of the U.N. visit, the Cuban government took several steps to improve its human rights practices and thus to assure a U.N. report that would not be damning.
Recc^niang these improvements, the State Department observes in this year's country report that "in 1988 the human rights situation was characterized by continuing repression tempered by limited improvements in selected areas." The country report goes on to dte the government's greater openness to investigations in Cuba by international human rights organizations; the release of political prisoners, many of whom were permitted to emigrate; the
37
Critique
limited tolerance of unofficial, independent activity, especially in the field of human rights; some improvement in prison conditions; and improved relations with the Catholic Church.
The sudden shift from exaggerated to relatively fair reporting ^ves rise to its own false impression, however, because the State Department never makes clear that the dramatic change in its portrayal of the Cuban human rights situation is due in large part to a change in the accuracy of its own reporting. For example, the State Department offers no explanation for the drop in the number of alleged poUtical executions it reported, from 17 at Combinado del Este prison alone between July 1986 and June 1987 to none in 1988. Nor is there an explanation for the drop in the number of disappearances it reported, from at least 14 in 1987 to none in 1988. Similarly, while the 1987 report noted continuing allegations of torture, this year's report states that "[tjhere were no substantiated allegations of the use of s^tematic physical torture during 1988." The unexplained shift in the extent of these serious abuses as reported by the State Department gives the impression of dramatic improvement when in fact there was no change between 1987 and 1^8, because in each year there was no eNÍdence that any of these violations occurred.
The State Department could have avoided giving this false impression of dramatic progress by conceding that its past reporting of these violations had been erroneous. Its failure to do so may, ironically, have contributed to the defeat of its effort in February and March 1989 to highlight Cuba's rights practices before the U.N. Human Rights Commission. After the Commission failed to back a weak U.S.-endorsed resolution in a 17-17 vote, it passed an even weaker resolution drastically reducing the level of scrutiny to which Cuban rights practices are subjected.
The State Department says it plans to keep the issue of Cuba alive at the U.N Commission next year. If the Department is genuinely interested in promoting respect for human rights m Cuba, its cause would best be served by continuing this year's accurate portrayal of current conditions, pointing out the pervasive denial of civil Uberties, while conceding that past portrayals of violent abuses have been unsustainable.
38
