CZECHOSLOVAKIA
The report on Czechoslovakia provides an accurate description of the efforts of the Czechoslovak government to resist the calls for reform that were evident in the USSR and other East European countries in 1988. The report notes that despite some slight improvements early in the year, "events in the latter half of 1988 demonstrated increasing repression and a possible return to previous practices." The balanced reporting reflects the work of members of the U.S. Embassy staff in Prague and their contact with Czechoslovak hiunan rights monitors, particularly signatories of Charter 77 (the human rights movement) and members of VONS (the Committee for the Defense of the Unjustly Prosecuted).
The U.S. government's reliance on information provided by the Czechoslovak human rights monitors is well-founded. Since its foimding in 1977, Charter 77 and its offshoot, VONS, have distinguished themselves as soxu-ces of careful and accurate information about human rights in Czechoslovakia. The report's discussion of virtually every major political trial during 1988 is due largely to the information supplied by these monitors, and to the "hands-on" concern of Embassy officials, who sought to attend these trials.
Despite the overall high quality of the report on Czechoslovakia, it does not g^ve sufficient attention to an important component of the human rights picture in 1988: the growth of independent movements with links to, but separate from. Charter 77. This is important both as an indication of the resiliency of dvil society in Czechoslovakia—the police crackdown on these groups has produced the largest number of activists in police custody facing lengthy prison terms in almost ten years —and because these groups are the principal force pressing for progress on human rights. Since many of those arrested are involved in less traditional forms of independent activity —including peace movements, youth groups and more radical cultural organizations — a special effort by Embassy officials is needed to maintain contact with them.
39
Critique
For example, the report states that "citizens' groups subjected to official harassment or unable to secure offidal rec(^nition include 'the Independent Peace Initiative' and 'Demoaatic Initiative,'" and notes that citizens involved in other environmental and cultural activities are also harassed. The report does not mention that members of these groups were targeted in the police crackdown prior to the 70th anniversary of the founding of the Czechoslovak Republic on October 28,1988, and that several of them remain in prison awaiting trial. These include: three members of the Independent Peace Association " Tomas Dvorak, Hanna Marvanova and Lubos Vydra - who were arrested for their peace activity on October 21 and 22 (Vydra was released in December, but Dvorak and Marvanova remain in prison as of this writing); Ivan Jirous, a leading cultural activist and samizdat publisher, and Jiri Tichy, another activist, who were arrested on October 20 (Jirous was sentenced to 16 months m prison and Tichy to six months in March 1989); and Petr Cibulka, a human rights activist and underground publisher, and Jiri Stencl, a peace activist, who were arrested on October 14 on charges relating to samizdat (Cibulka is still in prison at this writing).
In a similar vein, while the report discusses the cases of Unijazz (the successor to the Jazz Section) and SPUSA (Society of Friends with the United States) in the conte:>a of the government's efforts to prevent the establishment of independent organizations, the report does not mention other independent groups that formed during 1988 and faced similar repression, such as the Movement for Civil Liberty (an initiative launched in October to join various independent groups in Czechoslovakia in support of a political platform), the Czechoslovak Helsinki Committee (affiliated with the International Helsinki Federation for Human Rights) and Czech Children (a group of young people who helped organize a number of demonstrations in the latter half of 1988). Members of these groups were singled out by the police for harassment, house searches and detentions.
Finally, the conditions of prison labor are worse than the report indicates. The report notes: "Inmates are occasionally given such health-threatening assignments as polishing crystal and costume jewelry in environments lacking sufficient ventilation to prevent glass fragments and chemicals from
40
Czechoslovakia
being inhaled." Information gathered by Helsinki Watch in 1988 indicates that the working conditions for prisoners ~ especially political prisoners -- verge on the inhuman. Work-shifts are long and frequently changed, which disrupts sleep and keeps the prisoners tired; failure to meet production norms results in punishment, ranging from cuts in rations to solitary confmement; prisoners receive insufficient training; and the work place is unhealthy, with poor ventilation and high temperatures.
41
„..•,. . ; I	. ' " ...MV. » • • ' • • • -
a- •	J. .nrj'K--)«^-	.	. .	.
a. Vr -	^ • ■ ■
, ., .-.-..irr. • ••iti. ur.:' ...	q J'	•	• '
