DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
The report on the Dominican Republic is fairly accurate in its assessment of the himian rights situation in that country, with the exception that it glosses over gross human rights violations suffered by Haitian citizens living in that country.
The report starts out by stating that "all branches of the security services are responsible to civilian authority and committed to the constitutional order." Yet during the sugar harvest, generally between December and May, when the state-owned sugar company, Consejo Estatal del Azúcar (CEA), has had trouble fmding enough cane-cutters, the security forces have carried out raids in areas where workers of Haitian descent are likely to be foimd and have forcibly taken these workers to CEA plantations. The security forces have also detained Haitians who were trying to cross the border from Haiti to the Dominican Republic or who were enticed to the border by state-employed recruiters; these Haitians, too, have been put on trucks and dispatched to CEA plantations.
(This is what occurred after the period covered by the report, in January 1989, when one such truck carrying approximately 73 Haitians and guarded by armed soldiers overturned, killing 47 Haitians. Several of the survivors told of being captured on the border, kept in military barracks for several days, then put on the truck to be taken to a sugar plantation.)
The report goes on to state that "Dominicans continued to exercise and enjoy the broad range of human rights provided by the Constitution." This was clearly false as far as Dominicans of Haitian descent are concerned. The Dominican Constitution defines Dominicans as "all those who were born and raised on the Territory of the Republic, with the exception of the legitimate children of foreigners residing in the coimtry as diplomatic representatives, or those who are in transit in the country." In practice, however, people of Haitian descent, even when born on Dominican soil, are not considered Dominicans —
43
Critique
they are called "Dominico-Haitianos" -- and do not enjoy the same rights as the rest of the population. For example, because their children cannot obtain papers proving they are Dominican, they often cannot attend school. And contrary to the report's statement that "there are no unusual restrictions on travel within or outside the country," these Dominicans of Haitian descent cannot travel freely throughout the country without fear of being forcibly taken to the sugar-cane fields.
In the section on forced labor, the report states that some "hiunan rights groups and other organizations charged that Haitian laborers in the sugar-cane fields, especially those in the country illegally, were subject to abusive living and working conditions and in some cases were forced to work against their will." But this passage dismisses these abuses as mere allegations when in fact they have been widely reported in the Dominican press and readily could have been verified by representatives of the U.S. Embassy in Santo Domingo.
Moreover, the report misrepresents the problem by stating that "one issue raised by human rights groups, which has continued to generate criticism and allegations of abuse within the Dominican Republic, was the Government program of rounding up illegal Haitian residents and requiring them to choose between a contract to cut sugar cane or deportation." The fact is that very often Haitians are immediately sent to cut cane without being offered the choice of deportation. Moreover, these Haitians frequently are not "illegal immigrants routinely...deported under Dominican immigration law," as the report states, but Dominican citizens who are not recognized as such.
The report points out that there is a problem in the Dominican Republic with child labor when it states:
The Dominican labor code prohibits employment of youths under 14 years of age, and restricts the ni^ttime employment of youths aged 14 to 18. The labor code also provides that employees under 18 work no more than 8 hours a day, and specifies that those 18 years and younger may not be employed m dangerous or unhealthy jol^. In practice, many of the restrictions in the labor code are ignored.
When the recruiters have trouble finding enough adult cane-cutters, they recruit children, sometimes as young as 12 or 14 years old. Yet the report never specifies
44
Dominican Republic
this serious abuse of recruiting young children to engage in work as dangerous as cutting cane with a machete.
In the section on acceptable conditions of work, the report again omits any mention of the working conditions of cane-cutters. Cane-cutters on CEA plantations generally must rise at 5:00 a.m. to go to the fields and often do not return until 7:00 p.m. As a rule they are ^ven no break in the middle of the day to eat or rest and often work seven days a week. Generally, their only source of food or water during the day is the cane which they eat for nutrition and suck to quench their thirst. They often are forced to work under the supervision of armed guards and to live on the plantations in block houses consisting of one or two rooms with no windows, kitchens, bathrooms, electricity or running water. Despite the strenuous work they perform, they usually are paid on average approximately two dollars per day.
In the section on the right to organize and bargain collectively, the report briefly asserts:
The labor code clearly stipulates that workers cannot be dismissed because of their trade union membership or activities. Still, there are complaints that these protections are ignored and that labor leaders are being discriminated against.
Yet the report fails to mention the problems encountered by the unions trying to organize Haitian cane-cutters. Union members working vñth these Haitians are often dismissed or harassed. In one incident in September 1987, two members of the General Central of Workers {Central General de Trabajadores) who worked on behalf of Haitian cane-cutters, Frédéric Lafleur and Carlos Antoine, were mysteriously killed. In addition, there are more subtle ways of discouraging organizing cane-cutters. As the report points out, "the labor code specifies in detail the steps required to constitute a legal union, federation, or confederation, and labor has objected that the Government can use the failure to comply with every detail to withhold official recognition." This is exactly what happened with the Union of Cane-Cutters of Barahona (Sindicato de Picadores de Caña de Barahona). They obtained the minimum number of members required by law, filled out the required forms, and submitted them to the Mini-
45
Critique
stry of Labor in February 1988, yet as of this writing they had still not received the official recognition needed to function.
Finally, the report clearly states that "there are no known instances of arbitrary arrest, illegal detention or exile of persons for expressing views contrary to or critical of the Government." In so stating, it overlooks the case of Dr. Paul Etienne who worked for Good Samaritan {Bon Samariten), a nongovernmental center providing health and social senices to members of the Haitian community on the sugar plantations. Dr. Etienne was arrested on December 8,1988 and summarily expelled from the country the following day. No official reason was given for his expulsion, but it is believed to have been related to his outspokenness on the subject of the exploitation of Haitians in the sugar-cane fields.
46
