UNITED KINGDOM
The United Kingdom (UK) is traditionally the closest U.S. ally in Europe — a "special relationship" which has become even closer under the Reagan Administration and the government of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. The State Department report addresses most of the significant human rights issues in 1988, but often describes them in a partial manner which appears calculated to give the Thatcher government the benefit of the doubt. A most important development — the UK's derogation &om certain obligations under the International CovenaiU on Civil and Political Rights and the European Convention on Human Rights ~ does not even warrant a mention.
The report categorically states: "The British Government does not practice or condone killing for political motives." This judgment seems extraordinarily confident in light of the concern that in 1988 British soldiers may have carried out extrajudicial executions of unarmed Irish opponents. The entire entry in the report referring to the killing of Provisional Irish Republican Army (PIRA) members in the British colony of Gibraltar reads as follows: On March 6, security forces in Gibraltar shot and killed three unarmed members of the PIRA who were on a bombing mission. Critics of the shooting clauned that the three were the victims of a "shoot-to-kill" policy and called on the UK Government to provide public clarification of the circumstances surrounding the incident. A Gibraltar coroner's inquest found in September that the killings were justified under law. Each statement in this passage is factually correct yet serves to conceal as much as it reveals. The following illustrates what the passage neglects to mention:
• ^Security forces in Gibraltar shot and killed three unarmed members of the Pllii.'' The security forces involved were troops of the elite Spedal Air Services Regiment (SAS) of the British Army. There has been no explanation as to why they were used in preference to armed police.
199
Critique
•	The three people killed were "on a bibbing mission" This is correct. However, crudally, there was no bomb in Gibraltar at the time of the killings. The three had parked a car in the colony which the security forces said they believed contained a bomb. The evidence given by the soldiers at the inquest was that they shot the three because they beUeved that they were about to detonate the bomb by a remote-control device. In fact, none of the three carried a remote-control device. Nor did the security forces cordon off the area where the bomb was said to be, as they presumably would have done had they seriously believed there to have been a bomb in the car. Spanish pohce, who had tracked the three PIRA members before they arrived in Gibraltar, said they had informed British authorities that there was no bomb.
•	The UK Government was asked to provide "public clarification" It has provided no such clarification of any of the crucial questions concerning the deployment of the SAS and the orders given to them. When Amnesty International sought sudb clarification, its inquiries were dismissed as "prejudiced and offensive."
•	An "inquest found...that the killing were justified under law" Yet human rights groups have criticized the inquest as inadequate. It was not able to examine the planning of the operation by the security forces, including why the SAS was deployed rather than police, partly because Public Interest Immimity certificates issued by the government prevented such evidence from being disclosed. In April 1989, Amnesty International commented on the inquest: "The fundamental issue was whether the fatal shootmgs were caused by what happened in the street, or whether the authorities planned in advance for the three to be shot dead even if that was not necessary to prevent their criminal acts or to arrest them. Once immunity was co^erred on the planning of the operation, the fundamental issue could not be squarely addressed by the inquest."
The State Department report also seeks to downplay the human rights implications of the government's power to issue exclusion orders under the Prevention of Terrorism Act. The Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland each have the power to exclude individuals from mainland Britain or Northern Ireland respectively. As the report notes without commenting on the veracity of the observation, these powers have been described as a system of internal exile. The report neglects to mention that exclusion orders
200
United ïQngdom
are an administrative measure; the only available review is by the relevant Secretary of State. This is an apparent breach of Article 6(1) of the European Convention on Human Rights which states that "everyone is entitled to a fair and public hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial tribunal established by law." Nor does the report note the severe prison sentences that can be imposed for violating an exclusion order. For example, during 1988 Emmanuel McDonnell was serving a 26-month prison sentence for such a breach. He had tried to travel from Northern Ireland to Scotland to watch a football match. In September 1987 he was sentenced to two years' imprisonment. When he described the sentence as scandalous he was given a further 60 days for contempt of court. The State Department report also ^ves misleading figures on the number of exclusion orders. It states that 22 orders were still in force in March 1988 without making clear that this figure referred only to those from mainland Britain who were excluded from Northern Ireland. Many more people from Northern Ireland were excluded from mainland Britain. In September 1988, the total number of orders in force was 116. Twelve new exclusion orders were issued in the first nine months of 1988.
The report correctly refers to the decision of the European Court of Human Rights in November 1988 that the seven-day maximum detention period allowed by the Prevention of Terrorism Act was in violation of the requirement of the European Convention on Human Rights that a person be brought "promptly to court." The report then states that the government "is still seeking ways to bring UK practice into conformity." Elsewhere the report maintains that the UK government "has usually taken steps to rectify its own law and policies when they were foimd not to be in conformity with the European Convention." What in fact happened was that in December 1988, after the European Court decision, the United Kingdom derogated from certain of its obligations imder Article 5 of the European Convention, as well as Article 9 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. That the report should fail to mention this is an extraordinary omission.
Similarly, the report does not mention that internment (detention without trial), which was used in the early 1970s, remains law under the Northern Ireland (Emergenq' Provisions) Act of 1978. Although internment is not
201
Critique
currently used, it can be immediately reintroduced by an Order in Coimcil, rather than having to be considered by Parliament.
The section on the denial of fair public trials contains errors and incomplete presentations. For example, it is not true to say that the "majority of criminal cases" are heard by juries. The vast majority are heard by benches of maltrates sitting without a jury. The Criminal Justice Act of 1988 increased the number of summary oifenses—that is, offenses for which the defendant cannot elect trial by jury.
Nor does the report adequately represent the criticisms made by human rights groups of the "Diplock courts" and "supergrass" trials in Northern Ireland. The o'udal fact is that there are less stringent guarantees of the rights of the accused than prevail in the ordinary court system. This appears to be a breach of the UK's obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the European Convention on Himian Rights to afford all people equal rights to a fair trial regardless of their poUtical beUefs. "Diplock courts," in which the verdict is determined by a single judge sitting without a jury, are used to try certain cases involving political violence in Northern Ireland. Amnesty International concluded in a 1988 report that procedures and rules of evidence were so different "that a defendant may be convicted in 'Diplock courts' who would otherwise be acquitted, or perhaps not even tried, in the ordinary court sj^tem." "Supergrass" trials refer to cases in which defendants in the "Diplock courts" have been convicted on the basis of the uncorroborated testimony of accompUces. Elsewhere in the English legal system there are extensive safeguards governing the use of such testimony. The State Department incorrectly describes the "supergrasses" (the testifying accomplices) as "convicted terrorists"; in fact, the majority were granted total immunity from prosecution. The report correctly states that there have been no "supergrass" trials since 1985 but omits to mention that government policy on this issue has not changed. In a February 1988 letter to Amnesty International, the Northern Ireland Office said that "the government does not believe that it would be right to close off a le^timate means of bringing criminals to justice."
202
