GUATEMALA
The report on Guatemala provides an inaccurate account of the country's human rights situation, chiefly by stressing unfulfilled promises made by the civilian administration and by emphasÍ2Íng improvements in comparison with the unmitigated brutality of some previous regimes. That the sheer intensity of repression under Generals Romeo Lucas Garcia and Efraúi Ríc^ Montt " including the destruction of some 440 villages and the slaughter of tens of thousands of civilians — has not been equalled under ^e current government is hardly cause for celebration or great optimism. What the reader of this chapter is not told is that military violence against civilians continues at an alarming rate; that no military officer has been convicted of a human rights offense, while the rare cases in which police officers and civil defense members have been convicted for rights violations have been overturned on appeal; that since a major coup attempt in May 1988, the military has taken back much of the fX)wer it ceded to civilians in 1986; or that tens of thousands of Guatemalans living in rural areas face severe restrictions on their freedom of movement and association. When the State Department occasionally acknowledges violations, government responsibility is not suggested, even in cases in which the evidence clearly points to military forces supposedly under civilian control.
A fundamental error of the chapter is its failure to acknowledge the significant changes in the government and the human rights environment since a sector of the army allied with right-v^g civilians sought to overthrow the current civilian and military leadership on May 11,1988. While the report states correctly that the coup attempt failed to oust the President or his Defense Minister, it ignores the fact that key demands made by the plotters were granted, at considerable expense to civilian authority. Among the concessions were the firing of the reform-minded Interior Minister and an end to his attempt to forge a police force independent of army control, appointment to key posts of officers with a history of involvement in repression, an end to talks vwth guerrilla groups.
61
Critique
and limits on the growth of peasant, labor and human rights organizations. The report makes no comment on these policy reversals or on the erosion of the civilian administration's already limited power. Instead it states blithely: [AJdherence to democratic principles continued to improve. The situation at year's end had improved both economically and politically, since 1986 when the elected civilian government took office. The generally free environment encouraged the broader exercise of individual rights.
Contrary to this description of a "free environment," severe setbacks to freedom of the press followed the coup attempt. The nation's new weekly tabloid Lm Epoca was driven out of eastence when its offices were vandalized and gutted by fire on June 10,1988. Bureaus of the news agencies Tass (USSR) and Prensa Latina (Cuba) were closed down after their correspondents received death threats and the Tass reporter's home was bombed.
Popular organizations clearly have used the political space offered under the administration of Vinicio Cerezo Arévalo to press their causes to a greater extent than under the regimes of Ríos Montt and Lucas Garcia. Yet the report ignores the reduced space for such activities after May 1988. Human rights, peasant and labor organizations have lost several members to violence and intimidation which in some cases is of apparently military origin. Shortly after the July 1988 formation of a Quiché-based human rights organization known as the Runujel Junam Council for Ethnic Commxmities (CERJ), for example, participants received death threats from the military and civil patrols; one member was killed, and another kidnapped and disappeared by soldiers. That the group continues to ftmction is more a testament to its members' courage than to improvement in the human rights en\dronment.
The report places great emphasis on efforts undertaken to reform the police and prosecute its members for human rights \iolations, Viithout noting that these efforts collapsed after their advocates were removed from office as a concession to the coup plotters. The case of the killii^ and kidnappings of nearly one dozen people by armed men driving one or more white vans in early 1988 is illustrative. In February, Army Colonel Julio Caballeros, who as head of the National Police had led a much-publicized anti-corruption drive, personal-
62
Guatemala
iy arrested six Treasury Police £^ents driving a white van and charged them with several killings and kidnappings. In June, Caballeros submitted a 300-page affidavit to the court supporting the charges against the poUce agents. His effort to prosecute the Treasury Police members received strong support from Interior Minister Juan José Rodil, who was leading a campaign to forge an independent police force imder civilian control with foreign police assistance. One of the demands reportedly voiced by the coup conspirators was an end to this effort, and shortly after the May 11 attempt both Rodil and Caballeros were removed from office and a new joint police and army unit was created, the "Civil Protection System" (SIPROCI).
On July 20, two days after he ordered 18 Treasury police detained for questioning in the white-van case. Judge Aníbal Trejo Duque was himself kidnapped. A close friend of his was kidnapped and murdered the same day in a separate but possibly related incident. Trejo was released two da)^ later, and he lost no time in ordering the police defendants freed for "lack of eNidence." While the State Department seeks to dispel the notion that the judge's kidnap-ping was connected to the white-van case. Judge Trejo made clear to Americas Watch that he believed it was. Offering no explanation for the government's own sudden retreat from prosecution of the case, the newly appointed Interior Minister Roberto Valle Valdizán announced in August that the case against the Treasury Police was closed.
A second case, that of police officials convicted of the October 1987 murders of two men affiliated with the public university in Quezaltenango, was reversed on appeal in January 1989. The other case mentioned by the report, in which former civil defense commanders in Chijtinimit in Chichicastenango were convicted of a 1983 massacre, has also been overturned, as the chapter notes. Under these circumstances, it is misleading to laud the government's "commitment to reducing human rights violations" through prosecution of members of the security forces when that alleged commitment has had little or no practical effect.
The chapter's treatment of individual violations and categories of abuse greatly understates the problem and the degree of culpability of government forces. The report notes a general increase in violence, but states "there
63
Critique
was no evidence that the Government pursued a policy of political killing." Later, the report blames the violence on "political extremists and some individual and former members of the security forces." Certainly no one would argue that civilians in the Cerezo administration are in any way connected to the ongoing poUtical violence, a fact which distinguishes this administration sharply from most of its recent predecessors. Yet it remains unclear to what extent the ongoing political violence by the military and police is centrally coordinated. Americas Watch recently received sworn testimony from a military-intelligence agent who asserted that, during the current administration, be was assigned the task of compiling death lists as part of his job with the Defense Ministry. If the information provided by the agent is true, it would strongly suggest that political repression continues to be directed by the military leadership.
While the press frequently reports the discovery of corpses showing signs of torture, the chapter states that the "National Police, under the coordination of the Interior Ministry, have stated that they are attempting to end all such abuses." Such statements are no substitute for actions. Moreover, while the report dutifully records the Guatemalan government's denial of "military or police involvement in death-squad like killings," it fails to point out that the denial is cast in doubt by such cases as the above-noted murders in Quetzal-tenango by the police.
like past reports, this year's virtually ignores the pervasive restrictions on freedom of movement and freedom of association in rural areas. Tens of thousands of Guatemalans in conflictive highland departments have been forcibly resettled in so-called model villages where military surveillance is pervasive and where military permission must be obtained before leaving. The report mentions that in 1988 some 4,500 displaced Indians "returned to areas under Government control in 1988," vsithout noting that the displaced were held for weeks of interrelation at the army base in Nebaj, Quiche, then transferred to a government camp for as long as several months before being resettled in model villages. Few are offered the option of choosing to live independently.
The discussion of civil patrols is highly misleading. The State Department notes that there have been frequent complaints that the military continues
64
Guatemala
to oblige individuals to perform unpaid civil patrol duty, despite the fact that the 1985 Constitution expressly forbids such compulsion. Yet the report suggests that these complaints are unfounded, stating that Embassy officers "have found that service on the patrols is viewed as an obligation to community service and a sign of social status." While there are undoubtedly Guatemalans who are not dissatisfied with patrol duty, Americas Watch has received testimonies from hundreds of peasants stating that they are subjected to threats and coercion to perform what they regard as onerous and in some cases dangerous unpaid labor.
Several individual cases discussed in the report are handled in a way so as to shield government forces from criticism:
•	The September 1988 assassination of Father Andrés Girón's bodyguard is described as an incident which typifies the difficulty in distinguishing between common and political crime. Details left out by the report include the fact that the 30-35 armed men who carried out the assault were dressed in olive green, not a likely attribute of common criminals, and that Father Girón has received numerous death threats because of his work in favor of agrarian reform. The priest reported receiving one death threat just days before the attack.
•	The report repeats the government's version of the November 1988 massacre of 22 peasants from the village of El i^uacate, Chimaltenan-go, which holds members of the ORPA guerrilla faction responsible. This version has come imder serious question by Americas Watch and other investigators because of the lack of supporting evidence. The report omits evidence suggesting that the army committed the killings. In addition, the report incorrectly states that "members of the villagers' search party who managed to escape the guerrillas stated that ORPA was responsible for the killings." One searcher who escaped, Esteban Arenales, was quoted in The New York Times as saying that he believed guerrillas ~ he did not identify them as ORPA ~ captured the peasants. However, in a televised interview with the Canadian Broadcasting Company, Arenales denied having blamed the guerrillas and stated that he could not identify the captors. No other witness to the capture of the peasants has come forward with testimony. The Guatemalan government brought two area residents to the United States as part of an official effort to blame the guerrillas for the killings. Yet both men stated repeatedly that they did not see who captured the peasants. One
65
Critique
of the men, Waldemar Figueroa, said he did not know who committed the massacre. The other, Oscar Orlando Callejas Tobar, a re|X)rted Treasury Police informant, said he believed the guerrillas were responsible because the army had told him so.
In the case of Maria Elena Gaspar Ximcax, a Kanjobal Indian and a permanent resident of the United States who returned to Guatemala for a visit in June only to be seized and held in inconununicado detention for six days by police and military authorities, the report offers no criticism of government forces. Gaspar's detention was plainly illegal on several counts: she was held without an arrest warrant, her captivity greatly exceeded the constitutional limit of 24 hours for administrative detention, and authorities repeatedly denied to members of her family that they had seized her. Without noting the illegal conduct of the authorities, the State Department chapter reassures the reader that:
the army formally apologized to Ms. Gaspar stating that the case was one of mistaken identity. Ms. Gaspar had no further problems during the remainder of her visit to Guatemala.
The question of a purported mistaken identity has no bearing on the legality of the security forces' actions.
66
