HONDURAS
This report on Honduras contains <^jective reporting mixed with apologetics for the Honduran military, omission of facts that reflect poorly on the armed forces, and unwarranted attacks on Honduran human rights monitors. The underling fault with the chaîner is the premise that the emergence of an elected civilian government in Honduras is the same as the existence of civilian rule and respect for human rights. "The Armed Forces," the chapter asserts, "...operate under full civilian control." In fact, the military is a law unto itself. It neither allows dvilians to police its conduct, nor enforces dis-dpline within its ranks for human r^ts offenses. Reflecting the strategic anti-communist alliance that the United States has forged with the Honduran military over the last eight years, the report bends over backwards to smooth any feathers it ruffles amoi^ the uniformed class by its acknowledgment of rights violations by the military.
The strong points of the report are its straightforward discussion of torture and prisoner abuse, which the report accurately describes as "common," and its recognition of the practice by the security forces of extrajudicial executions, often of suspected common criminals. Several cases are cited in detail, including the apparent killing by the police of Jorge Andrés Sánchez Sánchez, who was detained as a suspect in the murder of a relative of a member of the military, and whose body was found shortly afterwards. Also described accurately was the case of José Lito Aguilera Cordova, an alleged deserter from the Special Forces, who died in military custody in January 1988 "as a result of traimia induced by severe beating." Although a military court opened an investigation, no results have been made public.
Nonetheless, the report tacitly excuses the killings by citing police statistics on the alleged high rate of release by the courts of suspected criminals, and by noting "periodic calls" from the "general public" for the seciyity forces "to take 'more stringent' anticrime measures," as if popular sentiment might somehow justify violent abuses by the authorities.
75
Critique
The report notes the announced establishment of what it euphemistically terms a "new private anti-Communist organization" known as the Alliance for Anti-Communist Action (AAA), but claims that the group has not been associated with violence. In fact, the AAA, which reliable sources have linked to the military, has issued death threats and is suspected of involvement in the October 10,1988 abduction of Sister Sandra Hernández, a member of the Sisters of Mercy based in San Pedro Sula. Sister Hernández had reportedly received a written threat from the AAA before she was kidnapped by armed men. She escaped after several hours of captivity.
The important issue of prosecutions of military offenders of human rights is handled disingenuously. This is the area where the absence of civilian control over the military is perhaps most glaringly evident. In an interview with Americas Watch in June 1988, Supreme Court President Salomón Jiménez Castro could think of only one occasion when officers had been convicted in a human rights case. In that 1979 case, two officers and two civilians were convicted in civilian courts for a massacre. Jiménez, who at that time was also Supreme Court President, refused to bow to pressure to pardon the officers and was unceremoniously fired. The officers were then pardoned.
In a new twist, the report discusses this lack of pimishment for military offenders as a public relations problem, stating:
The security forces were criticized for their reluctance to publicize proceedings against members charged with abuses. Although the police dishonorably discharged a number of agents in 1988 for abuses of authority, the failure to provide details on the types of abuses involved or the action taken in particularly controversial cases detracted from the overall effort by the security forces to demonstrate concern for human rights.
During a June 1988 mission to Honduras, Americas Watch conducted numerous interviews with officials of the military prosecutor's office (Auditoria Militar) as well as with senior police officials concerning the matter of prosecutions of members of the military for human rights abuses. We noted no "reluctance" on the part of these officials to discuss the proceedings against members of the military, on the contrary, they generously shared \sith us copious infor-
76
Honduras
matíon concerning cases handled by military courts. There simply were no cases in which military officers were convicted for human rights violations. The problem is not reticence biU inaction when the Honduran sy^em of military justice has addressed the serious human rights abuses committed by members of the military.
The chapter's handling of the January 1988 double slaying of the nation's second-most-prominent human rights activist« Miguel Angel Pavón, and a friend, Moisés Landaverde, is another example of bending over backwards not to offend the military. The State Department chooses to report discredited charges by a former activist in the Committee for the Defense of Human Rights in Honduras (CODEH), Héctor Vásquez, accusing CODEH president Ramón Custodio of responsibility for the killing, After launching this accusation in a military-sponsored press conference, Vásquez reportedly retracted the charge when summoned by the judge investigating the Pavón and Landaverde killings. A second judge in San Pedro Sula looked into the allegations and found them meritless. The report omits these facts and does not mention Custodio's emphatic denial of the charges.
Further, the report declines to mention the testimony of military defector Fausto Reyes Caballero, a collaborator for six years with Battalion 3-16, a clandestine death squad run by the military. Reyes fled to the United States in August 1988 after an attempt on his life which he attributes to Battalion 3-16. Reyes claims to have been told earlier in the year by two 3-16 agents that the military unit was res[>onsible for killing Pavón and Landaverde. Among those who reportedly told Reyes of 3- 16's involvement was the alleged getaway driver, who admitted his own involvement. Reyes's accusations received promineiU coverage in The Washington Post* and the Honduran press, but were iffiored by the State Department.
The chapter notes, without comment, that the investigation into the killings of Pavón and Landaverde "remains open" one year after the killing, and that "there have been no announced leads to the identity of those responsible."
• Julia Preston, 'Honduras Accused of Death-Squad Operations," The Washington Post, November 1,1988.
77
Critique
It fails to note the lack of seriousness with which the authorities have investigated the case as well as the military's obstruction of court proceedings. Hon-duran officials, most notably Attorney General Rubén Darío Zepeda, have repeatedly accused Dr. Ramón Custodio of the killing, in complete disregard of the fact that the courts, as noted, have foimd this accusation to be without merit. At the same time, police officials in San Pedro Sula, where the crime occurred, have ignored repeated summons to appear before the judge investigating the case.
The section on disappearances suggests that the State Department does not fully understand the meaning of the term. In a gratuitous jab at human rights activists who denounce these crimes, the State Department comments that "the security forces' illegal practice of incommunicado detention led to a number of inaccurate charges of disappearance." Amnesty International defines a "disappearance" as a case in which:
•	there are reasonable grounds to believe that the NÍctim has been taken into custody by the authorities or their agent;
•	the authorities deny that the Nictim is in their custody or the custody of their agent; and
•	there are reasonáble grounds to disbelieve that denial.*
A disappearance may be resolved or ended by the victim's release or the authorities' eventual acknowledgement of his detention. The Honduran military's practice of "illegal incomimicado detention" — in which detentions are often unacknowledged or denied ~ can rightfully be called a practice of temporary "disappearances." In some cases, such as that of seven men seized by plainclothesmen in Choluteca in October 1988, it appears the military was finally convinced to acknowledge the detention (several weeks after the fact) when faced with broad public protest over the men's "disappearance."
Brief mention is made of the landmark dedsion by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, an arm of the Organization of American States, which held Honduras responsible for the permanent disappearance in 1^1 of Angel
'Disappearanpes,' A Wnrkhnf>h, Amnesty International USA, 1981.
78
Honduras
Manfredo VeUsquez Rodriguez. The report does not mention that the July 29 decision not only blamed Honduras for Velasquez's disappearance and probable murder, but also found this to be part of "a practice of disappearances carried out or tolerated Honduran offidal$...between 1981 and 1984." The Court's findings substantiate what human rights groups have long asserted and what the State Department has repeatedly denied: that the Honduran government operated death squads diu'ing that period resulting in the permanent disappearance and probable death of some 150 people.
Finally, the chapter continues what has become a tradition of State Department reporting on Honduras, the ritual condemnation of CODEH, Honduras's prindpal non-governmental human rights organization. This year's chapter does not personally attack CODEH president Custodio, as last year's did, and it grudgingly offers the comment that the organization makes "a number of genuine efforts on behalf of human rights." These are minor improvements over last year's inexcusable attacks. Nonetheless, the chapter offers the vague and tendentious comment that "many observers in Honduras consider the group to be highly politicized and affiliated with leftist groups and causes." As we have stated repeatedly in the past, such statements endanger CODEH activists who operate in an extremely insecure environment, and are inappropriate in a document intended to address human rights conditions, not offer U.S. opinions about human r^ts monitors.
The chapter claims that CODEH lost credibility when the U.S. Embassy publicly challenged its figures on extrajudicial executions for 1987. Indeed, CODEH admitted errors in seven of 107 cases mentioned in the Embassy's analysis. The State Department concludes that of the remaining 100 cases, "11 did appear to be extrajudidal killings." Curiously, however, the coimtry report for 1987 did not indude any cases of extrajudicial killings by the security forces. CODEH has provided a valuable service in nudging the State Department to admit belatedly that such violations took place. Unfortunately, acknowledgment of these military offenses is made only in the context of an effort to discredit those who brought the offenses to light in the first place.
79

» - ' i:>f î

kl- -
(M: CMC,..

Píd 1Is<bd so shcfis aníüfiss \o ih^aaSi^ stiobosbadJ bAâ
