HAITI
Issued five weeks before the State Department requested renewed aid to Haiti for the first time since the violently aborted elections of November 1987, the report on Haiti reads like a promotional piece for the current military government of Lt. Gen. Prosper Avril, which gained power on September 17, 1988. The report's main point seems to be that the Avril government is more worthy of U.S. financial backing than the three prior military and military-dominated governments that have ruled Haiti since the fall of the Duvalier dictatorship in February 1986. Ongoing abuses are overlooked in the process.
The tone of the report is set in the introductory section, when it suggests that abuses ended with the rise of General Avril to power:
The first three governments which held power in Haiti in 1988 (from January 1 to September 17) failed to defend effectively the human rights of the populace from attacks by ex-tragovernmental organizations. In many instances, the Government instigated or tolerated these actions, and in others there was strong suspicion that acts of violence were committed directly by the Government or its officials. Politically motivated killings, mistreatment of prisoners, and arbitrary arrests and detention took place in Haiti before the coup which [brought General Avril to power].
The same theme is then picked up elsewhere in the report: "before the September 17 coup, bands of thugs attacked people and institutions with the apparent purpose of preventing the exercise of basic rights." Or again: "What is clear is that the first three governments failed to protect the pwpulace from politically motivated killings or to investigate and prosecute effectively those responsible for the killings which did take place."
These harsh assessments of the first three governments to rule in 1988 are entirely appropriate. The National Governing Council (CNG), which ruled until it installed its hand-picked successor on February 7; the "civilian" govern-
67
Critique
ment of Leslie Manigat, which ruled from February 7 until the military returned to open [}ower on June 19; and the government of Lt. Gen. Henri Namphy, which ruled from June 19 to September 17, all paid little heed to human rights. The statements are misleading, however, in implying that there was no such disrespect for human rights under General Avril.
As the report progresses, it becomes more explicit in its endorsement of the Avril goverment's hiunan rights record. For example, it asserts: There were no reports of any political killings perpetrated by, or with the complicity of the new Government after September 17...." Among the [}olitical killings ignored are the murders of Michelet Dubréus and Jean Félix in Cité Soleil, on the outskirts of Port-au-Prince, during the night of November 26-27,1988. The two had written a public letter to Haitian radio stations two days earlier identifying participants in the St. Jean Bosco massacre of September 11,1988 who were still at large in Cité Soleil. (The massacre, committed by armed plainclothesmen with the support of uniformed army soldiers, took place at St. Jean Bosco church during a mass being performed by the populist priest, the Rev. Jean-Bertrand Aristide. Twelve parishioners were killed and at least 77 wounded.) Dubréus and Félix were murdered by a group of four armed plainclothesmen (identified by witnesses as attached to the Anti-Gang Investigations Bureau of the Port-au-Prince Police Department) led by a uniformed soldier. The Avril government then arrested Rock Mondésir, another publisher of the letter, who was held on trumped-up charges in a series of military detention centers, including the Anti-Gang Investigations Unit and the supposedly closed army garrison of Fort Dimanche, before being brought to the National Penitentiary, where he was held until his release at the end of January 1989. The Avril government has initiated no known investigation into these murders.
Another political killing under the Avril government ignored by the State Department is that of Luc B. Innocent, a minor presidential candidate in the November 1987 election and leader of the Revolutionary Union Movement. Innocent was killed on October 8,1988 by an army patrol in Fonds-Verrettes in southeastern Haiti, near the border with the Dominican Republic. According to a communiqué issued by the Avril government, Innocent died during an attempted take-over of the local military barracks, part of a purported armed
68
Haiti
invasion to oust the Avril government, althoi^ Innocent had crossed the border with fewer than ten followers. One member of Innocent's party who survived the attack and then fled to the Dominican Republic contradicted this official account. He said that, suddenly and without warning, troops attacked a hut in which Innocent and his followers had been meeting, killing Innocent and wounding others. The government added to the uncertainty about this case by burying Innocent's body on the spot, without legal formalities or prior notice to his relatives.
Other misstatements in the report have a similar effect of exonerating the Avril government. For example, the government that preceded Avril's, that of General Namphy, had rescinded the popularly enacted Haitian Constitution of March 1987. By the end of 1988, Avril had not reinstated the Constitution. (He ultimately reinstated selected portions of the Constitution in March 1989.) The re{x>rt states that the Namphy government only "^ored" the Constitution, implicitly relieving General Avril of the obligation to reinstate it.
Similarly, the report states that Franck Romain, the former mayor of Port-au-Prince and alleged mastermind of the St. Jean Bosco massacre, "remained [in the Embassy of the Dominican Republic in Port-au-Prince] at year's end." In fact, the Avril government granted Romain safe conduct and spirited him out of the country during the night of December 31,1988-January 1,1989. Although we are not certain whether Romain left the Embassy before or after midnight of that night, the State Department should have acknowledged General Avril's role in permitting Romain to escape justice for his alleged involvement in the massacre.
The report is similarly misleading in addressing the Avril government's failure to prosecute those responsible for other abuses. In the case of Louis Eugène Athis, a presidential candidate who was murdered with two of his companions in the section of Léogane known as Aux Parques on August 2,1987, the report asserts only that "a warrant for the arrest of the suspect of the killing...was issued in December 1988." The report fails to mention, however, that the subject of the arrest warrant, David Philogène, a local army section chief and the man who is widely regarded as having orchestrated the killings, was gjven protection by the army when, following the September 17 coup, popular
69
Critique
demonstrations in Léogane called for his indictment. The army resisted these demands and violently broke up some of the demonstrations. Although Philogène was dismissed as section chief on November 4, 1988 and briefly placed in custody in Léc^ane and then Petit Goâve, the miUtary then freed him, and he reportedly fled to the Dominican Republic, making a dead letter of the arrest warrant cited by the State Department.
In the case of Yves Volel, another presidential candidate killed in October 1987 by armed men emerging from Port-au-Prince police headquarters, the report states: "the Avril government announced that it had taken into custody four suspects accused of participation" in the murder. This assertion apparently refers to a statement made by General Avril during an interview on Radio Haiti-Inter in which he said that he had seen the dossier on the Volel murder and that it seemed that "the Ministry requested the dossier from the Port-au-Prince poUce and the police responded in turn that the investigation had been completed, that the culprits had been apprehended and convicted and that the case was closed." General Avril did not identify who had been convicted, nor are we aware of any other suggestion that such convictions, or even arrests, occurred. Nonetheless, on this flimsy evidence, the State Department seems to accept as fact that arrests had been made.
At times, the report omits s^nificant context so that the political dimension of abuses it describes are imintelligible to the uninformed reader. For example, the report notes:
The soldiers who were arrested on October 15 and accused of participating in a destabilization effort against the Government were held without formal charges imtil mid-December when an investigative commission submitted its report in their case. The report concluded that some of those accused had plotted against the Government and others had been misled by the plotters into thinking that they were stopping a coup attempt. All of the active-duty soldiers were released from prison before the end of December and discharged from the military.
Nowhere does the report note that the arrested soldiers denied involvement in a coup plot and that the charges were widely regarded as trumped
70
Haiti
up. Nor does the report identify these soldiers as among the junior officers who helped bring Avril to power on September 17 with the hope of ending the pohtical violence of the Namphy government; the apparent motive for their arrest, also not mentioned by the State Department, was their overly vigorous attempt to seek out weapons caches of the paramilitary forces that had been behind much of that violence.
Similarly, in describing the massacre at St. Jean Bosco church, the report never identifies Father Aristide, the outspoken critic of mihtary rule, as the apparent target of the attack. The uninformed reader thus gathers no sense of the motives of the attackers or, for that matter, of the motives of the Avril government in choosing not to bring the attackers to justice.
The State Department notes that the previously confidential investigative reports on the November 1987 election violence and the Athis murder were released by the Avril government and met with "widespread criticism." But the State Department does not explain why these investigations were so maligned. The report on the electoral violence stated that it was not possible "to establish that there were Macoute [a reference to the paramilitary Tontons Macoutes] -Army forces involved" and failed to attribute any individual responsibility for the killings. The report on the Athis murder blamed the victims by saying that they should not have traveled to an area where they purportedly knew they would be attacked. These details, if provided, would have demonstrated the Avril government's unwillingness to reopen the investigation into the Athis murder, and its persistent inability to come to terms with the Haitian human rights community on the minimal powers required by a proposed new investigative commission on the November 1987 electoral violence.
The report asserts that Recherches Criminelles, the "notorious detention center and the headquarters of many of the irregular 'detectives' of the Duvalier era, was made into a purely investigate police facility" by the Avril government. The State Department makes no mention of the regular reports of deaths of detainees by torture or starvation in Recherches Criminelles prior to the September coup. Nor does the State Department note that while the Avril government changed the name of the facility to the Anti-Gang Investigations Unit, it continued to house prisoners there, and that the tortured body of one
71
Critique
prisoner arrested on November 15,1988was discovered in the morgue nine days later.
The report asserts that "weaknesses in the judicial system frequently lead to lengthy pretrial detention." Outright governmental intervention also plays a role. The judicial system has nothing to do with the decision of the military authorities simply not to present certain prisoners to a judge, as the Avril government failed to do in the case of the 15 soldiers arrested on October 15. Similarly, armed soldiers forcibly prevented Jean-Claude Nord, a defense attorney from the Haitian League for Human Rights, from entering the courtroom for an important trial during the 1988 Summer Session of the Criminal Court; the defendants were convicted and sentenced to jail terms. The State Department misstates Haitian law when it says that: a person may be arrested or detained if apprehended during the commission of a crime or pursuant to a judicial warrant based on evidence justif^g the arrest. In all other cases the person arrested must be brought before a judge within 48 hours to determine the legality of his detention.
Article 26 of the 1987 Constitution requires that in all cases a person in detention, whether or not pursuant to an arrest warrant, must be brought before a judge within 48 hours of the arrest for a determination of the legality of the detention. The report also fails to state that the right to appear before a judge is frequently violated; nor does it mention that throughout 1988, especially in the countryside, Army officers, without warrants, frequently arrested people who were not committing crimes.
Although the report is generally more accurate in describing the abuses of the governments that preceded that of General Avril, the State Department is less forthright about abuses than it should be. For example:
• The report notes the murder of four members of the Labadie Youth Movement in August 1988; remarks that "[t]he local government official, termed the Section Chief, was widely accused of having instigated the killings on political grounds;" and observes that a "commission formed by the Namphy Government briefly investigated the killings, but again no results were ever made public." The report neglects to note a key factor in the commission's failure to pursue the investigation ~ the commission included the same section chief and another
72
Haiti
local official who witnesses identified as having participated in the killings.
The report describes self-censorship by the press and radio only during the period of General Namph/s rule. It neglects to note that the press at times deemed certain topics taboo even under the "ciNilian" Manigat government, such as the indictment in Miami of Colonel Jean-Claude Paul on drug-trafficking charges.
The report fails to mention that government representatives in numerous rural areas (section chiefs) prohibited any public meetings, or that strikes in 1988 at numerous assembly and manufacturing plants on the outskirts of Port-au-Prince ended with the arrival of armed troops who intimidated and sometimes beat workers.
The report asserts that the Autonomous Central of Haitian Workers (CATH) "has operated without government interference" since it was briefly closed by the CNG in June 1987. This statement ignores the June and July 1988 closings of two branches of the Federation of Agricultural Workers, a CATH affiliate, in St. Michel de I'Attalaye and Gros Mome, following machine-gun and arson attacks. The St. Michel de I'Attalaye attack was carried out by the army; the Gros Morne attack occurred 15 to 20 meters from a police station without provoking any official reaction.
The report notes that Manigat "was ousted by the military when he attempted to force through various retirements and transfers of senior officers." Yet the report fails to mention a crucial element in his downfall: Manigat also had ordered the arrest of ten soldiers suspected of death-squad activities.
The report states that the Tontons Macoutes were disbanded and remnants have "attached themselves to figures of authoritarian bent." The report should have noted that, apart from token efforts, the Tontons Macoutes were never disarmed and many have joined or allied themselves with the Army.
The report labels Haitians fleeing their country as "economic migrants." It implicitly supports this label by referring to U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Senice (INS) officers who "are embarked on the Coast Guard vessels [that intercept and return fleeing Haitians] to interview potential applicants for [)oltical asylum," as if the inevitable determinations of these INS officials that asylum is not warranted proves that fear of political persecution could not be motivating these
73
Critique
Haitians to flee. The report fails to note that these INS interviews take place without the presence of counsel in public settings that are not suitable for serious inquiries and are almost imiformly perfunctory -circumstances that hardly encourage Haitians to confide their fear of persecution.
74
