INDONESIA
The report on Indonesia addresses some of the concerns raised in oitr critique of the report for 1987, but serious problems remain. For example, on the positive side, the conflict in East Timor is no longer referred to as a rebellion; the eœcutions of former members of the Indonesian Communist Party are noted; and last year's failure to mention the lack of access by the International Committee of the Red Cross to Muslim political prisoners has been rectified. The discussion of labor rights in particular is more thorough than ever before. And the tone throughout the report is generally neutral and objective.
The report's deficiencies are major, however. The many paragraphs that are repeated verbatim from last year's report suggest not that the situation was unchanged but that insufficient effort was made to update the facts. For example, identical wording on arbitrary arrests appears in both the 1987 and 1988 reports:
Fredse niunbers of persons detained without trial were unavailable. Human rights observers estimate there may be as many as 500 throughout Indonesia.
And in the section on fair trials, another repetition appears:
Several subversion trials took place in 1988[7], most related to alleged Muslim extremist activity.
In the first case, it would be helpful to have some indication of the circumstances under which detention without trial takes place. Suspected political activists in Irian Jaya and East Timor, for example, are often held without charge for interrogation for weeks at a time in military command posts at the district or sub-district level before being released. Many Muslims in Java suspected of subversive activity are held m pre-trial detention for periods far exceeding the provisions of the Criminal Procedures Codes (KUHAP) before eventually being brought to trial; a man named Haji Zainul Abidin was tried in October 1988 in Kendal District Court after having spent eight years in pre-trial
85
Critique
detention. More precise information on the subversion trials is also m order. In 1988, we were aware of some three dozen such trials in Jakarta, Cirebon, Kendal, Klaten, Yogyakarta, Temanggung and elsewhere. There may well have been more. The report's use of the word "several" implies a misleadingly low nimiber.
In another repetition of last year's report, the section on denial of fair public trial notes that "while the government does not provin data on the number of persons serving sentences for subversion, one reliable estimate suggested there may be several hundred." Again, it should be possible for Embassy offi-dals to be more predse. When one adds tc^ether the known prisoners serving lengthy sentences in connection with the attempted coup in 1965; the "Koman-do Jihad" arrests of 1977-79 in Palembang, Medan, and East and Central Java; the West Java arrests of alleged "Danil Islam" leaders in 1981; the "Jemaah Imron" arrests of 1981; the Tanjung Priok riot of 1984; the bombings in East and Central Java in 1985; the usroh arrests of 1986-87; the Jakarta and Cirebon arrests of Muslim activists in 1988; the activities of the Free Papua Movement in Irian Jaya over the last decade; and the remaining East Timorese prisoners, the total would be at least 400. And that figure would not include the numerous prisoners tried in Java over the last three years in less publicized cases of alleged Muslim activism.
With regard to trials, the report states, "Initial judgments are rarely reversed, although sentences are occasionally reduced." They are also occasionally increased, which is worthy of note, especially when the increases are from a life sentence to the death penalty.
The report implies that access to counsel is a question of money. In political cases, however, lawyers rarely have a chance to meet regularly with their clients until just before the trial is scheduled, and there have been several cases in which defendants have been pressured into selecting defense counsel other than that of their choice.
The section on arbitrary arrest and detention omits any mention of a new policy on remissions which has affected prisoners serving life sentences and those under the death penalty, including several political prisoners arrested in connection wth the 1965 coup attempt. Presidential Decree 5/1987 was issued in March 1987 but it was only in 1988 that its implications became clear. Before
86
Indonesia
it was issued, prisoners under death sentences could have their sentences commuted to life by a presidential pardon; they then become eligible for remissions to fixed-term sentences of 20 years, as were prisoners serving life sentences, if they behaved well. Under the new law, a life sentence can be changed to a fixed-term sentence only through the granting of a presidential pardon, and no prisoner can benefit from a pardon more than once. Since President Suharto in recent years has not been disposed to grant pardons to any of the 1965 prisoners, those currently serving life sentences have little hope of benefitting from remission to a fixed term. The new decree appears to have been applied retroactively because at least two prisoners who would have been released in 1988 under the old remissions law now find that their life sentences remain in force.
In the section on disappearances, the report notes that the government has responded to inquiries about missing persons submitted through international organizations. But as the report of the United Nations Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances notes, 55 out of 70 cases transmitted to the Group remain to be clarified. The government generally has responded when the person reported to have disappeared is alive, but it has not responded when there is strong evidence to suggest that the disappeared person was killed by Indonesian troops.
The section on torture is accurate as it stands, but while the report notes that several police and prison officials charged with mistreating prisoners were disciplined, it should be noted that such disciplinary action is only taken in cases of abuse of criminal suspects. We are unaware of any member of the security forces ever having been disciplined in a case involving torture or mistreatment of a political prisoner, and this needs to be mentioned.
In the section on freedom of speech and press, the report notes that "opposition groups are generally free to meet privately and formulate views." This is true only if the views in question are not seen as challenging the state ideology, Pancasila. Many Islamic study groups, meeting in private to advocate strict obedience to Islamic law, have been infiltrated and broken up by security forces. (This issue is touched on in the section on freedom of religion, but it is not just a reli^ous issue). Similarly, in the section on freedom of peaceful as-
87
Critique
sembly and association, there is no mention of the efforts to restrict Muslim religioiis meetings known as pengajian.
The report notes the restrictions on employment and freedom of movement imposed on former prisoners detained in connection with the 1965 coup attempt. It does not note that these frequently extend to the second generation and to relatives by marriage of the ex-detainees, or that the former prisoners still have to report to the local military on a regular basis -- in some cases as often as twice a week. And while the report correctly dtes the intensified efforts to keep track of all former members of the Indonesian Communist Party and its affiliated front groups, it does not convey any idea of the scope of the govem-ment-sponsored witch hunt that this entailed in the name of "clean environment" (persih lin^aingan). For example, anyone employed by a state agen<^ who was related to one of the estimated 20 milUon people believed to have been involved with these groups in the mid-sixties risked losing his or her job.
Also in the section on freedom of movement, the report states: "Although no accurate figures are available, it is believed that some residents of Irian Jaya who in previous years had crossed into Papua New Guinea returned voluntarily across the border." One reason accurate figures are unavailable is that the Indonesian government has not permitted the United Nations High Commissioner on Refugees to conduct any monitoring activities in Irian Jaya.
88
