THE ISRAELI-OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
This year again we find improved reporting of the major human rights issues in the occupied territories. The State Department provides a generally comprehensive and accurate presentation of the violations that have taken place in the West Bank and Gaza during the first year of the uprising, or intifada. It also strikes a more appropriate balance in terms of tone and language in comparison with previous years' reports, and cites statistics that take into accouiU figures compiled by Palestinian as well as Israeli sources. The report falls short, however, when it omits or understates information relevant to a full understanding of several key issues, including the use of deadly force, administrative sanctions, and sharp restrictions on Palestinian institutions, including trade unions. Also, as we pointed out in last year's critique, the report fails to offer its own judgment regarding allegations of torture or other forms of physical mistreatment of Palestinian in-custody suspects, detainees and prisoners.
We note at the outset that the work of Palestinian human rights monitoring organizations significantly contributed to the documentation of violations. While these groups have been allowed to continue operating during the uprising, the report accurately states that they faced increased pressure from the Israeli authorities in 1988, including the administrative detention of seven of their employees.
Since early December 1987, Israel has faced an unprecedented popular revolt by Palestinian residents of the territories. The sustained unrest has in-duded confrontations between Israeli soldiers and Palestinians, in which troops have used live ammunition, conventional and "new, improved" rubber bullets* and supposedly "non-lethal" plastic bullets to disperse demonstrators, including those throwing stones or Molotov cocktails, to apprehend suspects, includ-
These bullets, introduced in November 1988, are maible-sized metal balls thinly coated with black rubber. Fired at close range, they can cause, and have caused, serious injuiy or death.
89
Critique
ing fleeing suspects, and to extricate themselves from situations said to present mortal danger. By the count of the Israel Defense Forces (IDF),242 Palestinians were killed by IDF gunfire in 1988 and an additional 3,460 injured. The report is commendable for acknowledging in clear terms that many of these deaths and injuries could have been preveiUed: "Soldiers frequently used gunfu-e in situations that did not present mortal danger to troops, causing many avoidable deaths and injuries." The report also states, correctly, that soldiers disciplined or prosecuted for violations of IDF regulations on the use of live ammunition received lenient punishment and that "there were many cases of unjustified killing which did not result in disciplinary actions or prosecutions."
There is, unfortunately, an abbreviated and misleading discussion of plastic bullets. The report states that "the IDF claims plastic bullets are less lethal than lead bullets." In fact, the IDF has steadily held that plastic bullets -introduced into use in the terrUories in August 1988 — are non-lethal, not "less lethal," and designed to reduce fatalities. The State Department's assertion that "several deaths" were caused by plastic bullets is a gross understatement. While the IDF did not release its first figures on deaths from plastic bullets until mid-January 1989, when it stated that 47 of 90 Palestinian deaths since August were caused by plastic bullets, hospital records and press accounts in 1988 indicated that dozens of Palestinians were killed by plastic bullets in the last four months of 1988. The report also notes without comment the September 1988 IDF policy of using plastic bullets in non-life-threatening situations to increase injuries. This amounts, at the very least, to summary imposition of corporal punishment, which the State Department should have forcefully condemned.
We also take issue with the report's implied assertion that the IDFs use of deadly and excessive force against Palestinians can be partially explained because the IDF was "caught by surprise and untrained and ine}q>erienced in riot control." While it is true that the intifada was not anticipated by Israeli security, military or government officials, and that during the first months of the intifada Israeli political leaders and top IDF commanders predicted its imminent suppression, it is not appropriate, in our view, to excuse IDF conduct by citing the lack of training or esq^erience in riot control. In fact, the IDF for over two decades has confronted an increasingly disaffected population in the
90
The Israeli-Occupied Territories
occupied territories and has evolved policies and strategies to respond to periodic outbreaks of popular discontent, including violent disturbances. The tactics have, regrettably, included the use of live ammunition in riot-control situations.*
The report is uneven in its coverage of administrative sanctions imposed on Palestinian residents of the territories by the Israeli military. House demolition is discussed in greater detail than in last year's report and, to its credit, the State Department notes that this form of collective pimishment "contravenes the Fourth Geneva Convention in the view of the United States." However, the report states that "[a]t least 154 houses of Arabs were demolished or sealed for security reasons." The reference to security concerns suggests that house demolitions are related to the property's physical location (i.e., that it may have been a site for throwing stones or Molotov cocktails), when in fact the sanction is usually applied to punish all the residents of a house for alleged security offenses committed elsewhere by one of its occupants.
Administrative detention is covered in a detailed and generally accurate fashion.* * In a major improvement over last year's discussion, the report straightforwardly states that "[m]any individuals, including academics, jour-
The issue of the use of fatal force by soldieis in the territories predates the intifada. According to Al-Haq, the West Bank human rights monitoring group, nine Palestinians were killed and 32 wounded by IDF gunfire in 1986. In the first eleven months of 1987, before the intifada began, eight Palestinians were killed and 66 wounded in the West Bank. Utese figures indicate that the use of fatal force is not new, but simply has escalated with the rise in the number of disturbances in the territories.
The report notes, but does not ei^lain, the full significance of the March 1988 military order that substantially weakened some of the safeguards against arbitrary administrative detention. While the report correct^ states that local militaiy commanders can issue detention orders, it neglects to explain t^t this is pursuant to revised provisions in the March 1988 military order which expanded the number of officers empowered to order Palestinians administratively detained. Previously, only IDF Area Commanders could issue detention orders. In addition, the report should have noted that the periodic three-month review detention orders by a militaiy judge was dropped in March 1988, and that appeals were no longer to be made to the President of the Military Courts but to a panel of three officers constituted as an appeals committee. In June 1988, the appeals committee was replaced by a single militaiy judge empowered to uphold, cancel or shorten administrative detention orders.
91
Critique
nalists, and human rights workers, who have not engaged in or advocated violence or other acts thre^ening security" were administratively detained in 1988. The severe and controversial sanction of deportation, however, merits more than the mere three sentences devoted to it in the report. While the State Department notes the number of Palestinians deported in 1988 and states that the U.S. government finds deportation in contravention of the Fourth Geneva Convention, it neglects to provide any information or analysis about the Palestinians targeted for deportation or the administrative process used to deport them. At a minimum, the report should have stated that deportees are not formally charged with specific offenses and that deportation orders are typically based on general allegations of illegal activity and secret evidence not disclosed to deportee-designates or their attorneys during any stage of the process, including appeal proceedings.
The State Department also understates the Israeli authorities' interference with established Palestinian organizations in the territories. For example, the report describes "increasingly strict measures" taken against professional and community-based groups, but fails to mention that these measures included the closure by military order — generally for one- or two-year periods — of a host of organizations, including trade unions, medical and charitable societies, and umbrella federations. The report notes only the closure of the Federation of West Bank Professional Unions, leaving the uninformed reader with the impression that this was the sole Palestinian institution ordered closed by the authorities in 1988.
Major omissions mar the discussion of Palestinian trade unions. The report is clearly misleading when it states that "Israeli authorities, citing security concerns, actively discouraged union activities." The report should have added that among the forms of "active discouragement" throughout the year were closure orders ~ for one- or two-year periods - against 24 trade unions in the West Bank and against the General Federation of Trade Unions in Nablus. The report also, inexcusably, negleOs to mention that dozens of Palestinian union leaders and activists were placed in administrative detention in 1988, and that six were issued deportation orders.
92
The Israeli-Occupied Territories
Regarding torture and other physical oiistreatment, including severe beatings and beating deaths of Palestinians in custody, the report once again distances itself from the issue, avoiding any characterization or assessment of the reliability or credibility of reports by local and international rights groups, physicians, lawyers and others who reported that these abuses occurred on a wide scale in 1988. This contrasts, for example, ynth the State Department's reporting on Syria ("there have been numerous credible reports of torture") or Iraq ("reliable reports make clear that both physical and psycbol<^cal torture are used by the authorities").
The country report avoids the substantial issue of whether Israeli law permits torture by repeating almost the same categorical language used in the 1987 report, stating: Torture is forbidden by Israeli law, and Israeli authorities claim they do not condone it." While the 1988 report substitutes the word "claim" for the word "state" which appeared in the 1987 report, the current report ignores the rather obvious imphcations of the findings of the government-appointed Commission of Inquiry, headed by retired Supreme Court Justice Moshe Landau. The Landau Commission investigated the interrogation methods used by the Shin Bet, Israel's domestic intelligence service, against Palestinian detainees.* While the State Department correctly states that the Landau Commission "confirmed that the Shin Bet bad for many years illegally used physical and psychological pressure to obtain confessions," it misrepresents a key recommendation of the Commission when it says: "The report recommended that limited and clearly delineated 'physical and psychological pressure' (which it defined in a secret annex) should be allowed to be applied in appropriate circumstances." The State Department implies that there are limits - presumably short of outright torture — imposed on the psychological pressures permitted to be used against detainees, when in fact this is not the case. The Commission's recommendation was as follows:
The Commission was appointed in June 19S7 and issued its findings in October 1987 in a report that had two parts: a public document, and a second unpublished part "required in Older to preserve State security.*
93
Critique
The means of pressure should prindpally take the form of non-violent psycholo^cal pressure through a vigorous and extensive interrc^tion, with the use of stratagems, includili acts of deception. However, when these do not attain their purpose, the exertion of a moderate measure of physical pressure cannc^ be avoided. GSS [Shin Bet] interrogators should be guided by setting dear boundaries in this matter, in order to prevent the use of inordinate physical pressure arbitrarily administered by the interrc^tor.
In a glaring omission, the State Department makes no mention of the adoption by the IsraeU Cabinet in November 1987 of the Landau Commission's findings and recommendations. This represented an imprecedented offidal ex-plidt endorsement of the use of "moderate" physical force against suspects held in custody by the authorities — a contravention of the universally recognized right to be free from "cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment." We find it inexcusable that, for the second consecutive year, the State Department refrains from addressing this critically important issue.
While the repwrt provides an accurate description of the chronolc^ of the controversial "beatings" policy publicly announced by Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin in January 1988, the sequence of the narrative leaves the mistaken impression that beating of Palestinians by soldiers stopped when Israeli Attorney General Harish criticized the policy and said it was illegal. The report neglects to mention that Harish's criticism occurred in February 1988, and that reports of severe beatings contmued throughout the year.
94
