JAMAICA
The 1988 report on Jamaica continues the trend, begun last year, of presenting a realistic picture of human rights in Jamaica. This year's report, like last year's, begins by stating that "excessive use of lethal force" by the police is "the country's most persistent human rights problem." A recent Americas Watch investigation of human rights in Jamaica confirms this analysis. In earlier reports the State Department had minimized police homicides. The 1986 report, for example, referred to police killings as "problems" and attributed these to poorly trained police, a view that the State Department has since dropped.
This year's report, properly emphasizing commimity concern over police abuses, states: "Police actions, particularly instances of excessive use of lethal force in dealing with suspected criminals, have occasionally caused local protests. In 1988 large-scale searches for escaped criminals led to some complaints of brutality." The report then goes on to state that 141 people were killed by the police through September 1988. In March 1989 Police Commissioner Herman Ricketts told Americas Watch that the total number of fatal shootings by police for 1988 was 181. For the seven years from 1979 through 1985, the police shot and killed an average of 217 people a year. In 1986, the figure was 178; in 1987,205. Although the number of deaths at the hands of the police has declined somewhat, police killings continue to be extraordinarily high.
In Appendix A to the Country Reports, which sets forth the scope of each section of the report, the State Department notes that the section on "polit-cal killings" should include discussion of "extrajudicial killings (e.g., deliberate and illegal use of lethal force by the police against criminal suspects)." Despite this injimction, the report on Jamaica makes no mention of police killings of criminal suspects in the section on political killings.
In addition, when the State Department addresses these police killings elsewhere in the Jamaica report, it fails to explore much of the evidence
95
Critique
demoDstrating that the police are committii^ summary executions. This evidence includes statistics showing that although police shot and killed 181 people in 1988, they shot and wounded only 98 in direct confrontations. Ordinarily, one e?q)ects many more people to have been injured than killed in confrontations. By contrast, during 1988 six police officers were shot and killed and 12 were shot and injured in direct confrontations. This ratio, of two police injured to every one killed, is the reverse of the ratio for people shot by the police, of whom one civilian was injured for every two civilians killed. This again suggests a pattern of summary e^^cutions by police. Similarly, the State Department should have noted that while the Police Information Center continues routinely to say that victims of police killings died in shoot-outs, no gun was recovered in over half of the cases reported in the press in 1986 and 1987.
The 1988 country report properly indicates that Jamaicans are often detained without charges:
Police must record detentions and are responsible for ensuring that detainees appear before a meml^r of the judiciary within 24 hours of detention. However, there have been instances of detainees being held for two weeks or loiter without being brought before a judicial officer.
This imderstates the problem, however. Reports from the Jamaica Council for Human Rights (JCHR) for 1987 and 1988 indicate that the detainees it represented spent an average of 21 da)^ in detention before being released or charged; the loi^est such period of detention of a JCHR client was 166 da)«. The report correctly observes, however, that "detention of suspects without a warrant occiu's regularly, particularly in poor neighborhoods."
The report notes that detentions are carried out under the authority of the Suppression of Crime Act, a state-of-emergency law that was enacted in 1974 in reaction to Jamaicans' fear of crime and which has been renewed at regular intervals since. Under that act, police have wide powers to detain suspects and to search premises without warrants. But the State Department does not analyze the dangers posed by this law, which has adversely affected thousands of Jamaicans. Many members of the Jamaican Constabulary Force are young people who have had no experience conducting police work under
96
Jamaica
normal conditions, \vitliout the extraordinary powers granted by the Suppression of Crime Act.
The report correctly states that "suspected criminals are often beaten or mistreated by police while being held in local stations." But this year's report unaccountably omits a discussion of prison conditions in Jamaica. The 1987 report said:
Prison conditions in Jamaica are substandard, particularly in the police station jails. The Parliamentary Ombudsman visited many police station jails in 1987 in preparation for a report to Parliament and reported on the extremely poor conditions in those facilities. Overcrowding, unsanitary conditions, inadequate food, and limited medical care for inmates are the norm for these detention facilities. According to the Ombudsman, conditions in the two maximum security prisons are marginally better than in the police station jails, but similar problems pl£^e the prisons.
In February 1989, the Parliamentary Ombudsman told us that conditions in lock-ups and prisons continue to be appallii^. Lawyers and human rights activists who regularly visit lock-ups and prisons have given us similar reports. The State Department's omission of this information in the 1988 report is puzzling.
For a second year, the country report has noted complaints concerning private security forces — armed commercial guard services:
Guard forces often hire less qualified applicants than the police and proNide less training. The Government is now draftii^ legislation requiring licensing and standardized training for commercial guard forces.
Again, this should be developed further. Our investigations have revealed that there are over 200 private security firms in Jamaica, employing 12,000 to 14,000 guards, many of whom are armed, and some of whom have criminal records and have used their weapons improperly. Police Commissioner Ricketts told Americas Watch that private security guards killed 17 people in 1988. This is a serious problem on the island, and one which should be promptly addressed by legislation to regulate and control the firms and their employees. At present the firms must comply only wth the laws regarding Hrearms and the use of dogs. Many Jamaicans, including human r^ts activists, the Private Sector Organiza-
97
Critique
tion of Jamaica and the Pohce Commissioner, have expressed their concern about the mushrooming growth of these firms and the problems associated with them.
The report properly describes political activists who "occasionally resort to violence to prevent supporters of rival parties from engaging in legitimate political activities, sudi as voting, and to punish those believed to have harmed their party's interests." During the three-week election period, culminating in the election of February9,1989,15 people were killed. The intimidation of witnesses, and sometimes jurors, is also appropriately discussed, and is described as one of the weakest areas of Jamaican justice.
98
