KENYA
Although the report on Kenya touches on some important developments in 1988, it fails to capture the acceleratili trend toward autocracy and seriously underestimates the effect of certain government measures on human rights. The report thus falls short of focusing necessary international attention on the worsening human rights situation in Kenya.
A serious failure of the report is its superficial treatment of two constitutional amendments passed by Parliament in August 1988 without debate. The first extends from 24 hours to 14 days the period during which the police may hold those suspected of committing capital offenses in incommunicado detention ^thout recourse to judicial scrutiny. This change is particularly troubling given that at least eight people are reported to have died in police custody over the last year. The report fails to note that this constitutional amendment increases the likelihood of continued mistreatment and death of prisoners and detainees. The report also minimizes Kenya's harsh prison conditions — which have also played a role in prison deaths ~ by referring to them simply as "poor."
In similar fashion, the report fails to point out that the second constitutional amendment—which gives the president the authority to fire senior judges and members of the Public Service Commission — further concentrates power in the executive at the expense of the judiciary. In addition, by referring to those opposed to these two amendment as mere "critics," the report fails to convey the opposition of broad sectors of Kenyan society. The report's assertion that the amendments were "unanimously and speedily" passed by the National Assembly implies their popularity; instead, the State Department should have pointed out that the National Assembly is packed with loyalists of the Kenya African National Union (KANU) — the single authorized party — and is a rubber-stamp for all presidential initiatives.
In discussing arbitrary detentions and detention conditions, the report fails to note that:
99
Critique
•	Wan)vi Kihoro and Minigi Kariuki, two lawyers detained without charge or trial, are in very poor health and were denied access to doctors of their choice;
•	These two and a university lecturer, Mukaru Ng'ang'a, who was also detained without charge or trial,* continue to be held simply because they have sued the government for allegedly torturing them;
•	The coiu-ts have never voided detention orders or acts taken under the Preservation of the Public Security Act, a reflection of the subordination of the judidary to the executive;
•	There have been no vigorous and publicly annoimced investigations into mistreatment and deaths in custody of prisoners or detainees; and
•	Followii^ the detention of Gibson Kamau Kuria and John Khaminwa for representing individuals critical of the government, lawyers are afraid to appear for detainees; instead, the report simply notes that detention of lawyers involved in sensitive cases "could" discourage v^orous legal representation when in fact such discouragement is common.
Conspicuously absent from the report is any mention of widely reported cases of the use of excessive and deadly force by the police in apprehending suspects. Over the last several years, numerous suspects have been fatally shot by the police, allegedly while fleeing. A recent example is Francis Okute, an elderly carpenter at the College of Veterinary Science and Agriculture, who was shot by a senior police officer from Kabete Police Station on August 11,1988. There has been no vigorous effort to investigate or curb these acts of police violence.
The report correctly notes that in cases without political implications the right to a fair trial is normally observed, although long delays are common. While the report correctly points out that in trials involving Mwakenya/Kenya Patriotic Front suspects and sympathizers questions of unfairness have arisen, it minimizes the seriousness of concerns over the large number of "confessions" obtained for such trials by imping that only human rights organizations have
The detainees mentioned here were among seven who had been held without charges who were released in June 1989.
100
Kenya
doubted their reliability. In fact, broad sectors of Kenyan sodety and the international community have charged that most of these "confessions" were obtained through intimidation, torture or both.
The report's treatment of the two-st2^e 1988 parliamentary elections under the "queuing" system - which ended the secret ballot - is superficial and insufficient. The report neglects to mention the intimidation inherent in requiring voters to line up publicly behind candidates. The election results ~ in which none of the candidates critical of KANU or government policies was elected -- illustrates that the elections were not free or fair. The report notes that queu-ii^ engendered "controversy"; more accurate language would have desoibed the broad-based opposition from the clergy, the media, lawyers and voters in general.
The report asserts that President Daniel arap Moi was re-elected unopposed for a third five-year term. This statement is misleading in its failure to mention that Kenya is a ¿¿e jure one-party state and that the ruling party, KANU, nominates only one presidential candidate; President Moi could not therefore have been opposed.
The report correctly describes government control of broadcast journalism and restrictions on foreign journalists. In an attempt to appear even-handed, however, the State Department downplays restrictions on the press and ultimately contradicts itself. The report thus goes out of its way to refer to the "lively tradition" of the press in Kenya, even as it catalogues government attacks on publications found "objectionable," government censorship of editorials, self-censorship by intimidated journalists and denials of work permits to foreign correspondents. The report also fails to note that the prosecution and conviction of Bedan Mbugua, editor of Beyond, on charges of "improper financial man^ement" appears to have been prompted by his publication of an article that criticized queue voting and questioned KANU's conduct during the 1988 elections.
The report omits mention of government harassment and prosecution of Gitobu Imanyara, editor of the popular Nairobi Law Monthly, an independent legal journal with a human rights component. In addition to pressuring his corporate sponsors and harassing his printers, the government brought charges
101
Critique
against Imanyara in 1988 alleging that the publication was improperly registered. These moves appear to be part of a governmental attempt to close down the journal
The report corre<^y observes that there are no "formal" limits to academic freedom. But it fails to mention that over the years, and particularly since 1982 when student leaders were alleged to have met mth the organizers of a failed coup attempt, the government has taken nimierous steps that have had the effect of restricting academic freedom. For ^cample, the state has enlisted the services of loyal students and professors who, together with plainclothes security forces, monitor the content of classroom exchanges and report on the activities of the university community. University students and academics have been detamed or prosecuted and imprisoned for allegedly seditious activities, and numerous professors and academics who were detained in 1982 have been denied re-employment at the imiversity once they have been released. Clashes with the police and the General Service Unit (GSU), a paramilitary force which has been used in the past to coerce students, have become common at the Universities of Nairobi and Kenyatta; hardly a year passes without police action against students and the attendant closure of the universities. Many students have been injured diu'ing these confrontations and at least several deaths have been reported. In the aftermath of the 1982 coup attempt, an unspecified but reportedly large number of students were killed. Due to these pressures, leading Kenyan intellectuals, including the celebrated writer Professor Ngugi wa Thiong*o, have been forced to flee the country. Other previously detained academics, such as Al-Amin Mazrui, have had their passports confiscated, preventing them from travelling abroad. Mazrui was prevented from assuming a teaching position at Ohio State University.
The report refers to the rule requiring lawyers to register with the state but does not examine or give due weight to this troubling development. The requirement, which is unnecessary since lawyers traditionally have been regulated by the local law association, the Kenya Law Society, provides the government with the opportunity to weed out "undesirable" lawyers, especially lawyers disposed to handle human rights and other politically sensitive cases. In addition, although the report mentions the removal of the passports of Gibson Kamau
102
Kenya
Kuria and Paul Muite, it fails to note that these are not isolated incidents but part of a pattern of intimidation directed against the legal community.
The report fails to capture the magnitude of the problem of exile. By stating simply that "self-exile is a course of action sometimes chosen by Kenyan dissidents," the report misses the point that since 1982, particularly in light of the government's response to Mwakenya suspects and their alleged sympathizers, a climate of fear has grown. Widespread arbitrary arrests, detention, imfair trials and reports of torture created that climate, particularly among lawyers, academics and opposition politidans. As a result, a sizeable number of Kenyans have sought refuge abroad. The govemmeiU has repeatedly attacked these exiles and accused them of plotting to overthrow it. In light of these attacks, many exiles regard skeptically the government's invitations for them to return, fearing that detention or persecution awaits them.
The report paints a rosy but inaccurate picture of worker rights. It should have pointed out the seriousness of the prohibition against civil servants organizing unions since most Kenyan workers are in the government's employ. The legally mandated trade union, the Central Organization of Trade Unions, caters only to workers in certain branches of the private sector, and its ability to represent workers vigorously is suspect because of heavy government interference and the close relationship between its leadership and the Ministry of Labor. The report should also have noted that the right of workers to strike, organize and bargain collectively is severely curbed by government regulations that require state approval at almost every turn.
Although the report briefly touches on conflicts between the clergy and the state, it does not clearly describe the strained relationship between these two institutions that existed throughout 1988. The church has consistently spoken out against human rights abuses and other restrictions of basic freedoms. Senior government officials, in turn, have attacked it sharply for its advocacy. The banning of Beyond ~ published by the National Council of Churches of Kenya — and the prosecution of its editor, Bedan Mbugua, was symptomatic of these strains. A number of church leaders, including the Reverend Daniel Gitari of Mount Kenya East, voiced their opposition to the electoral changes of 1988. In September, Reverend Gitari condemned the fall
103
Critique
elections as "fraudulent." His remarks prompted the Secretary-General of KANU to threaten that the government was considering abolishing the constitutional right of worship.
The report also fails to mention that the right to travel is restricted in the northeastern part of the country, where emergency regulations remain in effect. Nor does the report refer to the tension that continues in that part of the country, where security forces continue to engage in violations of individual freedoms, including killings.
104
