LIBERIA
This year's report on Liberia is comprehensive and detailed, and while understating the seriousness of some abuses, it provides a relatively accurate picture of the overall human rights situation. Particularly valuable is the report's description of the discrepancies between the rights and freedoms theoretically secured by the Liberian Constitution and the actual practices of President Samuel Doe's government. The report is marred at times, however, by an over-reliance on government sources as opposed to independent investigation.
A major flaw in the report is its statement that Liberia's formally civilian government is beleaguered by "the legacy of recent military rule" which continues "to prevent fulfillment of [a democratic]...ideal." Since the military government of General Samuel Doe which came to power by a coup in 1980was replaced in 1985 by a fraudulently elected and military-dominated civilian government also headed by Doe, the so-called "legacy of military rule" is not a remnant from a previous regime but the same government in a different guise. Moreover, the ciurent Doe government has shown a remarkable contempt for constitutional rights and has continued to rule by force. To their credit, the authors of the report do note along these lines that "Doe's claim of a narrow victory [in 1985] is widely believed to have been fabricated" and that "the army continues to be a bulwark of the current administration."
The report is marred by a deliberate attempt to portray the Doe government as increasingly sensitive to himian rights concerns. For example, it inappropriately offers exculpatory justifications, as when it attributes military harassment and intimidation of civilians to "the lack of professionalism among poorly paid enlisted men." The issue is not the lack of professionalism at the lowest levels, but rather the brutal and lawless behavior displayed by the military leadership, including Doe, which condones violence at all levels.
105
Critique
The State Department also tones down reports of abuses by referring to "unconfirmed allegations" when there is ample evidence substantiating these reports. It thus states:
There have been unconfirmed allegations of deaths in recent years at Belle Yalla due to starvation, lack of medical treatment and mistreatment by prison guards. Because most of the prisoners are held incommunicado, these allegations cannot be confirmed.
This statement implies that no prisoners who could confirm such practices have ever been released from Belle Yalla. In fact, there are many former prisoners of Belle Yalla, including the heads of three political parties, Jackson Doe, Edward Kessally and Gabriel Kpolleh, who were imprisoned to prevent them from forming a coalition. The U.S. Embassy could easily have interviewed these former inmates of Belle Yalla to confirm or refute these allegations.
The report also asserts that "[t]hree opposition parties are recognized and permitted to function." For all practical purposes, however, the parties are parties in name alone. The leader and the counsel of the banned Liberia Unification Party, Gabriel Kpolleh and Caephar Mabande, are both in jail, serving ten-year sentences together with eight others for conspiring to overthrow the government. (Kpolleh was returned to prison after havii^ been released from Belle Yalla.) They were convicted without normal judicial safeguards ~ for example, the judge told the jury to disregard a prosecution witness who gave exculpatory testimony, stating that the witness suffered fi'om a lack of food — and the charges seem consistent \sith Doe's pattern of jailing opponents to keep them intimidated.
The report states that "there were no known political prisoners in Liberia in 1988." But both Kpolleh and Mabande, having been imprisoned on trumped-up charges for apparently political reasons, should be regarded as political prisoners.
The report also fails to mention some of the government's efforts to silence opposition. In early 1988, the most recent headquarters of the Liberia Action Party was vandalized, and threats were issued against persons who might wish to rent space to the party. The party's newspaper, Co-co-leo-co, was also
106
Liberia
ordered shut in February 1988. The United People's Party, previously banned, was permitted to function on condition that it serve as a loyal opposition, although in October 1988 its leader, Gabriel Matthews, announced the party's decision to renounce this role as a result of the government's "rebuff of several overtures." The Unity Party is the third "functioning" party, according to the State Department, but it is not clear in what fashion it "functions" since it has not played an active role in public life for some time.
The statement that "[tjhe ruling NDPL [National Democratic Party of Liberia] engaged opposition parties in discussions on possible power-sharing" is misleading. To our knowledge, no formal discussions took place in 1988. The report seems to be referring to earlier attempts at reconciliation which failed due to the government's intransigence on key issues and its apparent desire for cooption rather than reconciliation.
The report glosses over grave abuses in the past. The statement that "[t]he trend towards improved human rights observance since the resumption of civilian rule in 1986 was set back in 1988 by several adverse developments" does not place this "trend" in its proper context — an omission for which we have faulted the State Department in the past. In 1986, there was an "improvement" in hiunan rights observance, not because of a change in the government's practices, but because the government's repression of the opposition had been so successful that the government encountered no real challenges during that year. In the previous year, the unleashing of Doe's forces on innocent civiUans — ostensibly to crush an attempted coup - had resulted in hundreds of deaths and had effectively silenced most voices of dissent. Successive years have followed a pattern of tenuous calm, punctuated by periods of crisis. The decrease in the number of abuses thus appears to reflect reduced resistance to the government rather than greater governmental respect for human rights.
The report is candid about terrible prison conditions but discusses only briefly the question of torture and degrading treatment or punishment. For example, although the report correctly notes, in the section on political killings, the suspicious circumstances surrounding the deaths of Nicholas Podier, the former vice-head of state, and Joseph Kaipaye, a Liberian resident of the United States who returned for a visit, it neglects to note in the section on torture that
107
Critique
both were reported to have been severely tortured prior to their deaths. Nor does the report refer to the severe beatings and deprivation of sleep suffered by two American businessmen arrested with Podier. The report also fails to mention beatings of ordinary prisoners.
The report ^ves a good overview of the prc^lems in the judiciary. However, by observing simply that "reports of financial or political pressure on the courts are common," the State Department understates the problem. In fact, the judidary in liberia is at its lowe^ ebb. Accurate reporting would have emphasized the rampant corruption, incompetence and disorganization th^ pl2^e the judidal system.
The description of the liberian press as "lively" is overly optimistic. There has been a s^tematic government effort to intimidate the press. Attacks on the press, imprisonment of journalists and the banning of newspapers have created an atmosphere in whidi the press is barely functioning. Consequently, today there is only one independent newspaper, which censors itself so severely out of fear of government reprisal that it can hardly be considered "lively."
In discussing Decree 88A, which declares the spread "of rumors, lies and disinformation" to be a felony, the report underestimates its chilling effect on freedom of esqpression. It is true that the decree has not been invoked recently, but that is because the government has not needed to implement it to achieve its objectives. Liberians are constantly aware of its existence and the price they would pay if it were applied.
The discussion of freedom of peaceful assembly and association presents a rosier picture than is warranted. The report does not take into account the intermittent surveillance of opposition figures and the harassment, including arbitrary detention, of many political party members. Because many of the vioims are not nationally prominent, it has been easy for the government to conceal the e^^ent of its efforts to intimidate opponents and critics.
The report is correct in statii^ that exit visas, which are required for travel, are usually issued routinely. However, the report fails to mention that the government maintmns a "blacklist" of persons who may be denied permission to travel or who may be arrested upon their return. This list consists mainly of people who belong to opposition parties or who are perceived as outspoken
108
Liberia
crUics, but on some occasions this list has been extended to include persons ^o do not fall into either category, such as Archbishop Brown of the Episc(^>al Church, who was denied permission to travel to a church conference in the United States.
109

"T
liM
:	pol^kal preuuix |||
the coorti wnw 6	Pttp^rtMCMt •adercWsxtlae pn^^te«. Uiftcr,
plusko^ Aw^jmfr *we|i<ks»,	^ diKorgnBia^iioti thM
<rftbg Ubcma petm m Th^jy* ii ow^ optunwtic.

p^ kfc hwtiy fWoctrntiiifp C^owecioraih^,
1 liiHAieMSiiis^ftVflm ISA, *fckii4edt«re4Naf mmorft, tim m4 ifMWiliwilti m* « ilAswy, tfec rc;xKt tjaaercst>m»le& i» duU^ng effect
h, ^ RuH « llir gM«''»*^ iM ills not needed to mpk»eai k to »di^

d^KfU«»^ ^	«f	«1)4 «Modatios . ^
4 jwcffc tlum k tmrmx4.tfce report dota*not Ufeo intoiw «k» iKitKllMur «or«ein»ace of	figuiet and tbe
«W^irti MiiiwIN waMcd ww|jgwly>H<)Wgvc». riw report feUt to «ertion to
to iramS m^iMfb» pmmd opeii^h^ retam. TUa eoMitfs oi peepk wliejNtoei
