SRI LANKA
The 1988 report on Sri Lanka gives a generally accurate picture of both the chan^ng pattern of human rights violations since the 1987 Indo-Sri Lanka Accord and of continuing concerns from the pre-Accord period. The report's coverage of specific legation and practices that encourage abuses is uneven; the discussion of the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA) is more candid than last year's, but the treatment of extrajudicial killings and the new Indemnity Act is weak.
Among the more incisive sections of the report are the following:
•	The section on arbitrary arrest desaibes provisions of the PTA and Emergency Regulations (ER) which permit confessions that may have been obtained under duress to be used as evidence, thereby encouraging torture or mistreatment. The report notes: "In addition to allowing prolonged incommimicado detention, the PTA and ER contain other provisions, including allowing confessions made to police officers to be used in court and placing the burden of proof on defendants to show that a confession was coerced, that may actually encour^^e the mistreatment of detainees."
•	The report also notes that the PTA proscribes "v^iuely defined acts which can and have encompassed non-violent expression of opposition to the government." The report correctly notes that "the potential for abuses is clear."
•	And the report states that the 30-day limit for filing a habeas corpus suit to challenge the legality of detention orders "makes it virtually impossible in practice for persons detained incommunicado for prolonged periods, or relatives of those alleged to have disappeared, to bring suits." Such statements are welcome.
However, the report misses other opportunities to make equally strong
statements about new laws or regulations that have serious implications for the
protection of human rights. Nov^ere is there an adequate discussion of the
recently enacted Indemnity Act. The Act grants immunity from prosecution to
all members of the security forces for actions "legal or otherwise" committed in
the name of law and order or for the "public safety" between August 31,1977
177
Critique
and December 16,1988, so long as these actions were committed "in good faith." The years covered include the period after 1983 and before the 1987 Indo-Sri Lanka Accord when the Sri Lankan security forces committed grievous human r^ts violations, includii^ disappearances, torture and extrajudicial executions. It is deeply disturbing that the government continues to deny that these atrocities took place yet grants indemnity to those who committed them.
The section on torture touches briefly on the Indemnity Act. But the report's statement that "the bill was criticized by human rights actiwsts and the parliamentary opposition for its broad scope and its potential to abridge constitutionally guaranteed fundamental rights" falls short of the kind of condemnation the Act deserves. Human rights groups both inside and outside Sri Lanka have been greatly disturbed by this legislation, which will further obstruct investigations into poUtical killings and disappearances. Both kinds of abuses continue to be a problem, and the report underscores the government's role m both.
As was the case last year, the 1988 report does not adequately distinguish political killii^ that violate international law from those that do not, such as killings of combatants during combat. For example, extrajudicial killings of detainees by the Indian forces are discussed in the same par^aph that lists casualties from the conflict between the Indian Peace-Keeping Force (IPKF) and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam in the Northeast, thus diminishing the importance of the former as a violation of international hiunan rights and humanitarian law. The discussion of reprisal killings of Tamil civiUans by the IPKF also receives short shrift, and ^ves the Indian Government the last word to deny all reports of such killings. The State Department would have done better to comment on the Indian Government's failure to investigate these reports, some of which have been based on eyewitness testimony, and to make public the findings.
Extrajudicial executions by Sri Lankan security forces in the South deserve greater attention in the report than the two sentences citing an impossibly low estimate of "at least 25 such cases" reported by "nongovernmental groups." In fact, estimates of such killings range into the hundreds, and include killings by paramilitary groups acting with the complicity of the security forces. The report also fails to mention that emergency regulations passed in Novem-
178
Sri Lanka
ber 1988 permitted the security forces to shoot demonstrators and ciu'few violators on sight. Other emergency measures permitted the disposal of bodies without inquest. Although the report discusses the latter in the section on "disappearances," it is unfortunate that the State Department did not use this opportunity to point out that such measures facilitated extrajudicial killings by the security forces.
The section on political killings correctly notes that, "following a pattern set in 1983," the government has not made public any investigations into political killings, nor have judidal actions been taken against the vast majority of members of the security forces accused of human rights abuses.
The section on disappearances is clearer than last year's about the culpability of the security forces. It states:
In many instances, released detainees have reported having seen a "disappeared" person in government custody ~ or, in the north and east, IPKF custody -- and, in a few cases, later having seen a corpse. These reports, along with the knowledge that the PTA and ER permit security forces to dispose of bodies without inquest, have led local citizens to the justifiable conclusion that "disappeared" persons have been kiUed by the authorities in reprisal for attacks on security forces. The report should have been stronger on the subject of access to conflict areas by international humanitarian agencies. The report states that "by the end of the year, no decision had been taken on the request of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to visit detention camps," leaving the reader with a more positive impression than the facts warrant. Despite repeated offers of assistance since 1983, the ICRC has not been permitted full access to areas of conflict or detention centers, and the attempt of one human rights group in Sri Lanka, the Civil Rights Movement, to draw attention to this issue m a newspaper advertisement led the government to censor the ad. The report discusses this incident of censorship in the section on dvil liberties; it would have been appropriate to include this discussion in the section on access as well, since it is dearly evidence of the government's reluctance to open itself to the scrutiny of humanitarian organizations.
179




í-v,-;'
MfiAfiatanillii^
lililí hl ami
-IM'» itíWhlIttBÉi^
Líétifc*. •

^»lilijiiiÉtiirtii

rfpiiiigiiiiirtiíi
iwiHÉil|ifiniiiti
frCMR

<iifüiWiirt<iiüpw|Éij
Nil


o] noíiiiaJI» WBib ol .toaaiovoM xXfgí^ ÜvO
'IÉlMifclÍlW*lHlilfcMÍÍI
í «MtfkíA ^ CBs^rgency
enB


•WS

■Mhr.iî
