MALAWI
Malaw has experienced a deep and long-term human rights oisis for the past 25 years. Organized opposition is banned and the expression of even mildly critical opinions is likely to incur lengthy detention without trial and torture. The gravity of the human rights situation is reflected in some measure in the country report, but some important developments in 1988 have been overlooked.
The report correctly states that "it is difficult to estimate the nimiber of arbitrary detentions and arrests," without specifying predsely why this is so. Malawi is a closed sodety allowing no free expression through the mass media. At a local level there is an extensive network of government informers, primarily organized by the Malawi Young Pioneers, the national youth movement. Anyone suspected of contact wth foreign journalists or human rights organizations is in great danger. In November 1988 Osborne Mkandawire, a journalist working for the government, died in Mikuyu Prison, apparently as a result of torture. His alleged offense was to have passed information to foreign journalists. The State Department report does not mention his case.
Detained at the same time as Osborne Mkandawire in May 1988 were three other journalists, including Tony Tembo and Robert Kalemba, who both wrote for foreign news magazines. They were later released. Margaret Maran-go Banda, a former radio journalist and ofGcial of the Chituko Cha Amai Mu Malaw women's organization, was arrested in July on her return from a visit to Britain. At the end of 1988 she remained in detention without charge at Zomba Central Prison. None of these cases is described in the State Department report.
The report miikes a number of curious statements about arbitrary arrest and detention which are unsubstantiated and probably incorrect. The statement that "long-term detainees are normally charged officially and brought before the courts" does not correspond with the information received by hiunan rights organizations monitoring Malaw.
Ill
Critique
The detention since 1980 of Aleke Banda, a former senior official, is referred to stating that "charges against him still have not been made pubhc." In fact he is detained without charge.
The report also estimates, without ^ving its reasons, that the number of arrests and detentions "appears fewer than in previous years." Since the government is not obliged to publish figures for detentions and there are severe restrictions on human rights monitoring, there is no reliable estimate of the number of arrests and detentions. It is irresponsible for the State Department to suggest that there has been an improvement on the basis of mere guesswork.
The report correctly refers to legal discrimination against Malawians of Asian origin, but is incorrect in asserting that "the economic and social needs of ethnic Africans are generally met on a non-discriminatory basis." It is equally misleading to state that "Malawi enjoys a large degree of ethnolinguistic uniformity."
Since a cabinet crisis soon after independence in 1964, the government has been dominated by Chewa speakers from Malawi's Central Re^on, notably President Kamuzu Banda himself. A number of prominent politicians from the Northern Region were e3q>eUed and forced into enle after the 1964 crisis. Chewa was declared the country's national language in 1968, whereas Tumbuka, the lai^;uage of most people from northern Malawi, has no official status. Since the 1960's there have been periodic purges of northerners from public life.
Northerners have long played an important part in the country's educational system ~ a legacy of their favored educational status imder British colonial rule ~ which has been resented the Chewa ruling elite. The Northern Region, with 20 percent of the population, thus generally accounts for about half of university entrants. In September 1987 a quota s^tem was introduced for admissions to the University of Malawi. Henceforth admission will take into account regional ori^ rather than simply merit. In 1988 ten northerners were dismissed from the Malawi National Examination Board. It was claimed that the board's northern chairperson, Donton Mkandawire, had packed it with people from his own re^on to influence the results of the Malawi Certificate of Education exams. Mkandawire fled to Botswana, leaving virtually no northerners on the board. (In early 1^9 it emerged that these discriminatory
112
Malawi
measures were only a prelude to widespread sackings of northerners from the dvil service and redeployment of northern teachers.)
Human rights reporting in Malawi is a risky and imprecise business, so the State Department should not be critidzed too severely for minor oversights and factual errors. However, it is serious for the report to fail to mention anti-northem discrimination, which has been an underlying theme of Malawian political life, just as it is dangerous to assert without substantiation that arbitrary arrests and detentions appeared to have eased in 1988. The hazards faced by Malayan human rights monitors place an even greater obligation on diplomatic observers to conduct impartial and accurate research.
113
tttMk iMti m», the ìfkà'
iifiiißmi^^
vfaMoouC
mi iililiIWii» ■! lili: tai» tea »Orth-■mll^twi»III ihi^ tfcc	ItitíÉMiirit» I Boaid ft ^
iwTfciii ■ cfciiii»	had pacfc-
kmè ymw iigMi ipMIaeaPC tto ttwito H»M Ctv fkdu- B.4swifik birt^t iiifcfljyW
■ "ci J;. ti i TVuùtó^; J-;
