MALAYSIA
The report on Malaysia contains serious distortions and omissions. As with last year's report, it significantly understates the general extent of governmental abuse of human rights. In describing specific allegations of human rights violations, the report either adopts a position favorable to the Malaysian government or takes no stand whatsoever.
The fair trial section is poor. During a year when one of the most egre^ous abuses by the government was the manipulation of the judiciary for apparently pohtical reasons, the report relegates the independence of judges to a throw-away paragraph at the end of the section.
It states without comment that the Lord President of the Supreme Court was dismissed by the King on charges that he had shown "bias and prejudice in speeches critical of the Government" and had created "misunderstanding between the Prime Minister and the hereditary rulers." Nowhere is there an indication of the crucial role of the Prime Minister in the dismissal or a mention of his political conflict \sith the courts. Nowhere is there any hint that the Lord President may have been innocent of the charges against him or that the charges were politically motivated. Nowhere are the questionable procedures followed in the dismissal discussed.
Similarly, there is no discussion of the questionable suspension of the five Supreme Court judges, two of whom were dismissed, except to state that it was "for their actions related to the Lord President's case." As with the allegations against the Lord President, those against the five judges appear to have been poUtically motivated at the mstigation of the Prime Minister.
The report downplays the significance of the dismissals. While stating that "critics charge that one result [of the dismissals] will be to reduce considerably the inclination of judges to act independently of executive authority," the State Department dismisses this conclusion. Citing one case of questionable significance that went against the government, the report concludes that this is
115
Critique
an indication of "continued judicial willingness to disagree with the Malaysian Government on important issues." The rapid suspension and removal of the Lord President and two Supreme Court judges at the urging of the Prime Minister is likely to have a greater long-term effect on judicial independence in Malaysia than one High Court ruling.
This year's report, like last year's, does not question the government's charges against those arrested under the Internal Security Act in late 1987, most of whom had been released by the end of 1^. Last year, we acknowledged that the State Department may have had difficulty reporting on the October and November 1^7 arrests because they occurred towards the end of the year. This year, the State Department has no sudi excuse. The Report merely repeats without comment that in making the arrests, the government cited "the need to act to avoid racial strife." It offers neither its own analysis nor that of other observers. There is strong evidence that the arrests were carried out by Prime Minister Mahathir primarily to silence critics in the nilii^ coalition, the political opposition, and social reform ^oups.
Incredibly, there is no mention in the section on arbitrary arrests of the Government White Paper entitled "Towards Preserving National Security," issued on March 14,1988, which is the official justification for the late 1987 ISA arrests. According to the White Paper, the primary reasons for the arrests were: "members of certain political parties and pressure groups...exploited various sensitive issues and inflamed communal sentiments"; "the Christianization of Malays" by church groups and their "manipulation of the Islamic religion" (mentioned in the report only in the section on freedom of reh^on); and the "activities of the Mandst group" which "aimed to replace the existing national social and political structures with a communist system." Only the first of these reasons, racial conflict, was cited by Prime Minister Mahathir in his statement after the arrests began — and by the State Department in its report.
The government provided no credible evidence supporting these allegations nor did the government attempt to prove the allegations in court by bringing criminal charges against any of the detainees. After the initial 60 day period when roughly two-thirds of the detainees were released, the remainder were relased gradually, despite the passing of the October 1987 racial tensions.
116
Malaysia
The sixteen detainees still being held at the end of 1988 were mostly members of the two largest opposition pohtical parties, the Islamic Party of Malaria and the Democratic Action Party (DAP), and included the DAP's top officials. The report is silent on these issues.
The discussion of the advisory review boards in ISA cases describes the procedures of the boards without mticism. In^ead of taking the government to task for employing a board whose decisions are non-binding, never pubhdzed and often kept from the detainee, the report sheepishly states that it is thus "difficult to generalize about the regularity with which the recommendations are accepted by the Government." The report should have noted that a number of ISA detainees have refused to take part in the review process because they believe that to do so under the circumstances would only serve to le^timize their arrests.
The report mentions that "some" of the released ISA detainees are still subject to restrictions on their movement and association. In fact, nearly half of the 106 ISA detainees from the late 1987 arrests were released conditionally, including nearly all of those who received two-year detention orders after the initial 60-day period. The report fails to note that these conditions, like detentions under the ISA, may be renewed every two years indefinitely.
The report states that about 32 persons were arrested under the ISA in 1988 as arson suspects. The report does not point out, as it should have, that several of those arrested were active in the Islamic Party of Malaysia, suggesting possible political motivation for the arrests. Furthermore, the report should have stated that the arrests under the ISA were unwarranted, because Malaysia has criminal statutes proscribing arson. However, by using the ISA, the government is able to avoid bringing formal charges and trying those arrested.
The report describes amendments to the ISA enacted in Parliament in July 1988that effectively eliminate judidal review of ISA detentions. Inexplicably, the report does not mention events that were a likely impetus for the amendments: on March 9,1988, the High Court ordered the release of Karpal Singh, a prominent lawyer and opposition leader detained under the ISA, on the grounds that his arrest was unlawful. Eight hours after his release, the authorities re-arrested Karpal Singh under new ISA detention orders.
117
Critique
The section on arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence states that under current security legislation, police may enter and search homes without a warrant. However, no description is given of how such searches are conducted. Those arrested in late 1987 under the ISA had their homes and offices seardied and books and papers seized. The security forces often did not tell those arrested where they were going and in some cases blindfolded them. It was often days before relatives were notified where their family members were being detained and days and sometimes weeks passed before family \isits with detainees were permitted.
The section on freedom of assembly and assodation again fails to mention by name some of the non-governmental organizations that have been particular targets of offidal harassment, such as ALIRAN and INSAN. Members of these organizations were among those arrested in late 1987 and some continue to be under restrictions of various kinds following their release. Restrictions on key indi\iduals, mentioned in the sections on arbitrary arrest and freedom of movement, may also affect the functioning of their organizations.
The section omits an important incident that demonstrates the govenmient's willingness to restrict peaceful assembly. On November 6,1988, in Lake Gardens park, police arrested eleven people who were among a group holding a peaceful candle%ht in protest of the continued detention of those arrested in late 1987. They were charged with illegal assembly under the Police Act, although eventually the charges were dropped. The previous week, police in plainclothes roughed up two family members of detainees who were releasing balloons in the park as a form of protest.
The otherwise objective discussion of limitations on freedom of expression is weakened by the first sentence of that section: "[I]n practice there are very few constraints on the freedom of ejq^ression in conversation or private communications." The State Department's straining to stress the positive is palpable.
In the section on freedom of religion, the report describes the allegations of religious manipulation claimed by the government in the White Paper and the response to these charges made by a Christian group. However, the State Department seems to give equal weight to both contentions, implying that
118
Malaysia
the arrests may have been justified; they were not justified and the report should have said so.
The section on Malaysia's attitude toward human rights investigations is misleading. It states that representatives of human rights organizations "are able upon request to meet wth relevant government officials." An Asia Watch representative visiting Mala)«ia in August 1988 and a Lawyers Committee delegation in October 1988 were unable to meet with any of the officials having direct jurisdiction over issues of concern, despite requests for such meetings. The best Asia Watch managed was a meeting with a junior official in the Foreign Ministry.
The section states that "there are currently no organizations in Malaysia which deal specifically with the protection of human rights." That assertion would be correct if the word "spedficall/ were changed to "exclusively." As it stands, the impression conveyed is wrong, even if a later sentence notes that "a number of organizations" devote some time to human rights activities. The substantial human rights work of organizations like ALIRAN and the Consumer Association of Penang are thus ^ven short shrift.
119
à^Vr-HJ



m

	m IP
	m 1«'
» kmim f-'	m m

tàmkmiHam < »y »■neawilf tfcit aocto ftw HMMndaU Ol

'^'TTM & «te Di p Mtiww'ft aaéÊk^tù Htnm'^poMm » ^
îÉL	Ék
