URUGUAY
The report on human rights conditions in Uruguay during 1988 is adequate in most respects. It gives cogent, well-presented information on Uruguay's electoral system; the general respect for labor rights; the status of women and minorities, which compares favorably with situations in other Latin American coimtries; and the absence of current human r^ts violations. In addition, the report takes note of the important work of SERPAJ (Peace and Justice Service, an ecumenical human rights organization), although it neglects to mention the work of another respected human rights group, lELSUR (Uruguayan Institute of Legal and Sodal Studies), which provides legal services and analyzes legal issues.
This, however, is the easy part. The difficulty arises, and the report becomes evasive to the point of being misleading, when it must address the principal human rights issue, now facing Uruguay ~ the legal impunity of those who, on orders, committed gross and systematic violations of human rights during the twelve years of military dictatorship between June 1973 and March 1985. The report avoids dealing thoroughly with this issue by emphasizing the legitimacy of the Sanguinetti government (which supports impunity) and asserting that civilian authority controls the military (an assertion hard to sustain) while skimming over matters of substance relevant to the impunity issue and the law which has brought it to center stage in Uruguay.
The State Department's inadequate treatment of the transition from military rule appears in the report's first sentence, where it states that Uruguay "returned to its democratic tradition" on March 1,1985 "with free and fair elections." Given that the two principal competitors of President JuUo Maria Sanguinetti, the victor, were barred from political activity - one was actually in prison during the campaign period in 1984 - and that other poUtical figures were also prevented from running; given that freedom of the press was not fiiUy restored until after the elections; and given that as late as June 1983 dissidents
203
Critique
were being arrested and tortured, the State Department's characterization of the elections as "free and fair" is at best an oversimplification.
This problematic approach continues in the beginning of the second paragraph of the re[)ort, where the State Department asserts that "Uruguay's military forces are controlled by the Government." This is true in only a technical sense. When political matters touch upon military sensitivities, the government has shown itself incapable of withstanding military pressure and threats, most notably with regard to the search for justice on past human rights abuses. The December 1986 Law of Expiration (Ley de Caducidad), which precludes prosecution of military and police personnel for human rights abuses during the military period, was rushed through parliament and has been defended by the Sanguinetti government predsely because the military had made clear that it would disobey the dvilian courts (and by implication the entire civiUan structure of authority) if the courts sought seriously to prosecute human rights cases. The law was proof that a government elected on a wave of human r^ts sentiment and representing a party which had committed itself to prosecute past human rights violations was hostage to a military that accepted no blame and would tolerate no scrutiny.
The report does mention the Law of Expiration as a source of controversy — twice, in passing — but fails to explain the convulsive social reaction it has caused or the controversy surrounding the government's response to criticism of the law.
Still in its introductory paragraphs, the report notes that "PubUc debate on the 1986 Law of &cpiration...continued during 1988. Local human rights groups and Amnesty International (AI) e}q)ressed concern that the law might deter investigations of disappearances and promote a sense of impunity among wrongdoers." The first sentence is an impressive understatement. The second attributes to AI and Uruguayan human rights groups a mixture of legal and ethical arguments which are seriously misstated and misleading. As lELSUR, SER-PAJ, AI and others, including Americas W^ch, have pointed out, the Law of Expiration not only "might deter" investigations of disappearances; k has done so. Not a single case of disappearance has been officially attributed to the military, and only a handful of cases have even been investigated, and even then
204
Uruguay
by military officers. (One such officer, an army colonel still on active duty, called only one military officer to ^ve evidence and consistently disregarded other testimony that implicated military personnel in the disappearances). As for wrongdoers possibly gaining a sense of impunity, that has indeed occurred; it is not a prospect but a reality so long as the law is on the books. In the meantime, high government officials including President Sanguinetti, Vice President Enrique Tarigo and Defense Minister (Army General) Hugo Medina have made public comments harshly critical of those who supported a referendum on the law and have implied that such citizens have subversive motivations.
The report notes, in this same paragraph, that "the Supreme Court has upheld the Law of Expiration in several cases challengmg its constitutionaUty." This simple statement obscures a hotly contested dispute. When the Law of Expiration was passed in December 1986, lawyers for victims of human rights abuse and their relatives, as well as civilian judges presiding over disappearances and other human rights cases under investigation, filed writs with the Supreme Court challen^g the law's constitutionality on grounds that the only mechanism for the state to desist from punishing crimes was the mechanism of amnesty or pardon. The framers of the Law of Expiration had dehberately refrained from calling it an amnesty law. In May 1988, by a three-to-two vote, the Supreme Court upheld the law, but only after classifying it an amnesty. That is, the law was ruled constitutional for being something the government had said it was not.
The report notes that "no cases of disappearance were reported." Although no new cases of disappearance in Uruguay were reported in 1988, there are 132 unresolved disappearance cases from the military period which deserve but do not receive mention. As we have commented about reports on a variety of countries in the past, disappearance cases remain open until clarified; the report's failure to mention them as pending and serious problems is unfortunate. That is all the more true because, according to Appendix A of the Country Reports, the section on disappearances "covers unresolved cases...in which the victims have not been found or perpetrators have not been identified."
Similarly unfortunate is the report's failure to offer details on the controversies over political participation during 1988, which stemmed from the
205
Critique
citizens' drive to call a referendum on the Law of Expiration. The section of the report devoted to "respect for political rights" - which, according to Appendix A of the Country Reports, "discusses the extent to which citizens have freedom of political choice and can change the la>^...that govern them" — makes no reference to the year-long drama over whether the appointed Electoral Court would validate sufficient signatures fi'om petitions favoring a referendum on the impunity law. (The Uruguayan Constitution permits referenda to be called if 25 percent of voters have vaUdly signed petitions requesting a vote. Supporters of a referendum eventually prevailed in their drive to place the issue on the ballot. On April 16,1989, the effort to invalidate the Law of Bq)iration was defeated by a margin of 52 to 40 percent.) That drama included the punishment of two military men for having signed petitions favoring a referendum; the nullification of thousands of signatures, including the invalidation or temporary invalidation of the petition signatures of two well-known public figures on grounds that their signatures were false or suspicious, although both had publicly stated their support for calling a referendum; a heated parliamentary special session on the credibility of court procedures for validating signatures; and sharp criticism of the court by the country's principal human rights figures. What emerges in this country report is a careful exercise in saying as little as possible about a crucial legal and ethical issue which has divided Uruguayan society. Although the report is far more forthright with its criticism than the country reports on Uruguay of the early Reagan years, it still betrays a hesitance to highlight human rights issues under elected, allied governments.
206
