YUGOSIAVIA
The report on Yugoslavia is more objective than in past years because it less frequently adopts the perspective of the Yugoslav government and more frequently presents human rights violations in its own voice rather than as allegations attributed to non-governmental human rights organizations. In describing events in the Albanian-majority province of Kosovo, for example, the report distances itself from the prevailing Yugoslav government view by using quotation marks and by stating forthrightly: "Arrests for 'hostile propaganda' and on similar charges continued at a high rate, particularly in Kosovo province, where ethnic Albanians accused of 'nationalism and separatism' were the primary victims." In the past, the report stated that "Yugoslav authorities are widely believed to interfere on occasion in the private lives of citizens;" this year the report states imequivocally: "Arbitrary interference in private life occiu's most often in connection with government efforts to monitor op[>osition or dissident activity."
Nevertheless, this year's report maintains a bias shown in prior reports of interpreting events in Yugoslavia in a more favorable light than the State Department interprets similar events in other Communist countries. The Communist Party in Yugoslavia, like similar parties in the Soviet bloc, is described as the "leading organized ideolo^cal and political force." But unlike reports on those countries, where the State Department depicts the government as a "one-party dictatorship," the Yugoslav League of Communists is called "the only legal political party" - a phrase which avoids criticism of the one-party system as it casts doulH on the legality or legitimacy of any other parties. The report attributes the founding of two political organizations in Slovenia to a "growing trend toward political pluralism" without noting that grass roots pressure rather than governmental tolerance is largely responsible for the trend. Further, as the report later notes, these new Slovenian organizations agreed to be founded
209
Critique
within the "framework" of the Socialist Alliance, the popular front of the Communist Party.
In discussing the press, the report claims that "press autonomy has increased markedly in recent years in some parts of Yugoslavia," and that the press has been "more active" and "aggressive" in exposing corruption. While these statements are superfìdally correct, they paint a deceptively positive picture by failing to provide the context for this greater press autonomy, which appears to be the unintended consequence of infighting among various fiefdoms in the republics rather than freedom of the press deliberately guaranteed by the government. Press criticism is generally limited to crìticiàng leaders in neighboring republics but not the leaders of one's own republic. Further, the report fails to note that in 1988 the Belgrade papers were dominated by polides imposed by Serbian Party leader Slobodan Milosevic and manipulated by him against various political targets.
The report does acknowledge press bannings and provides more coverage of this issue, but contains contradictory remarks. The report notes that "public prosecutors have the power to ban publications," then tempers this observation by observing that "banning is a local option" and "police and prosecutors rarely intervene." By calling censorship a "local" problem, the report minimizes the responsibility of the federal government, which has signed and ratified various international accords and is obliged to adhere to them throughout its territory. Moreover, the report provides a number of examples of banning ^thout noting that most of these were effected by prosecutors and that in fact such interventions are not "rare."
The report states that press criticism sometimes results in editors being transferred, but overlooks that some reporters and editors who covered taboo subjects have been fired and dismissed from the party. The report is misleading in stating that "neither the print nor broadcast media are censored prior to dissemination." While true as a formal matter, the statement ignores that the press is not an independent institution but an organ of the government. Through an elaborate filtering process (the report notes correctly that 80 percent of reporters are party members), the government is able to ensure conformity and manipulate the press before publications reach the newsstand, and thus usual-
210
Yugoslavia
ly does not need to make use of censorship at the production stage. When at times parts of the Party-dominated press break loose, particularly at times of social and economic unrest, they are punished by procuratorial or Party intervention.
The section on mistreatment in confinement has improved over past years in that more references are made to allegations of torture and beatings, but they are still couched in terms of reports by Amnesty International and a Yugoslav human rights monitor, Dobroslav Paraga. The State Department notes Paraga's report of prison abuse and that he is still subject to a conditionally suspended sentence for exposing mistreatment. It also states: "Reports of such abuses, including occasional deaths that result, emerge in the press, as do reports of steps taken by authorities to deal with unwarranted use of force." But the State Department fails to add that the mainstream Yugoslav press' reporting on prison abuse is limited to the treatment of criminal convicts. Paraga's reports on political prisoners, as well as those of another Croatian former political prisoner, Vladimir Seks, were carried only in the liberal youth press of Slovenia, since they could not be published in Croatia.
The report a^rts that arrested persons are "usually" brought before a judge within 24 hours and that a bail system is "generally not applied in political cases." In fact, the bail system is never used in political cases. Moreover, the report should have noted that Yugoslav law requires only that the defendant be brought before a judge within 72 hours, and that this lengthier option is often exercised in political cases.
The report correctly makes note of Yugoslavia's decentralized government and the veto power maintained by individual republics. But it mistakes decentralization for democratization and fails to explain that the local Communist parties maintain absolute powers within their realm. The report n(Hes that "in some republics and provinces...local political officials exercise considerable, and frequently decisive, influence over the management of enterprises." In fact, in each republic the party bureaucracy is empowered to maintain complete control over politics and the economy; for historical reasons, authorities in different republics simply exercise different degrees of restraint in asserting this power.
211
Critique
In the section on freedom of religion, the report, rather than portraying the state of religious liberty, observes that conflicts between the church and state arise when the church engages in "what authorities consider 'nationalist' or political activities," but no clear examples of the "political activities" of the church are provided. The report refers to the Serbian Orthodox Church's advocacy of reli^ous instruction in public schools, seemingly to imply that this is "political activity," but does not provide the context in which this call was made: a situation in which private religious schools are prohibited. The report also observes without comment that the authorities "frequently criticized the Catholic Church in Croatia for alleged support of Croatian nationalism, and the Serbian Orthodox Church similarly for Serbian nationalism." It then notes an "improvement" in state relations \sith the Serbian church because of a "coincidence of rel^ous and political interest in promoting Serbian cultural and historical self-awareness" — an extremely understated reference to the resurgence of nationalism. The report fails to note two important human rights cases. First, civil rights attorney Vladimir Seks continues to be denied access to the bar, despite repeated applications for admission in various republics. The report acknowledges only that "government authorities sometimes attempt to intimidate or chastise attorneys who take political cases," without mentioning Seks's disbarment. Further, in discussing the denial of passports, the State Department fails to report that noted Yugoslav exile Mihajlo Mihajlov was stripped of his Yugoslav citizenship in August 1988 and informed of this action in November 1988. Mihajlov, a former political prisoner, had become a permanent resident in the United States but had retained and renewed his Yugoslav passport regularly. Mihajlov is the first Yugoslav to lose his citizenship since the Stalin era and his case merits attention.
The report asserts that Yugoslavia "extends temporary asylum to refugees." It should have noted that this "asylum" is frequently a jail cell for refugees from neighborii^ Romania. The State Department also observes that "cases in which a refugee is under UNHCR [United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees] protection are not fordbly repatriated." It should have noted at the same time reports that Yugoslav authorities have gone to great
212
Yugoslavia
lengths to discourage refugees from entering the country and seeking UNHCR protection.
This year, in a welcome development, the report contains more coverage of domestic human rights monitoring. As evidence of greater receptivity to independent human rights monitoring, however, the State Department observes that "(t]be Socialist Alliance has established a Human Rights Forum intended in part to defend Yugoslavia's human rights record but also to monitor human rights trends and foster understanding of Yugoslavia's mternational commitments to human rights." The report should have noted explicitly that the Forum is controlled by the government and at times has attempted to usurp the role of independent monitors. The report also mentions that Yugoslav authorities permitted the International Helsinki Federation ("IHP) to hold its annual meeting in Belgrade without noting that the authorities first attempted to persuade IHF officials to cancel the meeting.
The report's coverage of worker rights is inadequate. It neglects to note that the 1,720 strikes mentioned were not organized by the official trade unions, even though, as the report notes, they may have been "recorded" by those trade unions. The report also makes the surprising observation that "collective bargaining in a Western sense is not entirely applicable to Yugoslavia, where all large firms are socially rather than privately owned." This implies that Yugoslav workers exercise meaningful control over the means of production when in fact the one-party state controls all enterprises.
213
«vi^ « fKfMvi» k ««fer	OH^
noBcr fop	iweeeetio» ««
t Ite fiD&eÜ
■■tfcffliMii ^tm goae ft» ftwi
/■'à;'


.î'ti
