SOUTH AFRICA
The report on South Africa is detailed and comprehensive. There are few important omissions and Uttle praise for the South African authorities. The report is well-documented, making extensive use of court testimony and of reports by human rights monitoring groups. Statements in the 1987 report that we criticized as being tentative have now been strei^hened. One indication of this firmer criticism of apartheid is that the report has been vilified by the South African authorities for being "one-sided and unsubstantiated;" Minister of Foreign Affairs Pik Botha charged that it was written "with a view to satisfying a particular domestic US constituency rather than in the interest of creating an environment of mutual trust and understanding."
The report offers a gloomy assessment, concluding, as it did in 1987, that "the human rights situation in South Africa continued to deteriorate in 1988 as the Government took additional harsh measures to repress opposition to apartheid, including nonviolent political activity." In words similar to those of the 1987 report, but with the occasional use of significantly stronger language, the introduction to the 1988 report takes note of "piecemeal reforms that ameliorate some aspects of apartheid but do not threaten continued white control of the nation's key poUtical structures." It also comments on the "extraordinarily" strong powers of the state president under the terms of the new constitution, and refers to a "gross income disparity between blacks and whites" that is perpetuated by apartheid. In addition, the introduction records the effective banning of 32 anti-apartheid organizations, the renewal for the third consecutive year of a state of emergency with even tougher restrictions on anti-apartheid groups and the media, and the continuing high level of political violence.
The introduction falls short in several respects, however. It notes the release of several prominent political prisoners, but neglects to add that most have been served with severe restriction orders, effectively cutting them off from pubUc life. It also details the increase of black security forces, known as Kitskonstabels, or instant police (because of their abbreviated training), and
159
Critique
notes the tacit government support of conservative black vivante groups, but it makes no reference to the abuses committed by these forces and the extent to which conservative blacks have become the surrogates of suppression. Although these matters are mentioned later in the body of the report, the failure to mention them in the introduction when related material is being discussed gives those sections of the introduction a deceptively positive gloss.
The report also is weak in its treatment of the National Security Management System (NSMS). Although the report describes the increasing influence of the NSMS over government policy — this "parallel government," designed to minimize and suppress black discontent, is accountable only to the cabinet-level State Security Council — the State Department failed to heed our criticism of the 1987 report on this issue. Last year, we criticized the report for neglecting to discuss the effective spread of the NSMS to the local level; the increased sophistication of the NSMS in compiling intelligence, including the use of informants; and the NSMS's use of force to preempt or remove potential protesters or critics. (The report does note police use of informants and surveillance, but in a completely different section.)
The body of the report contains several significant observations. Noting that t^t State of Emergency restrictions have further reduced available information about the number of detentions and the extent of political violence, the report uses court testimony and the reports of human r^ts organizations to make serious charges and blunt statements of fact about the conduct of members of South Africa's security apparatus. Among important findings in the report is the statement that "[djuring 1988 court cases and out-of-court settle-ments...suggested the enstence of police 'death squads' operating completely outside the law both inside and outside the country." The list of known assassinations that then follows this observation suggests that an even more definitive statement would have been in order, however.
Another im|>ortant finding, qualified with "reportedly" in 1987but now stated as fact, is that "[ijn recent years many people have disappeared into police custody for long periods." The report raises the possibility that some may have been killed by security forces, noting the most well-known case, that of Maisha "Stanza" Bopape, a township activist and a staff member of an industrial and
160
South Africa
labor research organization who disappeared in June 1988. The report observes that the task of accounting for missing persons is complicated by security laws that do not require the authorities to notify family members of a detention, and because some activists have gone into hiding. Since "disappearances" are increasingly becoming a feature of political life in South Africa, we urge the State Department to investigate this important issue still further in future reports.
Another phenomenon that needs a more careful assessment is the possible involvement of the police and army in bombing and arson attacks on anti-apartheid organizations. These attacks, termed "extra-legal repression" by anti-apartheid activists, are on the increase. The State Department report attributes, for example, the August 1988 bombing of Khotso House, the headquarters of the South African Council of Churches, to "right wing" elements. However, a report sponsored by the Johannesburg-based Human Rights Commission concluded: "[It is unlikely] that the bombings of COSATU House (in 1987) [the headquarters of the Council of South African Trade Unions, the largest South African trade grouping] and the South African Council of Churches on August 31,1988 were the random work of the right. They were simply too professional—causing few human injuries but achieving structural annihilation." There have been no arrests in the Khotso House explosion; the police investigation yielded an incredible assertion that the bombing was caused by the explosion of a car bomb under construction by ANC guerrillas.
Although the country report does mention other attacks on anti-apartheid organizations and individuals, it does not indicate the frequency and seriousness of these attacks. The Human Rights Commission has recorded a total of 113 cases of arson and other forms of attack on anti-apartheid organizations and individuals over the past four years. The attacks include bombings, thunder-flash explosive attacks, burglaries of files, vandalism, gunshot attacks and stonings. No arrests have been made in connection with any of these attacks.
The report details allegations of torture and even quotes from a 1987 Amnesty International report on the kinds of torture used. The report asserts that there is strong evidence that severe beatings and torture are a common ex-
161
Critique
perience for security detainees, and ^ates that "numerous incidents of torture involving young detainees, many under the of 18, occurred at Protea police station in Soweto." It also mentions "what appears to be a common police tactic of detaining political activists, especially youths, and holding them for a few hours or ovem^t, during which time they were interrogated, threatened, and often beaten."
The report offers no details on methods used by police to suppress unrest. That was not the case in 1987, when the report noted that many deaths resulted from "excessive use of force by police, who sometimes quelled demonstrations with live ammunition, tear gas, birdshot, hard rubber clubs, or rubber bullets." The failure to provide such detail this year is a serious ommis-sion. If the conspicuous absence of such information in the 1988 report is due to the increasingly tight State of Emergency restrictions on reporting police or army activity, that should have been stated. Or preferably, the report could have quoted, for example, a study released in April 1988 by Black Sash, a monitoring organization composed of South African women, which accused black municipal police forces of bringing "terror and disorganization" into Eastern Cape communities through the use of thefts, assaults, evictions, beatings, torture and midnight arrests.
In this respect, the State Department's report seems to have been written under the same strictures as those imposed upon the local and international media, with little reference to independent investigation. Although the careful use of court testimony and published information ^ves the country report gT'eat credibility, the State Department should make a point of independently gathering information about police excesses, particularly if local media laws are designed to prevent this kind of information from being disseminated through alternative channels.
A weakness of the report is its failure to highlight abuses that are particular to the so-called "independent" homelands. Several of the homelands have devised their own security legislation, which in many cases is even more repressive than that of the rest of the country. The abuses illustrate the South African government's increasing use of black surrogates to suppress opposition activity. Precisely because the homelands are remote from urban centers and difficult
162
South Africa
for others to cover, they should have been highlighted in the State Department's report.
In the same vein, the report should have analyzed more carefully the violence in Natal. There, fighting between supporters of COSATU and the United Democratic Front (UDF), an umbrella organization of some 600 anti-apartheid organizers which was effectively banned in February 1988, on the one hand, and members of the Inkatha Movement of Chief Gatsha Buthelezi, the Chief Minister of the Kwazulu homeland, on the other, has claimed more than 800 lives since June 1987. The genesis of the conflict is believed to lie in violent recruiting drives by members of Inkatha, and the majority of those killed were aligned with the UDF. Police were slow in attempting to restore order, and there have been credible reports of police involvement in some of the killings. Similarly, there have been press reports of the murder of Inkatha opponents who sought and obtained protection from the courts, but it does not appear that many of the Inkatha "warlords" who are presimied to be behind the murders have been brought to justice. The State Department's failure to discuss these abuses may reflect a reluctance to criticize Chief Buthelezi, a prominent supporter of the Reagan Administration's approach to South Africa. Chief Buthelezi is one of the few black South African leaders to have met with President Reagan; he has also advocated continued American investment in South Africa. The report notes that there were hundreds of detentions early in 1988 in the Pieter-maritzbiu-g and Natal Midlands area, mostly of UDF activists, but it does so in a different section of the report and fails to link these detentions to the strife in the area.
The report is once again somewhat tentative in its analysis of the judiciary. The report could have noted more forcefully that the presumption of guilt is a prominent feature of most security le^slation. In addition, given the regularity vnth which successful court challenges to State of Emergency regulations have been overturned by the Court of Appeals, and in light of the guilty verdicts in the Delmas "treason" trial, which the report describes in some detail, the report could have reached a stronger conclusion than to point to "indications" that the Government has steadily increased its political influence over the judiciary. There is more than "evidence" that important, security-related cases
163
Critique
are assigned to conservative judges sympathetic to the political interests of the government. And the report could have noted the (^nical remark of Chief Justice B J. Curlewis, ruling in April 1988on an application by the Catholic Church-sponsored weekly The New Nation to have its three-month suspension order overturned: "It is not our job to pass opinion on a Minister.... Censorship is like a guillotine, and there is very little use growing honeysuckle up against a guillotine."
The report notes the "increasing evidence" that the South Añ-ican government perceives long poUtical trials as a means of keeping prominent activists out of public life for extended periods of time, even if many defendants are eventually acquitted. While we welcome this observation, there is more than "increasing evidence" to support it The practice of keeping poUtical activists on trial is not new. A prominent example is the Treason Trial of 1956 to 1961; all of the 156 prominent activists charged (including Nelson Mandela) were eventually acquitted. Similarly, the accused in the Black Consciousness trial ~ in which the leaders of two black poUtical groups, the South African Students Organization and the Black People's Convention, were tried under the Terrorism Act on charges relating to their promotion of the cause of black consciouness --were detained in September 1974 and not convicted imtil December 1976.
The report should also have noted the incapacitating effect of the use of the State of Emergency laws to hold activists in long-term detention without trial. (The use of these laws is mentioned without such analysis.) An estimated 1,000 activists were in such detention as of December 1988, and many were in their second and third year of confinement. In February 1989 several groups of detainees around the country launched hunger strikes to urge that they be either charged or released.
The report correctly notes the important implications of the Delmas trial in that it appears to have criminalized any kind of non-violent opposition activity. In the same context, however, the report should have mentioned the trial of Moses Mayekiso, a trade unionist, and four others who currently face treason charges for creating alternative government structures — that is, street committees ~ in the township of Alexandra, near Johannesburg. Mayekiso was detained in June 1986 and released on bail only in December 1988.
164
South Africa
The report states that the six death-row prisoners known as the "Shar-pevUle Six" attracted international calls for clemency because of "fears that their executions would further aggravate the situation in South Africa." (President Botha commuted the death sentences on November 6,1988, together with those of four white policemen sentenced to death for murder.) The statement distorts the nature of the international protest, much of which was directed against the use of the death penalty in a case in which none of the sa was accused of the actual murder, but all six were found guilty under the controversial legal doctrine of "common purpose." (In addition, it appears that at least several of the sa were convicted on the basis of fabricated evidence.) The report also omits mention of the Upington 25, a group of blacks in the Cape Province who were sentenced to death in April 1988 under circumstances similar to the Sharpeville Six.
The report refers to the release by a ma^trate of Jerszy Ras, a South African convicted of killing an American citizen. It should at the same time have recorded the actions of a magistrate in the rural Transvaal, who meted out a small fine and suspended sentence to a young farmer convicted of systematically beating a black laborer to death.
The section on worker rights and conditions of work has been expanded, a commendable development, particularly in an assessment of South Africa, where trade-union activity is one of the few legal means of black organization. However, this section could have been considerably strei^hened. There is no discussion, for example, of what has been described by one opposition newspaper. The Weekly Mail, as "a vast extra-legal onslaught against the labor movement, particularly against COSATU." Incidents include firebomb-ings, burglaries, break-ins and arson attacks. (The report does note, but in a different section, that members of COSATU are among the main targets of detentions.) Among incidents that could have been mentioned are the September 1988 firebombing of the Durban printing unit of COSATU on the eve of a planned anti-apartheid conference in Cape Town, and an arson attack on the East London ofßces of COSATU in November 1988 in which two floors were biu'ned.
165


»i»« ibiá-Ar n mm a in x^l&aaq ifl«db adi )o oar klHatfon^ odl^K^Mf hiiiiá	KU ¡sebfèta^.
jfahwiiififcligjJte	wjiiügyiyÍQi
MtmHná jiwiilllii tSmiámií mthétímKS^^Éémái^^
■fiisi.'M-^.W^Ê^^^ ^—^ ---inirrMilyikjlliMtll

flMiwiiwpnnffiiiipHu^jiiüititoi
lrial»«K w-	it dbwTirea&oeTriai	1961;
i JfttfWftiiiMtf ti^rniàmpaiâm vMumtkiVrnfiiA (tiutfi^'i rt^A^lgtoäieir protnoCioa

^íéhlMfa iltabiAiii rtooíwaaf VJ^ÌP^KJt ijpiu^i
^«Iftpinl	tioqai ariT) jpbftïfft nons bo« «tu-xsaigHireQSfnrd «a^ot
oommiCtc«».^ m âw tr^aùi^

VW
v.::®'
