ZIMBABWE
The State Department correctly underlines the improvement in Zimbabwe's human rights record since 1986, at the same time as it identifies continuing areas of concern. The major weakness of the report is a tendency to describe the position of those arrested as it is in law, rather than in practice, which leads the authors to underestimate the continuing use of torture. In addition, while the report gives O'edit to the government where it is due — for ciu-bing the worst abuses of the 1982-86 period - it does not adequately analyze the government's failure to learn from that period. Thus, the report does not explain the full significance of developments which it has reported.
The political precondition for the improvement in human rights has been the growing unity between the Zimbabwe African National Union (Patriotic Front) of President Robert Mugabe and the Zimbabwe African People's Union, the former opposition party led by Joshua Nkomo. The report correctly warns of the human rights implications of the government's plans to impose a de jure one-party state. However, it misses the point that political unity has meant that the government has not been called to account for past abuses.
For example, there has been no official explanation of the whereabouts of dozens of people known to have disappeared in 1985. The government in 1988 did not respond to inquiries about those who were known to be in police custody at the time of their disappearance. Similarly, while 75 security-force personnel charged or convicted of human rights offenses were amnestied or pardoned in June 1988, it is estimated that more than 200 people accused of aiding the armed insiu-gency in Matabeleland, which ended in 1988, are still serving prison sentences. Most seriously, the nationwide state of emergency remains in force, as it has under successive governments since 1965. Curiously, the report fails to mention that imder the emergency powers the government can detain for an indefinite period anyone deemed a threat to security. Because the government has developed the habit of ruling by emergency powers, there
215
Critique
is a serious danger that it will deal with future political opposition by resort to its powers of detention.
The report states baldly: "Detainees are not held incommunicado." However, this describes the position in law rather than the actual practice. In fact, detainees are often held incommunicado in the initial period after arrest. It is during this period that torture usually occurs. In 1986 clear orders were issued to the police prohibiting torture, vsliich had previously been widespread. As a result, torture has decreased dramatically. However, all indications are that the Central Intelligence Organization (CIO) has not changed its practice. For example, in addition to the cases of Odile Harington and Philip Conjwayo, dted in the report, Leslie Lesia, arrei^ed in mid-1987, was beaten so badly by the CIO that both his legs are reported to have been broken. Charges against him, related to alleged pro-South African espionage, were dropped in October 1988, but he is still detained under the emergency powers.
A further worrying trend which the report fails to identify is the newfound willingness of the executive to overrule the decisions of the tribunal that reviews the cases of all emergence-powers detainees. The tribunal's recommendations are not binding, but until 1988 it was most unusual for the President to disregard a recommendation to release a detainee. However, the President has overruled the Review Tribunal in the cases of at least two of the six people detained in August 1988 after espion^e charges against them were dropped. In the case of one, Jack Lewis-Walker, a senior d\il servant, the President has overruled the tribunal twice. The report mentions the case of the six, but omits this highly significant detail.
The country report is broadly accurate, and it does not appear that the errors and omissions we have mentioned are intended to exculpate the government. However, the government's current moves toward establishing a single-party constitution make it espedally important at the present time to conduct an honest and precise evaluation of ^mbabwe's human rights record, so that the cause of national reconciliation not be piu'sued at the expense of an accounting for past abuses.
216
